Go Roman find it! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! I should come to the name of the show. Thanks Joe for having me in the show. My pleasure. I love your man, Caves. Oh, thank you. I really do. Awesome. Yeah, it's fun. So when I heard your story, I was like, this sounds completely insane. And just to fill people in, just explain what happened. Well, I was born into a cult, a high control group that I didn't know to call a cult, because you know, I was born there. A child, yeah. That was my whole experience. My grandfather started in 1931. So my mother was also born into the cult in the 1940s. My dad was, let's just say he was 12. When he first met my grandfather, who would later become his father-in-law, and my grandfather became his father figure. So my mom was married off to this man who was a follower of her father, and I am the second child of their union. Wow. And where'd all this take place? So this took place that he originally started at near LA in Pasadena, which most people know because of the Rose Parade and other things like that. When he first started it, it started. My understanding is he was a boy scout leader. And he was an orphan. He had come from Oklahoma when he was a young man. And the boy scouts didn't allow him to have as much control as he wanted to have over the boys. Oh boy. So yeah, which is a lot of control. So he left the boy scouts and he took the boys with him. And some of the boys from his original troop in 1931 stayed with him past his death. One of the first boys took over after him in the late 1980s. Wow. Or the early 1980s, actually. Yeah, so he was really good at getting followers. What was his background? Like what did he do before he did all this? Nothing. He was completely, I don't think he graduated from high school. I don't know that for sure. He lied about everything. And he said he had a PhD from Stanford later when he got. It wasn't until I got to college. I know this. I'm not even 100% sure he knew how to read, to be quite honest. Really? He came from a family where he was the only child that lived out of his particular mother, who was married to a man who was a second marriage. And his first wife had died. And then he had a bunch of kids or whatever. So he had a bunch of half siblings, but no full siblings. And apparently, not this could be lower too. They kind of excommunicated him. He compared himself to Joseph. You know, like of the multi-colored clothing and everything. So he was like put down a well, he liked to say. And his scaped and he came to LA. In the height of, I know the silent films, things like that. He said he was in silent films. There's no chance that is true. But he said he was. And he got some sort of probably church education when he got here. And he declared to everyone he was the prophet of God. He was going to live 500 years. And he was going to lead the army of God in the second coming. Wow. That's your grandpa. That's my grandpa. It's hilarious. Oh my God. Wow. Yeah. I can't pick your grandpa. No, you can't. No. But it was a male organization for a very long time. It was all men. And it wasn't in town. All men? All men. It was all men. It was from 1931 to 1966 when my mom married my father. No one was allowed to get married there. They were all presumably celibate. And it was just a man. Oh my god. Presumably. Presumably. It's like prison. They're good for the stay. Absolutely. So I was raised by a bunch of older men who had never been with a woman. Oh my god. Well, that ended. But he didn't want his daughter to be an old maid. And she was getting older. She was 24 by the time you married her off to my dad. And at that point, I think the women, his wife said, it was his fourth child. They had three boys first. And so this was his first daughter. And he decided that since the world had not yet ended, that maybe he should marry her off before she either became an old maid or maybe a loose woman who knows. When did he think the world's going to end? Well, he used to prophesy in 1977. Once more fire. Sure. I love some fire. I'll keep this over here if you want. It's easy to eat. Thank you. Where I come from, this is a grave send, by the way. Oh, women smoking a cigar, anyone? Anyone smoking a cigar? Is that straight coffee? Yes. What was the rules? Well, coffee is interesting because I don't know that they set out loud. You could drink coffee, but I don't remember it being forbidden. That the body is the temple of God. And that there's no marking your body with ink. No piercing your ear. I know. I have a lot of ink myself. I wasn't sure if I should show it up. And no piercing in the ear. No piercing in the ear. What about makeup? No makeup when I was young. They also unusually cut off women's hair, at least during the era that I was there. Now there was an old- Kind of off like a boy's hair. My mom had this exact same haircut since she got married until she died the exact same haircut. She died in 2022. Yeah, so just a lot of the femininity was considered a temptation to the boys. And since it was supposed to be, they thought it was better to burn in hell than to lust after a woman. And they quoted some stuff from Paul and the epistles. And basically you could get married as opposed to lust. And so eventually, in the 1960s, they allowed their first wedding. Which is 35 years. Think about that. 35 years of something. About all, yeah, just a bunch of dudes. Wow. It is just absolutely fascinating to me how some people develop these groups and how they do it. And like what the characteristics of the leaders are, it's so weird. There's a place out here called The One World Theater. And it used to be owned by a cult that there's a documentary on called Holy Hell. And this guy had started a cult in Los Angeles. He was a yoga teacher, but he was also a gay porn star and a hypnotist. And it's great, God. We're a documentary. The documentary is incredible. He watched Doc and ready. Like what the hell? And he was running from the cult awareness network. So he changed his name. His original name was Jaime Gomez. He changed his name. I forget what it was. He had like two different names. So I think one was Michelle. And there was another one. So and then he came out here to Austin, because right after Waco, they were kind of cracking down on cults and they were trying to find them. Yeah, so like we got to go. So the cult awareness network was on to him. Because also family members were calling in. We lost our children. They were with this guy. And he's crazy. And you know, they got the people in the woods in LA. And so he moved out to Austin and had his followers build him this theater where he could dance in front of them. Yeah. And so there's- You could do the dancer? It was like he was a very handsome guy. And he was very charismatic. And he was like ripped. He was a yoga instructor. He had a six pack. He's beautiful man. And I think he- And he also was kind of exotic looking. So he had this like guru thing going on, you know? And then he was also a hypnotist. So he's like really good at manipulating people's consciousness. And that might be a criteria for being a cult leader, by the way. The charismatic. Maybe a form of hypnotist. Like you have to be able to manipulate consciousness. Because if people at least your top leaders have to be indoctrinated, if they are not, I mean some people call it brainwashing. and call what you want. But you have to have people who worship you. Yeah. It doesn't work unless you do. Of course. I think we have a very narrow idea of what hypnotism is. Because of the term. I think the term you lock on the term, like, oh, I want to quit smoking, I'll go to a hypnotist. And they sit here and then the clock tick, tick, tick, but I think there's like states of mind-melding that have when people, where you all get sort of locked into a state of consciousness. And I think it happens in riots. Definitely. You know what I'm saying? Like the madness of the crowds. There's something real about that. Have you ever been in a chaotic public environment where like fights break out or something like that? There's a very strange feeling in the air that leads people to do things that they would never do before. People that would never pick up a shopping cart and throw it through a Starbucks window will do that now. It's like everybody just loses their fucking mind. And I think it happens in concerts when people are jamming out together, you all get in the same like mind frequency. And I think a really good cult leader does that too. I think they get these people and they lock them in to this way of thinking. And we don't want to call it hypnotism, but I think there's a lot of states that are very similar to hypnotism in that something happens where you enter into an altered state of consciousness. It's probably accessible somehow or another, but you don't know how to get there. But then this song brings you there or this person brings you there with their talk about the impending apocalypse and we're all locked in. And it gives people like a sense of belonging and purpose that you're locked into this frequency that everybody else in the room is locked into. It's very comforting. I mean, there are a lot of things about a cult that are very comforting. Yeah. I think that's the positive benefit of religion. Absolutely. Like this thing comforts you. And even if like it's like, some of them's got to be wrong. Some of them's got to be wrong. Or if you have 100 different ones and they're all different gods and different people, and somebody's got to be wrong. But the one common denominator that they share is that if you do believe in these things, it seems to aid you in life. People seem to be happier. They seem to have more of a sense of purpose. They don't feel lost. Some of the least happy people I know are atheists. And I have a joke about it, why I say you're really dumb for not believing in stupid shit. Because if you believed in stupid shit, if you believed in dumb shit, you'd be happier. That would be a smarter move. Because it's kind of true. And I think that's what's so fascinating to me about these cults is how they do it, how they lock people in. I'm sure because of your experience, you've probably seen a few of these documentaries, right? You've probably seen. I definitely have. And you know, when I watch there being an act of the Waco one, which is not the documentary, but did you watch the one that came out maybe five years ago? No, no. But they showed the children and how they didn't want to leave. And just how difficult there was a child psychologist who worked with them afterwards. And I was very interested in that. Because it takes a long time to undo the level of, I mean, it's one thing to have a faith, right? Like, believing in, you can call it stupid shit. But whatever you believe in, it's one thing to have a faith. But to not have the ability to think for yourself and to be trained out of you. So I went to lunch a couple of days ago with someone I had seen since I was three. And he, so a lot of fellow former field members have come out of the woodworks. Which is the favorite field is the name of the group. Yes, we call ourselves the fields. And one of these former members who I won't name, I hadn't seen, I didn't recognize him at all. I just hadn't seen him since I was a little kid. But several of them have come out who knew my parents. And of course, new my grandfather before I was born. And then maybe new me when I was a little teeny girl. And they have lots of stories. Anyway, he was on one of these things we called the trip with a capital T. And what we did on the trip, I mean, there were different things in different years. But this one was in the early 1970s. And he was, you know, doing all the things you do on the trip. But one thing they required was my father required of us at home, too, is to run every morning. First thing in the morning, which you can say, there's some good things about this. But you slept together in tents, and then you'd get up, and you'd run, and you'd have to beat your time. And my father used to time us as a kid. So like I had to beat my time every day, which is really hard to do, of course, because at some point you're not going to be able to beat your time, right? Like you can't always get better. But at this point, he was 19. And he was beaten the time he said in that time was in relation to the fastest runner. And so if the fastest guy was going really fast, you had to keep the same ratio, if distance. So anyway, he didn't make his time. There were three guys who didn't make their time. And they had to go through the SWAT machine. So my grandpa often made boys go through the SWAT machine. And the simple version, which was done at the actual location of the field, was you'd crawl through the other boys or men's legs, and every boy would spank you. I know, I know. Oh, my God. I know. They're a little, well, we want to get into it. All the things you could think about that. But there was a different version that was only done when the boys were separated from their parents. And so when they would go on these trips, and my dad was the original driver, he started driving by the time he was 18. He was driving all around the country, taking my grandfather's boys. So again, my father was not his son. He was just some dude who like joined to this cult. And my father would drive these boys around, and he would time them when they ran and did all those things. And so in this particular case, they did SWAT machine where you have to hold onto a fence pole, and you face the fence, and then all the guys come, and they hit you. So they're not just spanking you, but they're hitting you. And so he was getting kidney punches and all the stuff, and he was saying he fell to his knees. And he was, he almost died. He was so bruised up. And he did not want anyone to know this story. He hasn't spoken of it because he's so shamed that potentially someone might think, why didn't you fight back? And of course, I said, but you were trained, not, you trained that you deserved this. And then apparently one of my uncles, it was really worried when it taken to hospital, but couldn't or didn't because they had no insurance. And this young man who's no longer a young man, said that he could never tell his parents. And he never stood this day, ever told his parents or anyone. He and his brother never spoke in the time in the fields. It is like this big taboo. He got out maybe a year later, but he was, I mean, that was only one of many, many, many stories he told me, but that one just really struck me to feel ashamed of that. You know, like I guess for many years, I too did not tell people where I came from, because you feel like you must have done something weak to be a follower. And that's just not true. I mean, if someone gets a hold of you as a child, they can program you to think almost anything, especially if they're good at it. Yeah, unquestionably. I mean, that's why they have child suicide bombers. Yes. Yeah, I mean, you can trick children. Yeah. It's understandable though that you would think somehow or another that other people would think that it's your fault. Or ignorant people would think that why didn't you know, why didn't you leave? You know, people that never really thought about it, never thought it through because that they haven't had to. Right. The friends I went out with were, I mean, I'm calling them friends now, but I hadn't seen them since I was a little girl. They were saying, I would have, of course, you would drink the Kool-Aid and when people use that expression, I would have been first in line. I would sign up for that. I mean, that's, we all would have, and I mean that. And I was born there and indoctrinated. And I would have completely taken anything that my grandfather or my parents told me was going to kill me. I would have, you know, I would have felt that that was going to take me to have and quicker. And everyone I knew would have done that. Wow. And the reason you don't hear about a lot of cults, by the way, is because they didn't end up in flames or mass suicide. But that doesn't mean that they didn't prey on, you know, dozens, sometimes hundreds or even thousands of people, depending on the cult. I was talking to Mark Andreessen, who's explaining to me that there's still many, many active cults in California. Absolutely. And I was like, what? Like right now, like people know about them? Oh, yeah, there's a, there's a test of them. Like there's some successful cults. Mm-hmm. Yeah, when I first went to the field still around. The field's still around. I've been told it is a completely different organization. And I'm not going to vouch one way or the other. They certainly don't have a charismatic leader, like my grandfather once he died and his replacement was there. And then once he died, I think it's become, it has not become secular. It's a very strong religious organization, but they don't have the control that you do. Because like when we were young, they didn't have social security number. There was no way to track things. And now, you know, it's hard to get away with. Yeah, yeah. You have to pay taxes. Yes, they do pay taxes. And there was a sexual abuse, you know, case that was actually prosecuted. And I think after that, which I think was 2006, I think that they had to really clean up a lot of their practices. When I'm hearing these stories about these boys and the abuse, that's what I'm thinking about. I think if there's a bunch of boys, no one's allowed to get married, that's not a good recipe. No, it's not. And the particular one that got prosecuted was a young leader who was abusing 11 and 12-year-old boys. Yeah. It's actually, I say out loud. I said this to my mom. I said, mom isn't it curious that no one's ever prosecuted anyone for what they did to girls. And I was a sexual abuse victim there. And it was something I was so ashamed of for so long. And anyway, but there's other forms of abuse that go on. I mean, there's obviously physical abuse. But there's a lot of psychological abuse. There's a lot of ways that I get inside of you that you're worthless and that you can't trust yourself. And you can't even trust yourself with your own stories. And I have a slightly younger brother who adores you, by the way. Thomas, who is his name? His name's Michael. So Michael. Yeah. He, I love him to death. And he was raised, you know, we were all raised collectively, but we were also raised separate from each other. And my biological siblings, we all had different experiences because they don't let you bond. They don't want my sister who's just a little bit younger. She and I, we loved each other deeply, but we weren't allowed to speak to each other sometimes for weeks or once at a time. And they were just strongly against you forming what they would call allies. They didn't want friendships that could turn into anything that would be a little bit probably cool to you. But no, like anything that would form a click, they used to call it. Right. And the other groups were the, another person could be in control. Right. Or they could discuss who's in control. Yes. Or any loyalty to anyone else other than the primary leader. There's a lot of ways that this, that you can indoctrinate people and make them police themselves. Oh, yeah. That's what North Korea does. Yeah. North Korea gets everybody around and everybody else. Oh, yeah. That was huge where I come from. I have, um, I felt like it was a huge compliment. One of the former members came out of the woodwork after this and he said, you know, I knew that you would never read us out. And I was like, man, that's so great. But I mean, it was something we were all taught so, so, so deeply. That, yeah, you, you have to know whether, if this is your brother or your sister or your mom, you have to tell on them. You have to. Because you're worse. That's when it keeps everybody scared all the time. And you never trust anyone. God, that's so, it's so insidious and yet also brilliant. Like it's evil. It's evil. How did he figure out how to do it? That's it's crazy. And how's he able to pull it off? That's what's always so fascinating to me that it's not like children with children. It just makes 100% sense. You raise there. You think this is reality. And you think that the world outside reality is all a bunch of evil demons or whatever it is. But if you're an adult, like you're a grown adult, 34 year old man and you meet this dude at the auto repair shop. And he hands you a pamphlet. And the next thing you know, you're on a farm somewhere. Like how do those people? So I can't vouch to that. I will say that the unusual thing about the field is you have to join as a child. There are no adults who join. You, they, it's kind of like a pyramid scheme. When you're most people join when they're five or six, and they are indoctrinated. And then they play sports. Like so for example, they play tackle football at age five. And so they teach everyone how to, you know, play game. But it's only the people who are really good at the game, that they continue to court. I would say you could call him groom, whatever. But it's, there's a lot more kids there than will ever get into the inner circles. And it's a little like the mob or something. Like I was born in the inner circle, but there are plenty of people who came out of that. Cold who honestly weren't harmed by it because they got out young. So as long as you get out by the age of 12, you're probably okay. But they don't keep you unless you're really fully indoctrinated. And most of people who stay really don't have a family to go back to. And they separate you from your family. And so they do more and more separation as you become a teenager. By the time you're 18, you're signing a commitment for lifeform. Jesus. And I'm not saying that's happening now, but that was 100% happened. Not during my, not just during my era, but all the decades prior to me. So it's not just a cult, but it's like, it's got a sort of a meritocracy built into it. Yeah, but I think a lot of cults have that. Really? I think so. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you have to keep people out. That don't line up enough? Yeah. So cults in general kick people out. In fact, they want you to believe that staying is hard and that you have to work hard to stay. I think the misconception is that they're trying to get you in. Sure, they're seducing you in some way. There's some sort of calling card, whether it's a pamphlet or something else. But we should be here. Do I have what? No, I said yoga class. Yeah, exactly. That's what I got to do. Yeah. Dancing, you know, but whatever brings you in. But then after that, it's like you're the strong one, you're the special one for choosing to stay. In this particular cult, they always would say there's 20 of you in this room, 19 of you will fall away. There's only one of you who will make it into the army of God. Geez. It's like the Navy seals of cults. It kind of is. And there is a lot of physical. Yeah. I was telling you what, the best of the best. So if you are a child and you're in, I mean, first of all, how could anybody ever expect a child who gets indoctrinated to know the difference? If that's your reality and that's what you grow up with, how could you possibly know? What year are we talking about when you were like eight years old? That would have been the early late 70s. Yeah. So nobody knows what the hell's going on. Oh, absolutely not. Even in the world. Exactly. The whole thing is a big foggy haze. There's no internet. The world's we have like one tenth of access to information that we do today. Oh, that's fine. And you're also a child and you think that this is reality. And parents were used to their kids being gone all the time. And I think that that was not something unusual. Because one thing I hear for kids who went there, people say, well, how did your parents allow that? And I mean, parents like they sent them off to the sports place. And then their kid got really into it. And then at some point their kid became a teenager and didn't want to come home anymore. And I mean, they're like, well, I don't think my kids do in drugs. I don't think that they're like in prison. So it seems like they're doing pretty well. But also seems like, society, there was a shift at some point in time where what was the year where more women entered the workforce and more women started getting jobs? So that happened in the 70s. I think 1973 might have been like one of those, I mean, obviously was starting to happen in the 60s. But there was a lot of women at home in the 60s. And around 1973 to 1979, you had a huge exodus of women out of the home. The women I come from, I mean, like my grandmother who had my father who joined to the school, she was always a working woman, minimum wage working woman. She didn't have more than eighth grade education. She worked because her father, excuse me, her, my dad's father, her husband, had been in World War II and got pretty severe PTSD or whatever. It was an alcoholic and beat her. And so she ran away from him. She just had one child, which was my father. She was living in a chicken coop, an area LA, just with this one son. And she was the first woman to get hired in a factory. But this was in the 1940s. So there were always women, of course, and lots of women of color who were working. But it wasn't the middle class women who were working. But the poor women were always working. All right. I'm just thinking like, latch key kids at that point back then. 70s and even 80s. Yeah, it was totally common. All my friends, we just got let out of the house where kids. And you just got on the bus, went to school, walked home from school, rode the bus, hung out with your friends. Nobody knew where you were. Right. So you could have been in the cult and your parents would have not necessarily known. I think I would have told them. Well, but I could have got sucked into one. That's the point. Everybody looks at themselves as who they are today. So if you're a 35 year old man and you're listening to this today, you're like, I wouldn't get sucked into that. You can't say that because you're not a five year old boy. If you're a five year old boy, you don't know what the fuck is going on. You're a child. By the time you're 18, you sort of get a, yeah, especially if you're a little street wise, like, all right, some people are shady. I know what the fuck's going on. Listen to this guy. He's trying to rope me in. I remember there was this Christian group when I was in college that was trying to indoctrinate people. And they were like young, good looking people. And there was this beautiful Puerto Rican girl. And she was always trying to get me to go to parties with her. And I was like, wow, did I hit that jackpot? Like, eventually I'm going to get a date with this girl. Like, this is amazing. You know, I was probably 1920, I guess, 20, 21 maybe. And one day she invites me to go to this retreat on the weekend. They have some some crazy Christian retreat. And I'm like, oh my God, a retreat. Like, it's not telling me it's a Christian retreat. She's telling me it's like this fun party and this whole thing. And I said, I can't have plans this weekend. I go, but if you guys ever do another one of those things, that sounds like fun. And so Monday morning or whatever the day was, I'm in school. And we're all in the cafeteria. And it was the day that Trump's airplane, the landing gear, failed to open. And so we all sit down at the lunch table and I had just seen it on the news. I said, did you see this thing on the news about the plane? It's crazy. Like, the landing gear didn't go out. And so the plane just on the belly of the plane skied across the runway. And there's all these crazy sparks. And I go, but nobody died. And they go, oh, praise God. And I was like, what? Like, what's going on here? This super hot Puerto Rican girl's like, oh, praise God. They're all praise God, praise God. And I'm like, oh, and then it just immediately click, you dummy. They were trying to get you to go to their church thing. You thought she liked you. And then they started talking to me more about God. And then they was like, oh, I got a girl. I got a class. I got a guy out of here. Fuck. So you didn't get that day? No, no, I avoided them. They were in my Italian class. And they were learning how to speak Italian. And I avoided them. I was like, I can't be involved in this. Because they were all glossy. They were like, they were all believers. This is not saying that God's not real. This is not saying the Christianity is not true. That's not what I'm saying. What I'm saying is you could have got those people with Scientology. You could have got those people with Mormonism. You could have got those people with the moonies. Whatever. They were just looking for a thing that they could attach themselves to and then formulate their identity based around this thing. And for them, it was Christianity. And it was this youthful form of Christianity where they're trying to get young people. They're making it like retreats. We're going to have, we're going to party. And they were all socially odd. They were all real awkward people. It was really, it was very interesting though to me. The person is always curious about human beings. I was like, this is wild. Hang around. Well, I think in high control groups, they do tend to obviously cater to the young. I mean, they're still listening to the young. And I want to be clear too. I'm not anti-religion. I think high control groups slash cults are a whole different experience. And yes, they use religion, but they don't teach you to have faith and to trust yourself in your faith. They teach you to follow someone else's faith. I used to have a joke about what's the difference between a cult and religion. Or a cult is created by one guy and he knows it's bullshit. In a religion, that guy's dead. And all the other people, all the other people that this fucking dude 2000 years ago convinced. But some religions are really beneficial and they might in fact be based on some kind of true story. I think it's a game of telephone. That's what I think. I think if you tell me a story and I tell Jamie the story and then Jamie tells someone out in the lobby of story, by the time it gets to me all the way again, it's going to be screwed up. Right. It's over thousands of years of just oral tradition and then writing in lost languages, like ancient Hebrew, they wrote them in Aramaic on animal skins, some of these stories like the Dead Sea Scrolls. And then they eventually translate them to Latin and De Greek and to Roman and to English and to German. Like what? Lost in translation. Also like what did they know? How much did they know? They had some ideas of like the formation of the universe, the beginning there was light. It sounded a lot like the Big Bang. Sounds a lot like if you would tell the Big Bang. Once did they know? They had some ideas of the formation of the universe, the beginning there was light. It sounded a lot like the big bang. It sounds a lot like if you would tell the big bang to your kids and your kids would tell to their kids, and you're going to do this for a thousand years. At the end of it, you're going to get some real, people are gross. They always like to like twist things around and make things. You'll add their own little spice to a story. Like you've ever heard a friend tell the story, like, hey, bro, that didn't happen that way. Like you didn't say that. You fucking ran for cover. Like everybody's got their own version of a story. Yeah, I'm very well. I'm very well. If you could oral traditions 100% for sure, you're going to have a lot of that, especially when you have high control groups, like your grandfather. And you're grandfather. The translations too, like we even when the monks were translating all that and like they were scribes. They were describing it. Yeah. Like all of that too, there was an agenda on a lot of that. And so yeah. And then when we read the King James Version of the Bible, I mean, the king pronounced it to be so. And so anything that was left out, I mean, it was a lot left out, right? And what was canonized because it was perhaps dangerous to the particular regime that he was running. And so not to say that they're not true. You should decide. Yes, I know. You could decide. Well, God meant. Yeah. I think God didn't mean any of that. We should take this stuff out. My problem is never with religion. My problem is purely with human nature and what we know about humans. If there was a way that you got religion through some sort of non-human source, like if you achieved your experience through a non-human source, I would go, OK, well, maybe there's a place that you can go and you could actually go meet God. There's like a portal you walked through and you meet God. But as soon as you're letting people tell you a story, people are full of shit. They just generally, at least a certain percentage are full of shit. And the people that want to control people have a much higher likelihood of being full of shit. Because they really do that correctly. Like if you want to be a president, like you got a lot. You got a lot. It's really important. So the people that are good at that job are generally full of shit. And so then you have a problem with the interpretation of the past, right? I mean, you're seeing that right now in universities. Like people are trying to reinterpret certain events because of the way people feel about sociopolitical issues today. So they're trying to reinterpret history, take down statues. There's a lot of craziness that's going on today. Well, that's like a microcosm of the ancient history of human beings. It's not that God's not real. It's that people are full of shit. And so there's some, a lot of wisdom in a lot of these ancient religious texts in particular, which is really fascinating. Like how much did they know about the human experience? How much did they know about how you need to live your life in order to be harmonious with the universe? How do you like, how do you accentuate positive experiences? How do you leave the world a little bit better than it was before you got here? And that's- Have you read the whole Bible, by the way? I did when I was a kid. I actually had Bible class in Florida. I moved from San Francisco to Florida. I was 11 years old. And it was a completely polar opposite experience of the country. I lived in San Francisco with two parents who were hippies in hate ashbury. So we were in the middle of like, we lived near Lombard Street. We were in the middle of like the hippie anti-war revolution of the 1960s. And then I moved to Gainesville, Florida. My stepdad was going to, he was becoming an architect. He was a computer programmer and then he switched careers, became an architect. And so he's going to a university of Florida at Gainesville. And so we were this. So now I'm starting to run alligators. There's fucking alligators everywhere. It was like flooding. Like you people were retarded. Why do you have giant monsters everywhere? This is so ridiculous. So we had alligators, super weird swampy weather and religion. Religion was in the schools. Like in public school, you had Bible class. And they were also paddled you. It was the first time I had ever been hit by a teacher. I got in this fist fight with this kid and they whacked us with a paddle. But I should have allocated a question right now. So when you were in Florida in the 1970s, were you there in the late 1970s? It was, let me say. So I was in 67. I was born. So I in 73. I was in San Francisco. So 7576. OK. Did you know someone whose name was Ross Allen in Florida? I was not. I was 11. Well, he was older. Like he would if he was an alligator. Yeah. He's an alligator wrestler. He had an alligator. Oh, God. Farm. Alligator wrestling. Yeah. Like in the life span of those fellas. Well, I don't know when he died. But that doesn't seem like that would work out so well. Well, they probably he sang them. I don't know. They just even that. They're just going to break your arms off. Begin, which any more fire. Oh, so you grab that sucker right there and pull the top back flip it around the other side. Like this this way. This way. This way. This way. This way. No, the other way. It's upside down. Oh. See, this there you go. Now see the top. Uh-huh. Pull it sucker back like that. Like there. Yeah. So make fire. Pull it down. Pull it down. I know. I cannot believe how I'm in it. I don't know what that. No, it's not open. You got to open the top. Flip that top. No, no, no. Look at this. Oh, my hand. Oh, my God. I know. You got it. Thank you. I feel like I came here to learn this. Perfect. Thank you. Yeah, it's a little weird because it's all black. And so it kind of blends in, especially if you're like us and your eyes are probably going. As time goes on. Like I can do it myself. There's not a chance in hell. I could ever do one of those clasps on a like a bracelet. Those little tiny bracelets. Like them little clasps. Like my wife tried to get me to do one of those. I'm like, I don't even know what I'm saying. I have no idea what that is. I see blur. I see golden blur. What the fuck that is? What were we just talking about? Well, you were talking about learning the Bible in school. But so one of the things that a lot of people who have read the Bible or they have read a portion of the Bible. I definitely don't think I read the whole thing. Well, yeah, that's the thing. It's not very many people do. And that's why I asked because a lot of it is is. A lot of it is kind of tedious history. And there's a lot of he begets. And there's a whole line of Christ, all the ancestors. And the whole delineation of all that. And where I come from, we were encouraged to read like a verse of the Bible, but they would always tell you what it meant. And so I kind of went against, I use this little pin light and like did it like late at night. But I read the whole thing covered in cover. No, it's eight. And if you read like every single book in order, you start to find that there's a lot of really beautiful beautiful, beautiful, you know, places in the Bible. But there's a lot of stuff that's really violent. And then there's a lot of stuff that contradicts itself. And it's because it was written in different time periods by different authors and different languages. And it also has a historical context. And so generally there's a lot of stuff that people leave out when they teach the Bible because it's really hard to explain. Like what stuff? Well, there's for example, I mean, this one's taught a little bit, but David, King David, I'm sure you've heard of him like as of David and Goliath. But then he became a powerful king. And he saw this woman, who this woman is often talked about Bathsheba, he sees her bathing on a roof. And when we came from, we were taught like she shouldn't have been bathing on the roof now. I don't know. Right. Anyway, he demands that she come to him and she is the wife of a soldier of his name, Uriah, a top soldier. And he commands her to lie with him and she becomes pregnant. And then King David, who is the same guy who had this Link shot of David and Goliath, decides that he's got to figure out how to get her husband back so that her husband can go sleep with her and her husband won't do it because he's loyal to the army. And he comes back, but he sleeps like at the floor of the castle, you know, trying to... Wait a minute, he's trying to get the husband to go back with the wife? So that the pregnancy will seem like it's his. Oh boy. Yeah. In the Bible. In the Bible. Dirty David. Yeah. And it doesn't even in there. So Uriah won't do it because Uriah is loyal to David. Oh boy. And so then David sends him to the front lines to have him be killed so that he can marry his wife and get away with that child's not being a bastard or illegitimate. Oh boy. And then God kills the child because, you know, needs to make the point that David was. And think about poor Bathsheba. She's just been like wrong around her husband gets killed. All these things, her kid dies because God is punishing David. And her husband is killed because he was loyal to the guy who got her pregnant. Absolutely. That's not a story a lot of people here. Oh my God. Well you can fact check that one if you'd like. Oh no, I believe you. I'm good at that. I'm good at just okay. I have to go argue it. I mean, there's something I talk a little bit about in the book forger, which I encourage everyone to read. But in that book I talk about has a kid that I looked up this whole long, you know, he begat, he begat. And there's only four times that it mentions a woman who a child came out of. It's like it's all the male line. But occasionally they'll say so and so, you know, Bo as through Ruth or David's the father through Bathsheba. So Bathsheba ended up having a child who became Solomon, who we know a lot of people know these. A lot of people know these. The wisest man who ever lived and he wrote a Ecclesiastes and yeah. And so there's four women who are named. And as a child that was really interesting to me and I would ask, you know, why are these four women in the line of Christ? And no, tell me. And so I started doing the research about that. And one was a prostitute. One, oh, here's the story. You don't hear another Bible story. There was a woman named Tamar. And she had been married to one of three sons. I think there was three. And her husband died before giving her a child. So as was the custom in the time and perhaps the law, she married the brother of her dead husband. And that man would not give her a child because he didn't want to have a child in his brother's name. And so there, a lot of them were the one white. But this woman was not allowed to have a child. So he does something they call oninism. So he like spilled his seed on the ground instead of inside of hers that she couldn't have a baby. And so God gets really mad because, oh, and will not impregnate her. And so owning gets killed too. And so then her father in large decides not to marry her off to the youngest brother because two of the brothers are already dead, right? And he doesn't want to lose his only son. So he just vanishes her. And she has nothing because what is a woman have at the time of she doesn't have a husband or a child. She has no ability to make a living in the world. And so this man is the father-in-law, is really unkind to her in a way that she decides she needs to take something into her own hands. And so she dresses up like a prostitute and goes to the side of the road. And as he's traveling on the road, she puts herself in front of him and offers her services. And he sleeps with her and he does not have payment on him for some reason. And so he gives her his staff, which is a token of his word or something. So at least he's paying his prostitute. And she gets pregnant from this. And he orders her when he finds out she's pregnant to be stoned to death, to be killed, and executed because, you know, she's not allowed to have a baby outside of wedlock. And she said, okay, but let me just return this staff to you. That I got from the father of the baby. And so then he ends up protecting her. And she gets to have the child. And that child is in the line of Christ. Whoa. Yeah. So really interesting things. I don't know what you're supposed to learn from that story. When I was a kid reading this, I would ask. And of course no one really wanted to tell me. Because she was rewarded for that. That's the interesting thing. The stories are crazy. It's just if you're being honest, and if you believe in God, but you also know that people are full of shit, you have to put all this stuff through a filter. You just have to. And it doesn't mean that there's no God. Of course. It doesn't mean that. It just means there's probably something in these stories. But we have to be really careful with what that something is. And I don't profess to know. I don't. I don't know why. They can don't slavery. The Bible can don't slavery. Like flat out. It's in there all the time. It's like yes. Women are essentially second class citizens. And you know what I found out recently? That there was a woman before Eve. Depending on who you ask. Yeah. So what was that one? Well, that's not in the six books of the Bible that most people are taught in the Protestant tradition or the 69 or whatever in the Catholic tradition. That's part of the apocrypha. So these are books of the Bible that didn't make it into, you know, Christianity as such that we. That is cut today. Yeah. That was an utterance. Exactly. So that's not considered the word of God, what you're reading that is considered or what you heard. Like word on the street. Word on the street. Yeah. It's an internet. Yeah. That's a street these days. Yeah. This is the best street. Yeah. Which is not to say it's not true. Right. I don't know the truth. So I'm a yoga teacher among other things. And one thing that I say all the time when I'm teaching, which is really common thing is that yoga teacher to say is whatever I am giving you right now is, um, suggestion. So listen to your body do what's great for you. If there's something feel right to you, please don't do it. Um, and then you offer modifications, et cetera. And what high control religion does. And I'm not saying all religion. I'm saying the culture religion doesn't give you the option of listening to your body or opting out of anything. Mm. This is the interpretation of the word of God. And then one thing I will say is I don't know why Tamar did what she did or why own ended what he did. You know, I don't know whether or not the stories where I transcribed accurately or not, even if they were like, I, that is a different culture. Right. And was I'm not, I wasn't there. We don't even know if OJ did it. Right. So how are you going to know what happened to David and Bathsheba? I mean, we're pretty sure he did it. Well, but I was just reading some story that OJ hired thugs to, there was another thing, there was some thing that he said that he hired thugs to kill his wife and Ron Goldman. So this is really racist at my point. And there's a bunch of versions of it. And depends on who gets into power. Whatever version gets propagated. Right. Like if you, if there was no internet and no independent journalism and they never had to account for the fact that Iraq never really had weapons of mass destruction, if the people in charge, if we're living in 1963, how long does it take before people figure out that Iraq didn't have those weapons? How long? Do we ever find out? I don't know. I was going to say you might not ever find out. It took forever to just figure out that the Gulf of Tonkum was a false flag. The goddess into Vietnam. Right. I mean, they took decades for that to come out. Now that's widely accepted. So our own history is sketchy as fuck. Our own history, our real absolute history is sketchy as fuck. Yeah. And that's why conspiracy theories are so fun. Yeah, of course. And in a sense, a cult is just a whole conspiracy theory. that they control the narrative. Right. Completely controlled the narrative. And no one's allowed to question. And if they do, they're excommunicated. And one of the ways you know something as a cult is that they will always tell you that anyone who left, it's different than outsiders. I mean, outsiders are people who maybe had never had access to the truth. But people who are quitters, they literally call them quitters where I come from. The quitters. The quitters. I know it really is. Nobody likes quitters. Right. And so quitters were just anything they said was of the devil. And so you were not allowed to talk to anyone who left. And that's really common in cults to... You've been even talked to them. No. That's a Scientology thing, too, I believe, right? Yeah. I think it's really common in any high control group, I'm sure. Yeah. Because you can't. You really do need to control the narrative. And you can't let other stories get in there. Yeah. Wow. God damn. It's so interesting how these patterns recur all over the world. You know, there's a guy in Australia that says he's Jesus. And he runs this whole cult in Australia. And he has this woman who he says is Mary. But the problem is there was another woman who was Mary before. And the team worked out with the original Mary. So he tells us a new lady. I was wrong about that other lady. You're Mary. And so... Do you know that they say that the translation for Mary actually was woman? Oh, wow. And so the word possibly just means... I mean, you think about it. There's so many Marys in the Bible. Right. People talk about Mary Magdalene or Mary- in the Jesus or, you know, that it perhaps is just the translation for woman. Jesus as a historical figure is controversial. There's people that say that there's absolute evidence for Jesus. But then there's people that say, do you know like how much historical record we have on people that live thousands of years before Jesus? You know, there's people that lived that they know what they said, they know where they ate, they know where they went. They know so much about them. But the Jesus one is kind of... There's people that say, yes, there's historical documents that show existed. And then there's a bunch of documentaries that you can watch, like, boy, the evidence is kind of sketchy. It seems to be a thought, like a recurring thing in many religions. It seems to be like Hercules, right? It seems to be there's a bunch of these that are like real similar to that, like the child of a God, that comes down to fix everything. There's a lot of traditions where you have a virgin birth. That is true. And I am certainly not here to tell anybody what is true and not true, but the gospels that are written about Jesus were written after, right? Not during. And that was, you know, common. I mean Socrates never wrote anything down. He taught stories to Plato. And how long after his death? Well, I think the first one, now I feel like I am not a story in here, but I think the first one was like a hundred years. And so you have a possible Paul who wrote, but he only saw Jesus after. Like he was on the road to Damascus. And so he saw Jesus after Jesus had been crucified and risen. So what he saw was the ghost of Jesus. But the other, you know, gospels were not written by anyone who had seen Jesus in that way, even though they were the virgins like, when you have Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, these are the virgins that they were told. So I don't know, maybe a hundred years. I guess that this is where belief hits for people that are listening to this right now. Because there's going to be a certain percentage of people right now that have their hackles up. Because someone might be insinuating that maybe all this Jesus stuff is not legit. And that's not what anybody's saying. Well, we're saying is these stories were written down a hundred years after he was alive. And people are full of shit. That's it. It doesn't mean that he didn't exist. Because if someone did exist, like if the early emergence of humans in the world, let's imagine what they mean by this story. If the early emergence of humans in this world were put down here to figure it out on their own, like a bunch of the lock key kids, like latch key kids from the 1970s, figure it out on your own. I'm going to give you ways to live your life, tell everybody, but I'm hands off. I'm hands off. I'm going after life type of guy. I want you, I'm not going to come down and explain it again, pop out of the clouds and freak everybody out. I did that once. I did it once. I'm done. You guys killed me. So I'm just saying live your life this way. If that was a real thing, what would be any different than the Bible? What would be any different about the real event like that actually happened, where the son of God came down and explained to mankind what they're doing wrong, and lived this amazing life and taught so many people and they spread his wisdom and they spread his information. It wouldn't be any different than the Bible. Because even if it was like very clear what he was saying and very clear what he had done in the impact and how they all knew he was the son of God. By the time that a hundred years go by people talking about it, who the fuck knows? Who knows? Yeah, but you know what? Jesus did really well. So Jesus didn't write anything down, right? Like he was a storyteller. Jesus told a lot of parables and those are easier to remember. So if you listen to like, give sermon on the mount or you know, these various things, it's possible that some of these stories which they can be interpreted more than one way, but like you know, to say that you have you heard the expression casting pearls to swine? Yes. What does that mean? Well, in the story of the prodigal son, there was this, and Jesus tells this story, right? So there's these two brothers and one brother stays and does everything that his father wants him to do. And the other brother says, give me, you know, the son, he says, the younger son says, give me my inheritance now. I don't want to wait till you're dead. Just give me my inheritance now. I want to go ahead and experience life and the father gives his younger son his inheritance. And this young man who is raised well goes out and hires prostitutes, says all the things, right? And just and lives this loose life. And he finds that he runs out of money. And he is in a pen of pigs. And he is willing to eat what even the pigs won't eat like the leftovers. And he is faced down in the mud and the in according to the story in the pig pen and says, even if I was a servant from my father, I'd be treated better than this. And so he goes back, etc. And his older brother is really upset because the father brings the son back and treats him, you know, it's just so grateful his son's returning to him. And his brother says, you know, or an expression like, you're casting pearls to swine. I mean, like my brother is a pig. My brother is like, you know, from the pig pen and you're giving him something that he doesn't deserve. And that whole story, I mean, you can interpret it any way you want. But this idea that you tell stories like this and someone could say, God is willing to take you back. And perhaps even better if you have experienced life and that just being obedient is the only way to live a life. Maybe that's the, I don't know what the real interpretation is, right? But like when you read a story like that or you hear the story, Jesus didn't write it down. But if you told that story, then now people come to that and they think, what does that mean? Does that mean when I find myself in a pig pen that I can repent and go back? What does it mean? Is it funny that Jesus is a storyteller? Yeah, because a storyteller is a person who stands in front of people in command's attention. And we know how that goes. Right? Yeah. Well, you're storyteller. Well, sort of. I don't think you're a storyteller. I talk shit on stage. So it's just jokes. But those are stories. Some of them are stories. Yeah. Some of them are just making fun of things. Yeah. It's different than someone who tells you stories and in part to wisdom. Like if someone's standing in front of a group of people and parting wisdom, that's a very bizarre relationship. It's a very slippery position for the person that has the podium. Very slippery. Because you could start believing all this nonsense. You could start believing that you're different than everybody else. You could start believing that you are the son of God. Even if you're not even talking about Jesus, I'm talking about someone today. Someone today. Even today in this day and age with the internet. If you started doing something like that and your schizophrenic, you could believe it. Lots of people believe that this is not a God right now. Yeah. 100% legit. And then lots of people believe that other people are demons. There's a lot of like real funky beliefs that people hold on to. And if someone, like I said, if someone was a charismatic leader and they pretended to be the son of God, versus someone who is actually the son of God, 100 years later, it's going to be very difficult to parse out what's what. Right. Which is a problem. Which is a real problem. If you want to put all your eggs in one basket, you've got to pick a religion. You're like, boy, if you're agnostic, which one you guys is right? Is this something at the Hindus right? Maybe the Buddha is right? I don't know. You know, some people would say that the Buddha and Jesus have an awful lot in common. And if there is a right that a lot of those beliefs are going to overlap. And it is right to live a good life as to treat other people the way that you would want to be treated. And to love your neighbor. Love your neighbor. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think there's universal truth and all that stuff. I think the source of it is fascinating. Like what are the universal truths. But we always, we have to look at things through a filter of reality. And the filter of reality, we know human beings are full of shit. You have to put that in there. You have to put that with everything. You can't just say they wouldn't lie about religion. Stop. That's nonsense. It doesn't mean that God's not real. It doesn't mean that Jesus didn't exist. Because maybe Jesus is the ultimate. It's like this is the last word. And then we're going to let you guys figure it out on your own. And maybe if God exists, okay, let's just as a thought experiment, if God exists, why would God engineer an animal to be able to to be at the top of the food chain that is so filled with greed and want so much power that it's willing to take over enormous swaths of land with giant machines and murder anybody who gets in their way. And it's all justified in the name of nationalism. Why would God universally impart that kind of sensibility on a species? Why would God tolerate it? Why would God tolerate crime and murder and all the horrible things that are in the world? Why would God want any of this stuff to go on? If God is so all powerful that He created the universe, is this just a first draft? Did you like try like say like, I did it. It's free will, right? That's the answer to it is that in the garden when Adam and Eve didn't know the difference and then they partake of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil that like by the choice to do that brought sin into the world. And once they're sinned into the world, they're not going to be able to do that. And so that's what we're going to do. And so that's what we're going to do. And so that's what we're going to do. And so that's what we're going to do. But the choice to do that brought sin into the world. And once they're sinned into the world, then humans always have the choice to follow the light or follow darkness. I mean, that's the party line, right? That it is human choice. Right. My point was that maybe God's ultimate plan is to make things as fucked up as possible so that forces people to figure it out. It forces an evolution of consciousness. It forces us to go to the light. It forces us because it's the only way we survive. Like that could, it could be like a test. Like the entire human species, the entire civilization, the whole thing. It's just some gigantic test to see if you get it right. Did you ever read a wrinkle in time when you were a kid? Who's book is that? Madeline and Lingle. I've heard of it. I don't think I read it. Okay. Well, I don't know if it was Todd's schools, but kids read it for a year. I don't know when it came out in the 70s probably. But she says in an interview later that she thinks that in the end that God is waiting for every single person to choose to believe and to choose to follow. And that the light, so in a wrinkle in time is a story or science in it and a lot of things. But that when you see the light and you're drawn to the light that you might be tempted by the darkness, but when you really know what light is that you'll always choose that. And so that the end of the day that we're all going to see the light. But even if you don't believe in religion, if you know like good experiences and bad experiences in your life and when you're happy with yourself and when you're upset with yourself in your life, you generally know like there's a direction that you really want to be moving in. And the more life experience you have, the more stupid things you do, the more you learn. And so the more you get a better database to draw from to understand what each an individual choice means and the greater picture of your existence. And as you go further and further, you go, if you're living a harmonious life, you go almost naturally towards that direction. Trying to be nicer to people, love your neighbor, have more peace in the world, don't be murdering people. And that's generally how most religions want you to believe. The origin of it, there's some sort of a guidebook for being a human. That's the origin of it it seems like. They were just trying to like, you can't just let people be feral. You've got to give them some guidelines. And one of the best ways is to someone's watching all the time. And this guy, but maybe he really is. Maybe there really is something that watches everything. It might not be watching, but it might be like integrated into the entire existence of the whole thing. Maybe that's what the product of the sentence about. Yeah, maybe. Now he goes and has all these experiences find himself like making every mistake possible and then sees the light and goes back to his father. Yeah. He goes back to the kingdom of right now. Yeah. There's wisdom in all these things. And there's these people that lived and were writing things down on animal skins while they're engaging in wars with spears. You're like, it's fucking wild ass times. And they were trying to sort it all out. Have you read meditations, Marcus Rilius? Yes. And then wild stuff. That's it's wild how brilliant this guy was 2000 years ago. Like his understanding of how to live a life. Right. It's so valuable. And his concept of forgiveness. Like forgiveness. He's a fucking Roman. He's a fucking Roman. of how to live a life. It's so valuable and his concept of forgiveness. Like forgiveness, he's a fucking Roman. I mean, this dude is like this badass soldier. And he's like, it's very important to forgive everybody. Forgive him, forgive your enemies. Like he had this incredible wisdom about, just like maintaining your objective perspective of the world. That was really interesting. So we know people were smart at shit back then. Yeah. And if you go back 2000 years before him, when people start writing all this stuff down. Well, people had a lot stronger ability to concentrate. Obviously, we weren't distracted. Right? But even before things were written, people really had a command over language and oral traditions. And their memory, they had to remember. You know, we're to find whatever it is when you're a forager, where to find the hunt. Right. All of these traditions have to be passed down for humans to stay alive. I mean, we're really fragile creatures. Right. And to think that when before there was anything except for spheres, you know, like how did humans stay alive? They stayed alive because they could remember. They could remember what could kill them. Yeah. It was just like we used to be able to remember phone numbers. Yeah. If you remember. You were back then. I had so many phone numbers in my head. I still remember the phone number of the field. I just, wow. I do. I do because you know, it was the one place. Wow. That was my home. Wow. Yeah. That's wild. Yeah. My mom was a survival trainer. She trained people to survive. And she trained us to survive. And one of the big things was surviving the apocalypse. But some of the survival techniques are actually really valuable. And that's the thing about forgiveness or anything. I was like, you know, even if somebody is telling you something that is in their own best interest, it doesn't mean it's not true. Right. And that there's so many truths and anything. And so learning to survive, like literally off the lander and the desert or things like that was a really harsh training that I had as a kid. But it taught me to look around everywhere that I've been ever since and to pay attention. And I mean, that's a gift. And I think about that when I think about forgiveness too. Like part of forgiving people is because on some level they taught you a lesson. Well, even in cults they can give you valuable skills. Sure. I mean, it's something like a DJU survival techniques. How to survive the. It was really worried about the apocalypse. You need to learn how to survive the apocalypse. Sure. So, you know, they do it for good intentions. Yeah. And some of it pays off a little bit. Well, do you remember the one in Los Angeles that had billboards up and with a very specific date? What was the date? I don't remember. But I remember there was this Thai restaurant I used to go to on Ventura, this great Thai spot. And right above it was this fucking billboard. That was it was giving you a very specific date. Like repent the end is here. And it's going to be this time. I'm like, is this is like the most brilliant album release? Like that you know what I'm saying? Like some rock band is figured out a way to like make something go viral before the internet. I guess the internet was around then. It was not that long ago. I want to say like maybe eight years ago, ten years ago. What's it? Wow. That's pretty recent. Here it is. 2011. Judgment Day May 21st, 2011. Cry Mighty unto God. Monday through Friday live open forum on familyradio.com. And what happened on the show? Yeah, that was only 13 years ago. Jamie, what happened on May 11th? Nothing. The fucking zero. People were out of their mind. Like why 2k was a little like that too? Well, also December 21st, 2012. That was the end of the mine calendar. My license plate used to be December 2012. D.C. 12, whatever it was. But that was the end of the long count of the mine calendar and all the coops. That was the end of the world. So we actually did an end of the world show in Los Angeles with my friends from Honey Bann, my friends who's in Joey Diaz, Doug Stanhope. It was wild. And what did you do? Nothing happened. Nobody died. We had a good time. We had a good time in the world. It was going. But there's just a long calendar. It's a very bizarre ancient calendar that they don't really fully understand. So to say that was the end of the world, he's a little silly. Well, you know, when they give these dates, like when my grandfather gave the date of 1977, they can also say any time it doesn't happen that the calendars are wrong. Ah, how convenient. Do they have a good calendar? Can I see that calendar? Well, you know. But the point is like, oh, well, you know, with the Charbeth of Ham and all this, like, maybe that was redated because Herod didn't want us to know, like when Jesus was really born because he was killing all the babies. And he didn't really know the date of Jesus' birth. That's why he was killing, you know, all the young boys, as opposed to just that one and et cetera, et cetera. So back to the lady who was around with Eve. Who was that lady? I assume you're talking about Lilith, but that's not in the tradition that I read. So. But Lilith was supposedly, I didn't even know Lilith existed to like two years ago, I think. Oh, wow. That was like, what? What changed your life in some way? Who fucks Lilith? Yes. That's okay. It was an eye opener. I question everything after that. Okay. What is the Lilith story, exactly? So again, I was not raised on the Lilith story at all. I don't know, Jamie, do you know the Lilith story? So the Lilith story? I don't know, it's not something I feel like I'd misquote it. So the Lilith story, they decided it was BS, so they left it out of the big book. She's been interpreted as, I think, as Satan. Oh, Satan. What's your name? Of course, Satan. Ladies, maybe do terrible things. Yeah, what you did that to me. The original Hebrew word from which the name Lilith is taken is in the biblical Hebrew, the book of Isaiah, the Lilith herself has not mentioned any biblical text. In late antiquity, and how do you say that word? Mandan? How do you say that word? Do you know? Mandan? Mandan and Jewish sources. From 500 AD onward Lilith appears in historical, historical, historical, historical, in quotations incorporating a short mythic story in various concepts and localities that give partial descriptions of her. She's mentioned in the Babylonian Talmud, Nandash, Shabbat, Baba Batra, and the conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan as Adam's first wife. In the Zohar Leviticus 19A as a hot fiery female who first cohabitated with man. Wow. Many rabbinic authorities, including, boy, as another word, my moneeds, my moneeds, and menisham Mary reject the existence of Lilith. Interesting. Lilith is controversial. Very controversial. Like all hot ladies. Exactly. But the fact that she was the first? Yeah. I mean, again, that's not the tradition that most Christians are taught. I mean, it's considered part of the apocrypha. So, I mean, I don't have any idea what the truth is, but she has been vilified even more than Eve. Although, if you think about Eve's pretty vilified too, I mean, she caused the downshakes. She is a wild girl here. Right. Yeah. It's, I mean, boy, what's the root of that story? That's the real question. What was the original thing they were trying to convey? I will not. It's original human stuff on that. Yeah. But at least Christianity has like an origin story, you know, an origin story for everything. For the universe, for people. And when you did enough science and you didn't have any understanding of cosmology, you need something. We need something. It's thousands of years just staring up the stars. Anybody know what the fuck's going on up there? I know. Yeah. There's Thor. He lives up there and then there's Zeus. He's running shit. Yeah. Well, looking at the stars storytelling too. Mm-hmm. In the beginning, there was the word. Well, I think that's one of the things that's really screwed up human beings. And I don't think in any small way is light pollution. I think our inability to see that we are in this celestial, majestic cosmos, this thing. It's not just black with a few bright lights. The whole thing is lit up. And it's the most magnificent thing you could ever see. But we sacrifice it almost for everyone that lives in cities. If you live in cities, you know, go anywhere and see it. We sacrifice a humbling spiritual experience of just staring at the stars. And I think it's a spiritual poisoning. It's like just like if you have vitamin deficiencies. I think you have a spiritual deficiency, just a natural, universal, spiritual deficiency from not seeing the stars. I think it puts our place in the universe in perspective like nothing else can. Because it's there. It's real. It's not a concept. It's not something that you have to use of microscope or telescope to see. It's right in front of you. And it's absolutely spectacular on a clear night in the mountains where there's no light pollution. You see the stars? You're just like, wow. Is that up there every night? Did you use to go to Joshua Tree when you lived around LA? No, I didn't. So Joshua Tree is still so magical for that reason because there's no lights. I've heard it's incredible out there. Yeah, it's not too far from where I am. And when I feel that I need to commune with something greater than myself, you just go there and you just lay down and look at the stars. Light pollution is spiritual poisoning. I agree. It really is. And it's a big factor, I think, in how lost we are and how you're not consistently humbled every night by the majesty of the stars. If we were consistently humbled every night, I think we'd generally be like, you could tone people down a little bit. There is something really healing about looking at the stars and there's also the ability to literally not be lost if you know how to read the stars. Right. So that is something I was trained by my uncle who was, you know, somewhat of an astronomer. But to look at the stars and to always know where you are. And if you know how to read the stars, you can never be lost. So you could like navigate with the stars. Like if you're in a boat, could you do it? Could I do it? I don't know if I could do it very well from a boat. But I could do it by because I know how to put a stick in the ground and to see the difference in the way that the sun goes so that you can see where you are. Because you got to know where the North Star is obviously. But then you also have to know what time of year it is to some degree. So if you're lost for, or you think you're lost for a matter of months or years, you would need to have some sort of idea where you are. And if you're in the desert, it's hard to tell seasons. But if I was on land, I could do it. Yeah. So you'd have to add up the days. Well, you don't even have to add up the days. You just have to know what season you're in. And you can tell that by the angle of the sun. Right. But if you get lost. Well, sure. Although you don't have to get lost for years. You might just never know. You guys are getting prepared to be lost for years. Yeah. My mom used to have this phrase. I think she made it up. But it survived the year, survived with faith. And so she taught everyone that those five letters stand for what you should do first. You know, so the first thing, what do you think the first thing you should do if you're lost? Or you think you're lost? Get to a high space. Still look around. Well, the first thing you should do is shelter. First thing? The first thing you should do is shelter. If you don't have shelter, you're going to lose your body heat. It depends on where you are, of course. But if you're anywhere that gets cold in some ways, you don't know what's going to get cold. Desert doesn't seem like it gets cold. I've been in a desert night. Yeah, the year cold. It's very freezing. So shelter's the first thing. And then fire because the warmth is really important. So survive fears. So it's shelter. And then fire. And then the thing is signaling. So if you want to be found, you put up a signal. If you don't want to be found, you need to know what creates a signal for people who are looking. So for example, like if you are in the desert, you try to find dark rocks to put SOS. But if you don't want to be found, you try to never put a contrast. So you try not to have anything that would contrast with the color of the land from a plane that a plane would see as contrast. Jesus. So there's a lot of fun stuff like that. So they were preparing you from hiding and for surviving. Yeah. And who are you going to be hiding from? Well, so after the second coming, when everybody goes up to heaven, who's good, all that's left is the demons in the world. And there's a thousand years of terror that will rain upon the earth till the blood rises to the horses' bridles. Wow. And you guys were preparing for this when you were little kids. Yeah. Woo! Demons. Yeah. So if you're a good person, you're going to heaven. So you don't have to talk about these demons. Yeah. You've probably heard some of those stories, right? There's a whole book on these left behind series. Yes. So like who gets left behind? Yeah. But didn't they do a bunch of movies? I think so. I think Kurt Cameron did it. Maybe. I heard they're amazing. Okay. I don't know. So I can't speak to that. But yes, there's a lot of that. Because it's part of a lot of traditions. And the idea, though, is that some people are left behind in order to try to win the last people, like all the evil people, sort of like no is arc. Right? And he gets on this arc and like it's his job to, I mean, why didn't God just take no way to heaven, right? But like he gets this boat and he gets this family and all the animals and he gets to like stare, clear from the blood. Or you have Sodom and Gomorrah. You have a lot, the only good person left and he wants to like help the people in the town or Jonah and Nivit Nineveh where he's like told to go tell the people they're bad and then like, you know, God saves the people anyway. So there's a lot of stories of God changing his mind. And yes, I know a lot of Bible stories. Yeah. There's definitely a lot of stories of God changes one. Yeah. If you leave some people behind who know how to lead the army of God, you can then proselytize and bring people into true faith or righteousness. It's also kind of like, I don't know a way to keep people a little bit isolated if you're trying to teach them to do something that other people don't know how to do. And I was very ashamed of knowing like that kind of thing. So it's the kind of thing I talk about in foragers. Like I spent a lot of time really feeling like I couldn't acclimate to the regular world like later because I, you know, they say if you're always looking at, I'm sure Navy SEALs feel this way. But you know, like you're always waiting for disaster. Right. Yeah. And you're always thinking preemptively. And what can I do to avert this disaster? How did you get that out of your head? I was still in my head, Joe. For real? Yeah. Really? Yeah. So right now you're preparing for the end of the world. Well, you know, I walked in your lair and I'm like, okay, there's all dudes here. Where's the exit? It's like, no. No, but I mean, to some degree, I mean, I'm not actively preparing, but I feel like I, um, yeah, I mean, it makes it really hard to trust people when you've been trained that the people that you think you can trust are going to betray you. Right. Right. Yeah. Really hard to get that out of your head. I had a friend who was a Mormon. And when they left, she was like in her 40s and she said she became really susceptible to any kind of like spiritual people, spirituality, like con people. She just had this trusting nature from being like a strict Mormon her whole life. And then all of a sudden cut loose and didn't, you know, didn't know to distrust people. Absolutely. It wasn't programmed in. Because if you're only around people who are homogenous and they're like, you're taught, right. I was like, everybody in your group is trustworthy. You don't see the science. You don't know, I mean, you don't know the red flags as people would say. She also said like she found herself to be susceptible to people telling her things. Like she just had like this automatic inclination to not question and believe things that came from being strict, strict religion. Right. Why did she leave in her 40s? I don't know. Oh. That's tough time to leave. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know what the story behind it was exactly. Yeah. I never got into it. Well, that's the thing about cults is it does make it really difficult to survive on the outside. And I certainly know a lot of people have taken their lives after being excommunicated from the field. And I had a dear friend, the first person who ever told me that used that word that is a cult and I had been out for years. And I didn't, I mean, it's not like I never heard the word, but I didn't apply it the way we were raised and he had written, you know, these paper articles, these professors, et cetera. And he took his life because it was really, really, really hard to live on the outside. Yeah. And there's been many others who have done that. And there's also people who are ashamed once they reintegrated to society. They were part of that. They got duped into this nonsense. And so you hide it. Right. Most people, it's like, it's not like you're telling people and they're laughing at you. You're not telling anyone because you're scared. They're going to laugh at you or judge you. And so you spend your life in shame hiding. This truth, that honestly doesn't make you a bad person at all and probably many people would understand, but you don't talk about it. I didn't talk about it forever. Not just that, but everybody's susceptible to it, whether you believe it or not, especially if you were a child. Everybody's susceptible. This ridiculous idea people have that, oh, I wouldn't know them better. Like, I don't think you would. I really don't. I think you would now, but you're new now. You're 35-year-old you. You're not about you that was five years old. And if that had been consistently perpetuated onto you, you wouldn't know. So there's a story we were raised with, which is a really common biblical story of Abraham and Isaac and Abraham is told to kill his son, his only son. And he's told to take him up on an altar and slaughter him and the way that he was slaughter an animal. And Abraham makes Isaac do this hike up to the mountain where he's going to kill him. And he God has told him he must do this. And so he like ties his own son on this altar and brings up the knife to kill him. And very dramatically, you know, the story comes. And as he's plunging down the knife, and angel comes and grabs his wrists and stops. And God said, I just wanted to make sure you'd really do it. And this is the story I was raised on in both my parents and my grandfather were very big on like, you will kill your child. If God asked you to, that's what you're supposed to do. And I said this in the book and my brother who, you know, we really haven't talked about these, are we have now. But at the time we hadn't really talked about this. This is like all of a year ago. And he said when he read it, he thought, no, it's not that our parents would have sacrificed this. They did sacrifice us because they believed that somebody else would take care of us. And we were raised very, you know, I don't know if community is exactly the truth. Because there wasn't necessarily anyone who was checking. But there was random people who, in my case, a lot of men who just raised us because our parents had more important things that God told them to do. And so there's a lot of ways to sacrifice kids. There's a lot of ways to think that God is talking to you. Yeah. Yeah. You could apply that to other aspects of culture. Absolutely. It is, is there like groups of people that get together that have survived cults that have an ability to like help each other through this? So apparently there are and I didn't know about this. Since then, John, the last year. Oh, no. There's a whole huge group of people who have come out of like Hasidic Jews, like Orthodox Hasidic Jews. But there's also Steve Hessen. He's a doctor who spoke on Meghan Kelly when I was on that show too. He has something called the bite method, which is just basically says that there's like these really four major ways of control that cults do. They control your behavior, your information, your thoughts, and your emotions. And so he has these deep programming systems and counselors and people who can help you if you've been in that kind of high control group, even if it wasn't religious in nature. Yeah. Talk to that, did before. Have you talked to him? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, um, I think it's a Mooney, right? Mm-hmm. Yeah. The whole thing of like his excommunication and how he got free of it, when you were breaking free, what age were you? 17. You're 17. And what was it like trying to integrate with regular people out there in the world when you're 17? I don't think I did that very effectively at all. So how could you? Yeah. I just couldn't. So I got married. Like all of a sudden you go from being this incredibly controlling religious cult that thinks the end of the world is common to regular world. So it wasn't entirely all of a sudden I had a childhood illness, um, an autoimmune disease, which was probably, I mean, there's no genetic nature to these diseases, but where your body attacks itself. So it's quite probable that my body was just like, I can't take this anymore because I mean, stress. Yes. And also there's a lot of deprivation, sleep deprivation, you know, when you're in survival training, a lot of extreme deprivation. So along the survival training go for well, because I was born there and it also because I was sick and because of other things like I was trained for a very long time, like pretty much we moved up there full time up to the mountain, which I talk about in the book forger. We moved up there when I was almost eight. And so I was up there and tell I left and you were foraging. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there was other things going on too. So I got sick and then I was hungry and there was a lot of other things happening. And so I found a way to start house cleaning for people. And that's how I got an application of college and stuff like that. But I was a house cleaner. And so that was kind of a four way, a foray into learning about how other people lived, even though like it wasn't like I was invited into their family, I was invited into their things. But you can learn a lot. Yeah. When you see a refrigerator that has to be a net. What was it like just cleaning people's houses, just seeing how these weird people lived in the outside world. Did you ever see the unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt? I did. Oh, Larry. So many people were like, you need to show about you. It's kind of you. It is. And you know what? That is very much the way that she's just like confused by the smallest things. I mean, it's funny the way that they depict it. But it's also kind of dark. I mean, I actually liked the dark humor in that. It's a great show. And handmade stamp too. I got a lot of calls about that one. And they made another show about you. But I think that there's there's real truth to these the things that confuse that you and I didn't have any friends. I went to college. I didn't have I didn't know how to have relationships. There's a lot of rules apparently unspoken rules about, you know, the dance of friendship. And I had never made a friend because I was born with the people I was born with and I didn't know how to do that. Wow. I didn't know how to date. I didn't know how to like be. I didn't know any of the rules and it took me a very long time to learn them. What a crazy crash course. Were you open about your past? No, no, absolutely not. I wasn't open. They just thought you were aware. Yeah. One day I mean, ice queen. Oh boy. Because I was just really separate. You know, I didn't know how to and I I didn't drink or smoke or do any of those things because I was so afraid of losing control. I was so afraid that if I I also felt like I was in a huge hole that I had to dig my way out of in order to find a way to live in the outside world. And so I couldn't afford to like I didn't know how to trust and who not to trust. And I mean, some of my friends now even and my friends have become a little bit more of my family and my brothers like that too. He has just the most amazing friends who are his family and they will still call me feral. They're like, you don't still don't know. I'm like, I still don't understand the point of your tensile. I mean, like I can I can do it and I know which fork to eat from but like I don't want to, you know, you want to eat with your fingers. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know, I can eat with your tensile but it's not if I'm not in play company. I'm eating with my hands. Yeah. Interesting that like eating with your hands is thought to be gross. But something is happy with your hands like you're eating ribs. How you gonna eat ribs? If you eat ribs for the fork and knife, you're a fucking asshole. You know, you got a big old Texas beef rib. You have to eat that thing with your face. Yeah. You have to get in there. Yeah. So we have to use your hands. Isn't it weird? Yeah. It's interesting. It's just cultural. Yeah. But there's something we do in Western culture because we're so in our minds instead of our bodies, we're always separating ourselves. So we need this like piece of metal that keeps us like from the reality that we're like fucking eating an animal or, you know, whatever it is we're devouring and somehow it's more polite. If you have this piece of metal between you and it bizarre, it is. And it definitely keeps your hands cleaner. You know, it's easier to pick the food up. And you feel like, you know, look at me. I'm at a restaurant. I go, napkin tucked in here. Yeah. A lot of rules. Yeah. You have to have them down your lap and you know, right. And which side is the salad fork? Which one's the regular fork? Yes, starting to outside in. Yeah. Yeah. Bizarre. Yeah. So when you are learning these things, you have to like actually memorize them. You know, like when you don't come from it, you're like, there's a lot of rules and all of them have systems, right? So I'm very actually fascinated by microcosms. You like the microcosm cultures of like any sort of culture has a lot of rules attached to it. Sure. Well, you must be hyper where that. I feel like I am. Yeah. Yeah. Patrons of people just take for granted. You're like, oh, interesting. Yeah. It's watching. The thing about like not knowing where the forks and knives go to me is one of the dumbest ones of all time. Because it's like a sign that you're a cultured person. If you know where the for it has to be proper, like what are we doing? What do you do? You don't have a boring ass conversation with a bunch of people. Or do you want to sit down and have a meal and talk? Like that's the fun kind of like what the fuck we do. And like what who's probably impressing? Is the queen coming by? Like what is this? Why would you want this? Well, haven't you experienced though that sometimes when you get rid of all that, you just have a much more intimate conversation. Oh, yeah. I like to eat on the floor. I like to sit on the floor. And I have this beautiful regular house. And I'm like, if people will do it, I invite them to sit on the floor because it just feels organic to me. And it just feels earthier. And it feels just like, I don't know. It just removes all the hierarchies. And have you ever seen those Middle Eastern guys? All sitting around and enormous plate of food. And they're all just sitting cross-legged, just digging in with their hands and eating with their hands. Yeah. Yeah. Well, if your hands are clean. Yeah, well, the whole idea is you never shake someone's hand with your left hand. Right. Yes, the hand used to wipe your ass. Right. So they think we're gross because we use paper. We just smudge it all over the place. Well. And they got a point. They have a really good point. Like it is one of the grossest things. If you get one of those bidet toilets, you will never go back. You'll never go back. Like how gross is it? It's smear it all over the place. So they have your allowed to eat with your hands. You're supposed to eat with your hands. It's just a normal thing. Like most of the time it's normal. How do you eat popcorn? Do you use your spoon? I feel so validated right now. Yeah. How do you eat popcorn? Do you eat popcorn? Okay. Well, do you eat with your fucking hands? Yeah. I'm red. Yeah, red. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly, bread. Who's cutting bread with a fork and knife? That's ridiculous. Yeah. With your hands. Yeah. But I think if you can get people to act proper, like the conversations, if you stay within the lines, you know, maybe that's it. Maybe, you know, if you go to an inn and everybody's eating chicken legs and drinking beer and rah, they're gonna have crazy stories. Yeah. It's gonna get uncomfortable. Just keep people, make them more. They're nice as close. They don't want to get messy and give them a fork and a knife and keep everybody proper. And everyone's trying to press everybody else without proper. They are and how much they know about fine dining. May I see this some all year to make a wine selection? You know, all of it. It's like, I remember the first time, you know, someone came to pour this last wine or whatever. And then the guy is supposed to like take a sip of it to tell the guy if it's okay. And then like, whoa, what kind of culture is this? Like, I mean, also, and what are you gonna say if it's not? Like, what kind of... By the way, that is the most bullshitty bullshitty moment you're ever having a restaurant. This is when you sware that thing around, take a sniff and sip. It's less you really know what you're doing. 99.9% of the people doing that have no fucking idea what they're doing. Absolutely. And I don't know, I don't know if this is a fact, but I have never had anyone offered to me. They always offer it to the man and the man decides whether or not it's a wine good enough for the lady. Oh, that's interesting. Not definitely seeing women get it. Really? Yeah, if a woman orders about a wine. It's generally like whoever orders it. I've seen that. Okay, I'm gonna watch that. Yeah, but I think maybe that's just modern today. Maybe that's like a new thing, you know, women's liberation stuff. Like people don't want to be presumptuous so they'll offer the one in taste. Never offered me a taste. Interesting. Even if you've ordered the bottle. Maybe I've never ordered a bottle. Maybe that's what it is. I think it's generally the person who orders it. That may be. Yeah. But I also wouldn't have any idea if that was... Because if I'm around a group of my friends and we order a bottle of wine, if I ask, they always bring it to me. But if one of my friends asks, they always bring it to them. Yeah, I think it's generally the person who orders it. I think, but I don't know. I think it's probably just rules. But I would imagine that like, women get offered less. I would imagine if I was like an old school Somalia, I would assume the lady would not be making the choice. Do you know anything about Sikhs? Sikhs are religion? Uh-huh. Not too much. Which is really more culture than a religion, but this is about wine. I didn't change the subject. So they do not drink unless the person they are with is drinking and they don't want to be rude or whatever. So they're not allowed to order wine. But if you order wine and you pour it for them, they can drink. And that's the same thing about smoking. They also never cut their hair. There's a lot of things. But I have a Sikh friend and he taught me, I couldn't figure it out at the beginning because I was like, why is he keep asking me to order? Like, he'd be like, you were like, you were like, no, no, you were. I don't know what I want. You know, like whatever. And he'd be like, no, no, you need to order the bottle of wine. And he, if I ordered it... be like, why is he keep asking me to order? Like, he'd be like, you were, I said, no, no, you were. I don't know what I want. You know, like whatever. And he'd be like, no, no, you need to order the bottle of wine. And he, if I ordered it, even though he told me to order it, and he was paying for it, then he could drink it. I'm in it. Let it go, if you're real. No, it's so correct. That's the thing. I mean, there's just all these cultures have different traditions. And yeah. Yeah. Do you know what Sikhs do have? They have this crazy yogurt cannabis mixture. I did not know. That's supposed to be bomb diggity. What is that stuff called, Jamie? Yeah, Duncan taught me about it. Like, they have some, no. They have some like edible THC yogurt thing that's supposed to be insane. Oh, he's given it to you. Okay. Many different ways of making bomb lassi, the traditional method is to blend fresh cannabis leaves, plain yogurt, a pinch of sugar, and nuts like almonds and pistachios, along with spices and ginger powder, fennel seeds, cardamom, and peppercorn, and water. Wow. That's a concoction. Click on that. What does it say at the top? Oh, yeah. What did you say? The world's oldest cannabis treat. Yeah, I was gonna try it. I think you should. Yeah. But I guess these guys take that stuff and get blasted. Yeah, so it's a really old and rich tradition. And they are very humble and kind people, the culture, very pacifist and et cetera, et cetera. But probably that's what they've been doing. Yeah, they're chilling. Yeah. They're in a good headspace. Yeah. It's, it, like, so that's an example of a group of humans following a pattern that seems to be beneficial. Like, it seems to like they got a harmonious relationship with each other. They do, but they're work around. You know, we can joke about the work around. But the thing they work around does means that when they associate with outsiders, they don't stick to their own custom. They accept the customs of the outsider. Right. And so they work around it by the other person having the right, but they participate in it. And because they participated, they don't keep themselves as narrow-minded. I mean, cold people, there definitely no matter who poured you that glass of wine, you know, you drink it. My dad was in the military and he was like, I mean, he was drafted, but he was like, you're not. No one could get me to drink a sip alcohol, et cetera, et cetera. Like there he was very proud of his ability to be separate. Hmm. And so it's really difficult to have friendships in a cold, by the way, you think that it's so great because you're all in unison, but one of the things that people who have gotten out and maybe they still family members there is that the people who are left there, they don't have any real friends because anybody would report on anybody. There's no loyalty. You can't, you can tell a joke. You can't laugh at a joke. You can't like, there's really a lot of things that are forbidden that are, I think, required for friendship. And so I had to learn that when I got on the outside. And I look back and I think I was really impoverished by knowing people and moving in unison and having comfort, and not really having the experience of trust. And so how long did it take? And what steps did you go about to sort of like create your own version of the world? I feel like there's really good ways to do this. And I did not do any of them. I mean, I was in college. So I, you know, whatever. I learned things academically. But what I didn't learn is like in my body. I feel like I had four children really quickly, really young. And then I think I raised myself with them. You know, I used to do this thing when my babies were little, where I was reading about other cultures because I didn't know, I didn't even know like what American culture really was. And so I like a read about Japan, for example, which at the time they were saying basically, you don't say no to a child, to other five because you want to give them a sense of autonomy. And then you start putting the structure there. So anyway, I had these index cards and I put them all over my house and they said that they had the values that I wanted for my kids like resiliency, humor, agency, whatever. And so and then on the back, I would put the techniques. So for example, I didn't put restraints, like I didn't use play pens or whatever. I just tried to create a safe environment. And then I did these things like they should be able to find me, but I shouldn't always be present. So I would say, hi, I'm going to be working right here in this room, like to a one year old. Right. And they like anytime you want me, I'm right here, but then like removed myself and site. So they felt that they were in control of their relationship. And just all this stuff. But I did it so severely. You know? And so I think by raising them, I raised myself. Wow. But it did take me a long time to have friends though. I don't think I had friends tell my 30s because like any genuine friends, because I didn't know how to be vulnerable. And I didn't trust anyone. Like I would be friends with somebody for like six, seven years before I'd mention anything about where I came from. So how did you figure out how to open up? I'm still working on it. So where did I do? I'm not doing great. I'm trying it with you, Joe. Well, just the fact that you could do a way to communicate about it. You're so open about it. And I mean, I can't imagine what that's like. I can't imagine what that life is like. What your childhood was like with being 17 and just being out in the world on your own trying to decipher what the outside world does. Yeah. And I didn't understand parents either like people's relationships with their parents. Like I didn't ever have like my dad never bought me a meal in my life. Like he never even later in life when I reconnected or whatever. It's like I would always have to pay. There was never this sense that my parents were giving us. You know, it was always us giving to them. And I felt like I didn't understand. I feel like I still have a little struggle. I was like, why are they taking such good care of you? You know, it's like this, I don't know. I just connect as far as what it looks like to be a family. My definition of family is wider than biology, of course. Right. Because like your grandfather wasn't really your grandfather, right? He was. He actually was my biological grandfather, but the other kids that we were raised with all four grandpa. Right. And so I didn't know the difference. But he was my actual. So there was a lot of people that were family, but they weren't related. Right. Yeah. And then of course, once I left, I had to make new family as well. And my friendships were my family. Well, make sense. It would take you into your third is because it's like you have to really learn life. So you're going through one through 17 again. Yeah. Yeah. It takes you into that much more time. Did you see the movie poor things? No. Well, just this idea that if you put like a child's brain in an adult body, that like, that's what that story is about. It's kind of like a Frankenstein sort of thing. Who's in that movie? Emma Stone. Emma Stone is a recent movie? Yes. It was a bunch of those like she did when she did. She did. She did. She did. Well, she does call. She calls the guy God who created her because it's in that same Godwin. I think it's Godwin, right? Jamie? But it's she calls him God. So there's like a religious parable, but it's not specifically about religion. But I think that's what I was like. I was like a, which I feel like I'm still recovering from. What years is supposed to be taking place in? It's surrealistic. So it's kind of Victorian, but it's sensationalized. There's almost like Diego Rivera crossed with. Like, oh yeah, you can see it's part of it's in black and white and then she starts seeing in color. How do I know about this? Yeah, I don't know how you don't know. I am so out of the loop. There's just too many things to do. I feel like I just taught you something. You definitely did. But there's just too many things to be attached to today. Yeah, there are. There are too many. But in any case, it's an adult brain put in, I mean, sorry, a child's brain. It's actually her unborn fetus that gets put into this body. She dies. And so the baby dies and then or the baby just in quite die. So that that brain gets put into this adult woman. But in any case, that's what I felt like. I felt like I was this adult body who just had an infant brain and I and I was just and I think it just took me so long. So I don't come from I feel like I don't come from an era to like kind of like the way that that movie is depicted. I felt like there was no music of I don't relate to the music of my generation because I never heard it. And so people, you know, like people are just sort of like everyone should sort of like the same kind of thing. And I don't have it never. I didn't go to concerts when I was a teenager ever. I never. So I didn't have any idea what that felt like. And so I don't associate with that with youth, for example. Did you guys listen to any music? I sang a lot of hymns. hymns. A lot of hymns. Mostly just Christian hymns, right? All Christian hymns. And Wesley, there was a lot of, I don't know if you know who John Wesley is, but he read a lot of hymns. And you know, they can the, I think 1600s could you fact check that, Jamie. But it was, he wrote so many songs and I knew all the lyrics to those and you had to sing in harmony. And so when you were kids, like we guys would rock out and just rock out and sing hymns. Well, yeah. Pretty much. So when was the first time you heard another song? You know, the thing that I got ultimately kicked out for was going to a movie with a boy who was raised with me. He was a young man. He had left and he was a college kid. And I was 17. And I went to the color purple and there was music in that. And I... Were you allowed to see movies? No. Had you seen one before? No. Color purple is the first movie you ever saw. To my knowledge. Wow. So that really changed my life. I started watching movies when I got to college. What was it like going to a movie at 17 for the first time? Magic. Like a... Like a... Like the most beautiful church. It was so beautiful. It was like... It was... I mean, just the darkness and then the way that the screen lit up. And I just... It was so beautiful. I just thought... I think we take it for granted, right? Yeah, it just made me cry. You're wild. And that was the first time you heard other music, too. Yeah. And so I didn't start listening to pop and their music, though, took me a while to like acclimate even once I got out. Like I knew that other people were doing it, but the first time like I... Maybe bought a CD, for example. I think I was 30. Wow. Like I just didn't. Because I had babies young. I just didn't. I did all that. In my early 20s, I had all these little kids. And I was doing, you know, the mom thing and trying to get myself educated. So I could, you know, make good money and take care of everybody. And it just felt like there wasn't time for that. So I didn't have a youth. And so I met a music critic and I was in my 30s. I'm actually putting this in my next book, which is actually called, Prodigal Daughter. And he introduced me to the songs of... It was in the early 2000s. And he introduced me to the songs of the 90s and taught me like, you know, the derivations of, you know, the beats and the lyrics. And he had come from a pastor father. So he understood, you know, religion in relation to music. And it was just this wonderful music education. So I did all that. I mean, I really think I came into understanding music in my 30s. You're like almost like an alien. Yes, very much. I can alien version of a human being. Yeah. They dropped off at 17 years old. Like what? It's shocking to me how long it takes to figure it out. When you think like, you can learn to, you know what it is. I could learn to code switch and I could learn to be presentable and out to outside. Like I could learn which work to use. Like really quickly that you can learn. But you can't learn to feel the other things that other people feel. And so you're always just a little bit disconnected as like being kind of in a bell jar or something. Like there's always a distance between, or there was for just a long time between me and someone else. And so for example, my brother, who loves you as I told you, he, um, I went to spurt. They probably recently and they're like, you have a sister? Like he never even talked about his family. They didn't even know. She just wrote a book. You should read it so you could figure out where I come from. I mean, because he never told his very best friends who he had been like friends with for over 20 years. Like he never told them. And I think that, you know, and he, he looks really normal, you know, like he is. But he didn't have the ability, I think, to really, to really maybe gauge the way that it affected him. And we as a family, you know, the siblings all kind of went different directions because it's painful to go back and relive it. And you don't, it just feels like you're always going backwards if you try to be around where you come from. And you just want to, you just want to like live in the world and, you know, find, find a new identity. Wow. So there's long-term consequences for coming out of something like this. Oh, for sure. How could it not be? Yeah. I mean, just there's so many things that can happen to a child with a young that will screw them up forever. But the fact that you had no understanding of the outside world and you fully believed all this stuff that you're being told, you'll learn how to forage and survive in the woods. And then you get released. And then you're out in the world because you want to see the color purple. That's pretty amazing. Crazy. It's such a crazy story. But the outside world is really complicated because there's so many different beliefs systems out here. Yeah. Yeah. Did you, um, were you at a rush to try to find a new one? I was in a rush for everything because I didn't think I was going to live very long because there was still inside my head that I was a breaking. I mean, even now, like to be honest, writing about this, this is what the former field people have said to me all the time is like nobody's ever talked about this publicly. We were, we're trained, you know, like once you're in the field, you're always in the field, like it's like being a marine or something. Like these are our brothers and sisters in arms and you never allowed to talk about this. So to come out with the book, it was the first time that anyone has spoken publicly about this particular cult. And I was raised, of course, to believe I'd be struck dead by lightning if I ever talked about it. And so there were so many years that I think it was just so painful to even think about. Wow. I think, you know where I come from. So I'm kind of going around a circle to answer. That's a question, but it felt like it's been very recent that I can own that as being an essential part of my identity. Wow. How did you do you attribute it any specific, like is it meditation? Is it yoga? Like what is it that sort of as a loud you to kind of regain your life? Have you heard the expression or that the word biofield? No. So biofield is the love of living things and it's not specifically environmental. It was coined in 1973, I think, by Eric From. And it is the love of living things. So it's not just humans, but it's animals, plants, whatever. And so I think that because I was raised understanding the natural environment, I really feel like when I've been lost in the world, you know, and you think you're lost. I don't know if we can ever truly be lost. I think that we're just learning what's around us that isn't working. Like that's always information that can, if you know what to look for, there's always information that can get you where you want to go. You just need to know where you want to go, right? So I feel like putting my feet in the dirt, sorry, kind of like, you know, like being in my body and being on the earth. And I think yoga helps with that even if you're not doing it on the grass, although I do teach outside sometimes. But like if you can find yourself like what you're connected to, that feels solid. That feels like something you can believe in, right? Because it's not about an idea. It's like I am held by gravity right now. Like this gravity is holding me into the earth. And this earth, like it is capable of nurturing seeds, like things grow out of this earth. Like we forget that, I think sometimes in our contemporary culture that everything comes out of the earth. And so I think that one of the practices I do meditate, but I'm going to shave before I got came here today. But I think that like if I can be under a tree, you know, I'm like on the earth in some way, then I feel like that, I guess it's that neuroplasticity thing. Like I can always grow. Like there's that there's no point at which I'm separate. And I think there's that part of practice of being like, no, I'm truly connected. And all the things they taught me was a way of keeping me separate. But I can always go back to the source itself. Yeah. I think when we're talking about the sky and the light pollution being a spiritual deficiency, I think we have that also from the forests. I think there's something that connects us when we're in the wilderness. There's a feeling that you get when there's a humbleness that comes about you, a humility that you have to accept that the wilderness is so vast and powerful and amazing that it puts you in check. It gives you like this feeling of connectedness to everything. We think when we're living in cities and we're getting new words and we're going to restaurants, we think we're disconnected from nature because we've kind of set it up that way. we set our own little hamster wheel up over nature. But we're missing something by doing that. We're missing something. Yeah, we are nature. We really are. We are nature. We just create our forks. Let's go back to that metaphor and that little thing. But we separate ourselves from the reality that we eat straight from the earth. And most people they eat animals that are alive on the earth. And that thing was a living creature. And you are devouring it. And that is so primal. Yeah, life eats life. Yeah. We come from the wilderness. We really do. For like hundreds of thousands of years, we were way, I mean, just it's astronomically like longer that we spent foraging than we did. It's a visualization. Yeah. With an agriculture. I mean, agriculture is relatively new. And so we all come from that. So when we get there, I think it is something that is inside of us. And I think we would all benefit. At least I benefit. I shouldn't preach this to anyone else. And I think we benefit when we connect to it. I think all human beings share that. The only people that you have to be like really, really neurotic and like a crazy city dweller, like get me out of the woods. I ate it out of here. So quiet. There are a lot of people that are like, there are smoke and cigarettes. Bobby, when we fucking going home, this is terrible. There's got to be people like that. People that are just like, people that get acclimated to those particular cultures too, right? There's people that maybe there's a thing that they do in their city that they can't be without. And they need that thing. They think they need it. Yeah. Oh, yeah, for sure. But they like gambling addicts. Like a friend is a gambling addict lives in Vegas. And I'm never leaving Vegas. Because once a gamble all the time, if that's the place, you know, that's the place for you. You can't get that guy to live in the woods. You know, there's no card games out there. But there's a lot of adrenaline if you're looking for it. Oh, yeah. It's a different kind of adrenaline. Yeah. But it's also there's a lot, like I said, the humility that the woods give you. It's first of all, it's so hard to just get around. It's fucking hard to get around where there's no roads and shit. Everything's up and down. Yeah. But you actually can get GPS out there and handheld. Not everywhere. What do you mean? Well, I suppose if you have a specific device, but your phone is not going to work in plenty of places. And I wonder. Oh, I know. I know there's places. But the new phones don't do, don't do phones. Use actual global positioning satellites so that it works even without a cell phone signal. I think iPhones do that. I think Samsung phones do that too. I think. That's very good today. I think they do. It's very limited. Is it limited? Like you can send one, not like one, but like if you're stuck? No, no, no, no. You misunderstand what I'm saying. No, you misunderstand. No, you misunderstand what I'm saying. Yeah, there is satellite messaging. But what I'm saying is GPS coordinates that your maps work. I think your maps still work even if you don't have cell phone signal. You can't put in. I can tell you this. You're not going to tell you where it's not going to tell you which way to go because it hasn't been mapped in that way. It's not going to tell you turn last in 50 yards. Right. Right. You get GPS, but you don't get directions. You get directions. You're going to have to try something else. Siri, tell me how to get home. Right. You're going to have to find some other ways to identify. Yeah, you'll have to actually look at the terrain on your GPS unit and figure out which way to go. Yes, you can do that. You can pick a waypoint and it'll actually steer you towards a waypoint. And what do you have? Don't have your device on your foot. Your foot. Your foot. No, you can actually look. Oh, no, no, no. I mean, you're fucked. I'm fucked. You're not fucked. And iPhones GPS will work fine without cell phone coverage. Your phone will know where it is, but you will not be able to see your location displayed on Apple Maps without a data connection to download the map. That makes it a little bit tough to get around. So it knows where you are. The GPS will work fine. But so could you just download the map of the entire country and leave it on your phone? So I know you can do that with certain apps. Like there's Onyx, Onyx Hunt. It's a map application for wilderness hunters. And you can use that and you download areas. And you have them regardless of cell phone service. So you can tell where you're at. That may work. But most people on this planet have not done that. Yeah, you're fucked. Yeah, you're fucked. If you don't know where the North Star is, you know, how to figure out what North Southeast and West, yeah, you're in trouble. You don't know where the sun rises and says, some people don't even know. No, you're right. They don't even know. They have no idea. A lot of people live in the city, which way does the sun set north? I don't fucking know. They get out of the hell, probably north. And they just start going. They think they're going north. They're going deeper into the woods. And you know, another thing about going deeper in the woods, like humans are prone to circular movement. So if you don't know that, you will just keep walking in circles. And so you could see the North and you could keep walking like kind of towards it, but you're going to veer slightly and you're going to find yourself right back where you came from. No, it's not good. And you have to figure out a strategy to keep yourself from doing that because you will naturally, they've done all sorts of studies on this and humans walk in circles. Why do they do that? That's what we do. Why do we do that? It's something in our brain. We don't really understand what it is to walk in a straight line when she could get real like, prodigal son about that too, I think. But getting lost in the woods has to be one of the most terrifying experiences. You know, you should do if you get lost in the woods. The first thing you should do is stop moving. Stop moving. Yeah, stay put. You really need to create a shelter and come up with a plan. You really just walking around. You're not going to get out. Yeah, people have died. I mean, you probably heard this, but like on the Appalachian Trail and stuff, they'll go off the trail for like 10 feet or something to pee, but it's like in a book, show whatever. And then they lose track of where the trail is and they will die 20 feet away from the trail because they moved around, because they're all their energy and whatever. If they had just stayed put and waited for the sunrise and didn't, you know, whatever. And then they figured out a system like by watching the sky or if they had your, we should all download all the maps. Sure, we have GPS on our phones. But you know, people just, I mean, there's all these stories. My daughter was telling me that one of the nurses and she's so capable. She and her sister took her daughter. So it was like the two sisters, so the aunt and the mother and the daughter, teenage daughter. And they were saying to Kewe, like they were camping and they went just on a little, like a little hike out, you know, right next to the campground and her husband knew which campground she was at. They died just a hundred yards away because they didn't have any idea how to do basic survival. Actually, the teenager lived because the mother and the aunt gave her all their clothes and they covered her and everything and she survived. Oh my God. The things that people don't know about the wilderness. So stay put. Oh, if you're not good at this. Yeah, there's a lot of tragic stories. Jesus. It's so, it's so unforgiving out there. Yeah. And so many people have no idea how to even navigate any can. Most people are out of shape. You can't even walk up hills. There's that too, but it's stuck out there. You're fucked. But we survived as a species out there. So the thing is, it really is about knowledge. And I mean, living in a city would be impossible for prehistoric people too. Like just, I mean, cars are so fast. Like how do we avoid anything? They're not so quick. They're definitely good. They had a car. They would rock it. They would never figure out how to drive a car. No one's going to teach them. Oh, yeah. So I mean, you imagine they had those speeds. But the point is you can understand the wilderness, but people don't. And then a sense they're not humble enough, right? They don't understand that there's something terrifying. If you don't know what you're facing. And it's interesting that the disconnect from nature that we get with cities enables people to create things where you don't need nature anymore. Where you supermarkets, trucks, all those inventions, everything's coming out of cities. And it's all getting constructed, built, put together by group people living in cities. And it all comes from nature. Yeah. But nobody sees that because it's so many steps removed. Right. But whatever it does, it removes you further and further from nature. Yeah. All the things that we make remove us further and further from nature shield us from nature. I feel like a lot of the high control group, culty things is as far removed from nature as possible to. I mean, like my mom was really an exception in this way. My dad didn't learn the survival stuff. It was just my mom. But there's this idea I think that if we could understand our true nature, we'd be a lot less susceptible to all sorts of control, right? Because we would understand that we don't have control and that no human, you know, professes to have the ultimate wisdom could possibly have it because we would be so attached to understand. I mean, the cycle to nature, like everything is prey and predator and like everything's part of a much larger system. And if you saw yourself as part of that, it would be really hard to fully believe any one person could be the son of God in today's age. You know, like that they profess to be the prophet or whatever. You would have a lot more cynicism, I think, if you understood nature. Yeah. Which is something you've been from it. You were very moved from it. And, you know, that's also a problem of protecting your kids, right? Then your kids aren't going to meet a bunch of creepy people where they could recognize creepy people in the future. You know, I met a lot of fucking psychos. So I know that I see him coming. I go, I know what you look, I've seen what are you before. You're out of your fucking mind. And if you don't know that and you're a 17 year old kid, it just gets released from a call because you went to color purple. And also you're out there in the world. How'd you figure out who to trust? Oh, it took me a long time. In fact, I've been physically assaulted. I was, I mean, I've been physically assaulted by people I had no idea where danger is. Like, you were some guy and you know, he's like, oh, I'm having this backyard barbecue or whatever. And then there's nobody else there and you don't know to leave. You know, you're like in the backyard and he grabs you. I mean, my bones have been broken. And my background. Because I didn't understand, I mean, I could fight back to whatever degree, but I also, you can't fight to get back about somebody who's two or three times your size. You know, it's just really difficult, but I didn't know the people were dangerous. Right. Right. We're dangerous in that way. Wow. So it takes God. What a wild experience. That would make it hell of a movie. You know, because like the unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt is like really funny. Yeah. But like a real. It's more fun when it's funny. Yeah. Well, she's hilarious. That shows hilarious. It is. I really love that. The gay guy, the roommate. Oh my God. What's his name again? I don't remember it's been a while since I saw it. I was actually on the next one. Yeah. So it's a funny show. Well, I did. So after Forager came out, I was approached to do like a creative shopping room and whatever. So I did ride a screenplay for Forager that is different than the book, but it is about all of this. So we'll see what comes with it. Well, I hope they make a movie out of it because it's, it's such an insane story. It's just kudos to you for getting through it and becoming the person who's sitting in front of me today. Yeah. Because it's a wild ride. Yeah. It's been, it's been a long journey. But it's, it's nice to be on this side of it. I'll tell you how many cults are active right now in the country. Do we know? No, we certainly don't know. But there is such a thing as a cult directory, which you would mention to that. So when I was on, I did a local television right at the beginning when the book came out, Frank Buckley and the woman who was a producer, he was asking at the end. And it's like, oh, you know, I didn't know this cult existed. How did I not know? And she said, well, I did my fact checking before we booked her. and it's in the cult directory. And he's like, what? There's a cult directory. And the field is actually in the cult directory. And I didn't even know that. I was like, whoa. So it's been reported. So I think a more interesting question actually is why are these cults not shut down? I mean, there's a bunch of them like you said, someone told you there's just tons of them. They're active in California and they don't know if it's the freedom of speech that we have going on. Isn't the real question like how do you define a cult? Yeah. Because Scientology has tax exempt status in the United States, which indicates that it's a legitimate religion. Because they sued the IRS. They go, and they want, they sued the IRS. And they filed lawsuits and I guess the IRS caved and said, all right, we don't want to deal with all this. Well, which is really powerful of them. It really is. But also if you declare yourself a religion, then you do get tax exempt status. But I think what makes a cult is, yeah, I mean, there's like the Steve Hasson thing that we talked about. You know, this is really, really high control. But the question is, unless the abuse is reported in real time, it's really hard to find. And the people who are in the cult, a, don't recognize it's a cult because nobody's in a cult calls it a cult. And then B, our loyal to the cult. So they're not talking. Right. But you can't just go in and ask people, they're not going to tell you. Right. I would not have told you. There's no way. When I was there, when I was 16, I would never have this conversation. Right. Not just not publicly. I wouldn't have had a privately either. Yeah. I mean, you don't think it's a cult if it's the truth. You think it's the truth. You think this is in a cult. We're just the people living the right way. Right. Yeah. But there's a lot of people who believe that I think about themselves. They believe that about religions too. And the fact that people want to say that there's certain people that talk historically about the Christian religion and they refer to it as a cult. Allegiance too. I mean, the fact that people want to say that there's certain people that talk historically about the Christian religion and they refer to it as a cult, like just historically. Like this is the Christian cult and this is what they did. Like as you would say, this is the Hindu cult, this is the, this cult that that cult. They don't think of it as, we have this problem like religion cult, different things. But it's groups of people that have very specific rules that you need to live by that's mandated by a higher power. Like if you just break it down to what the ingredients are, like you could tell me it's a stake, but it has all the ingredients of a carrot cake. I think this might be a carrot cake. No, no, no. We call it a stake. Like, but it seems like it's got carrots. It seems like a carrot cake, you know, and that's religion and cult. Like there's this very blurry line. So Scientology should win that lawsuit. So who's to say, like what their Mormons aren't legit? They are legit. Okay, so they get tax exempt status, but Scientology doesn't. Why? Yeah, I don't think you can come up with a legitimate reason why. And in all these groups, Scientology and Mormonism too, there's these inner circles that are much, much more devout. So there's plenty of people who define themselves as Mormon or Scientologists who aren't living this really narrow life, but the people at the center are. But that's the question is like, how hard is it to form a religion? Is it really easy? Like, how easy is it to get that taxes and status? How many people do you need? I feel like I could do it. I bet you could do it. I bet you could do it. I bet you could do it for sure. But it's one of those things. It's like how many, you would imagine that everybody would be doing it. It's a great way to just trick the government. You don't have to give them any money. I think someone did that, right? Jamie, like a spaghetti monster or something and actually created the church of that. And you got tax exempt status for that? The flying spaghetti monster? Well, it would be really hard to argue, especially when you're dealing with something like Scientology, when you have a science fiction writer who is, you know, he's the most prolific fiction writer of all time. Elron Hubbard is he wrote more words down and had them published. And then a human being that's ever lived. I think he was a boy scout too, actually. Was he? Yeah, we should tell him. But I think my favorite is when he's in the Corg and he's got like this military jacket on, and just gave himself a bunch of medals. He's got like this tax medals. Have you gone to the museum? Which one? I think there's more than one, but there's the one in Hollywood. No. No, I didn't. I did. I've met with them before. I got audited, well, you hold on to the cans and they did that. Yeah, I did that. And you can feel the energy. I was filming a television show in San Diego and they had, we were near a park. And this was, I wasn't in this famous back time. I could get away with it. They didn't know how it was. And I sat down with us, dude. He went through the whole thing with me with the emeter and his tell me, is it? And I realized someone all in line that he's just a dude who joined Scientology and now part of his job is to go out and convert, but he's not very good at it. No, no, well, not only that, he's not good at selling it. He was very like very non enthusiastic about it because I would have thought that like all the cult members were like super pumped to get you to join. But this guy was just like lost, like I guess this is my people now and you know, you hold on to the emeter. So it was interesting. It was like, he wasn't even so like, it reshaped in my mind. I was like every person trying to indoctrinate you into this cult is going to be like really charismatic and really locked in. No, those are the leaders. They get the regular folks to go out to the park and annoy people and get yelled at you fucking wackadoo like, yeah, so that's the guy that I people at the top. Don't want to do that. It was very weird. I feel like you could be a collator Joe if you wanted to be. I don't think it's that hard. I feel like you could. I don't think it's that hard. If you decided it was one of your life goals, hit me up and I'll give you some like tips and you'll be, I'm not really there in another week or two. I'm not. If it's a cult, the cult, you could leave anytime. There's no requirements and just to see her in and you're in. Okay, you're not. I don't care. Yeah, well, the past of far ends have tax exempt status. Hmm. But, but the scientists do if you read the fucking story, anybody that reads that story, the story, the Thetons and the volcano and the aliens and spirits. It's really interesting. It's crazy. It's crazy. If you leave, read the Lawrence Wright's going clear. It's a very fascinating book that sort of details the whole history of El Ron Hubbard creating it. And he's basically a crazy person who is self diagnosing. You know, and so he was like self counseling, he was using all these self help books and psychology books trying to figure out how to live life. And that was Dianetics. Yeah. You've read some of that right? Yeah. Well, I bought it. I in the 1990s, they had those infomercials. Where's the volcano and the books were flying out of the volcano. It's a funny and I didn't know that it meant like I didn't know the whole story behind the volcano where like the aliens throw the fucking frozen souls in the book. All that crazy shit. So I just thought it was a self help book. And back then I was really in a self help books. I bought like Anthony Robbins, audio cassettes and all that shit. I was like, I was into things like that. And so I was like, oh, that seemed like how to maximize your life. And this commercial book. I don't interesting. So I bought it online or on the phone. I think I think back then you called. It wasn't online. And they never stopped sending me shit. They sent me shit for years for years. It was invitations to this and invitations to that and you know, half off of this and free that and come here and meet with us and they just wouldn't stop. They just bombarded me with stuff. Well, you would be a good get if they could get you. So you had all these iterations of like these self help, you know, stages of all these things through all of it, right? All the ways that you have self helped in a sense. So what has been the most useful to you in being the kind of person you want to be? Time. Time's a big one. Learning over time experiences, introspective thought, making decisions based on truth rather than thing than based on what you want to believe. And just the accumulation of life experiences, like a life well lived and then psychedelic drugs. Yeah, those have been very effective. Those are the big ones. Those the psychedelic drug breakthroughs are the ones where you you come. I always say that it's like control, all delete for your brain. And then your brain reboots with a fresh desktop. But now there's only one folder in that desktop and that folder says my old bullshit. And you have a decision either you open up that folder and start behaving exactly how you used to because you have a pattern in your custom too. Or you try to re-engage with the world, re-interface with the world with this newfound experience as a guide. Yeah. I think that's what the heart of all religious experiences are. I think there was people back then that experimented with psychedelic drugs and they had profound experiences and they might have even experienced entities. They might have even had interaction with God. It might be a real thing that you could do with the right stuff. And I think people have been talking about it writing it on cave walls and depicting it in many religious texts and drawing images of it on the fucking ruins of Egypt. It's everywhere. It was in the Ilucynean mysteries in Greece. It's everywhere. Psychedelic drugs have been everywhere throughout human history. I think they're probably shaped a lot of the way people formulated their ideas about religion. Absolutely. And I think that a lot of people believe that it was the forging of those mushrooms that led to psychedelic drugs that led the cultivation of communities that were religiously based. But that they really came from just looking for food initially. And then they would have these experiences and they could see something bigger than the life they were living. I always wondered why the Hindus don't eat cows. Like how did that become religious? Specifically cows. Right. And does it have anything to do with the fact that they make mushrooms? Because mushrooms grow in cows shit. And if you had cows that were connecting you to God, you wouldn't want to eat them. Like don't eat. Don't eat that. Yeah, don't eat that. That's cool. She brings us to mushrooms. Because that's where the mushrooms grow. It means that a coincidence that mushrooms grow on cows shit. I don't know. What is the original origin of why Hindus don't eat cows? Because I really don't know. But I know that there have been cultures that were cattle worshiping cultures that also had mushroom iconography. There's some, I forget the name of the culture. I just weird like Choctal, He Yoke or something like that. But it's a culture that had all the iconography was like cattle and mushrooms. Yeah. Or some of the iconography, I shouldn't say that. Like some of the writings what's left. There's so many cultures to show evidence that they've been doing stuff with psychedelic drugs forever. They're probably formulated so many of their, you know, like their shamanistic practices and how they organize their culture and their communities. They'll probably all do rituals together to connect to each other. You know, stare at the stars. About psychedelics, though, that is so beautiful compared to cults. And cults don't do these because they tap you into yourself and you have your own unique or someone unique. But you know, you have your own individual experience of what it means to you. And cults can allow you to have that. That's true. But you know, there are a lot of instances of guys who are shaman, even in the rainforest that do creepy shit. Well, they're human. Yeah. But they're not just human. It's like they do start running things like a cult even though they're, they're shamans and they're giving people ayahuasca. There's because yeah, well, certain of them, some of them might have gravitated towards that with that intention in mind. Right. Like they might not have been born true of the shamanistic spirit. They might have entered into it at a point in life like as a con artist. You know, which does happen. It does happen. Like people infiltrate certain kind of groups of people. If they feel like it's a bunch of vulnerable people in those groups and a bunch of like easily influenced and, you know, open to interpretation and you know, you could just tell them that you're connected to God in a very unique way and also your guru. You know, yeah, there's a lot of those guys too. I mean, that was the wild wild country guy. You know, he was like a legit guru, said some oh show said some brilliant things, but also was fucking crazy out of his mind. So I feel like we need to be skeptical of anyone who tells us that they know the word of God, that like they are connected to God and you're not. Right. So if you tell me this is my experience that I ask you questions, I can choose to follow you or not follow you, right? Based on whether or not I like the results of your experience, etc. But somebody who says, no, God told me this and this is the only way. But imagine if God really did tell you, you want to believe you. Well, I'm sure what I really am a prophet. Yeah. Well, that was my grandpa. Guys, I know this is crazy. I know this sounds crazy, but I just got back from the mountain that God gave me a series of roles. I got to give it to you. Yeah. Nobody would believe you, which is really ironic about today. Like Christians really want Jesus to return, but like what amount of convincing would you have to do to get people to believe you were really Jesus? You don't have to do so much work. And how many people would be convinced that it's Satan pretending to be Jesus? So then there'd be that battle. The same people that think Michelle Obama has a dick. There's going to be people that think they're going to think the nuttiest of things. And then this Jesus is going to be like, guys, guys, guys, I am not Satan. I'm actually Jesus. Nobody believe them. We would fucking crucify him again. And then people realize, God damn it, we did it again. We did it again. We're going to get a captain around to learn from him. And now they're going to have to rewrite Christianity. Every few thousand years he comes back and they fucking kill him again. That's the life. Well, that would be that's the really scary thing to think that if the son of God really did return, if that is a real true thing, how the fuck would we ever believe that? We don't believe anything anymore. Yeah. I mean, the tradition right is this Trumpet is going to sound and you think the trumpet in the sky. Maybe he convinced us the government. That's Airhorn's. They're tricking us. This is the ultimate false flag. The Jesus returns false flag. I mean, that's what a lot of people think is going on with the UF over ports. Yeah. Yeah. They think it's bullshit. They think it's the government. And the government's lying to us about that they're from another planet. You know, which is they lie about everything. Like if they're telling you something, this here, these are offworld crafts. I'm like, Oh, when did we make these like shut the fuck up? When did we make these? You're seeing they're at it for another planet for real? I don't believe you. I mean, it could be a case of crying wolf, like maybe they're telling the truth, but boy, seems a little suspicious. And that would be the same thing with the Jesus thing. Like if Jesus really did come back and there was some fundamental Christian is fundamentalist Christians that were in government, that wanted the world to know. So they had a press conference and we have definitive proof that Jesus has returned and we need to listen to everybody. Like get the fuck out of here. No one would believe it. That's what's crazy about today. If Jesus came back today and the world was in the middle of chaos, if we're in the middle of World War three and Jesus returns to some real likelihood that they would crucify him again or something similar. Real likelihood. He falls in the wrong group of people, the modern day version of the Romans. Right? He could follow the wrong group of people and like if Jesus like accidentally landed in ISIS country. Could you imagine? I don't know if it would be an accident, but okay. Right. Probably not an accident. But maybe, you know, Jesus is just like, let me just go down there and it wasn't specific enough and God didn't say like where do you want to go? Like send me to Manhattan. No. He said just bring me to earth and he just dropped him off right in an ISIS camp. Oh yeah, that'd be very dangerous. Yeah. Yeah. And then the whole thing starts all over again. Yeah. And then we have to tell the story about the guy who came from God, he was God's son and ISIS killed him. I don't think we've changed that much since the Pharisees and Sadducees and all that. Yeah. I mean, we changed a little, but I think so much of our change is not a human nature change. Right. That's what's going to so much of our changes take the logical so much of our change of society and wooden buildings and concrete structures and roads and metal forks. Metal forks. Yeah. That's what's changed. But the actual tissue is real similar. It's real similar to people that lived 10,000 years ago. Yeah. So if we've got the human nature like more suppressed now than it's ever been before. But like we were talking about earlier, if you're in a crowd situation when things go chaos, then you go, oh, we're still this thing. We're still a program for war. We're still program for chaos. It's all in us. Yeah. Yeah. And mob mentality all of that. It's all in us. It's all in us. Yeah. Absolutely change when they're in a group. The dynamics are always different. I think you see it online too. I think mob mentality exists not even just in a physical space, but I think it exists in a digital space too. I think when people gang up on people online on Twitter and those kind of things, I think that's the same thing. I think it's the same kind of mob mentality. It's the same sort of energy that is in us. It's very creepy. Yeah. It's very creepy. And it's one of those things where it's you're like, how do we ever get that out? How do we ever get these ancient primate inclinations out of the modern human organism? I think if we hadn't answered for that, that we would be very, very, very wealthy. Maybe or the government would kill you. Yeah. It would be hard to control people if you had the answer to that. Yeah. I think for individuals, the most important thing is exercise. It's one of the most important things I should say because it's, you can induce enough stress voluntarily that the regular stress of the outside world is mitigated because you've already experienced a higher level of difficulty in your day by choice than the world can impose upon you. So if you have rigorous workouts, schedules, if you like to run, if you want to lift weights, if you want to do yoga, like you want to do something that's physically taxing, that's what you should do. do something like that and just the physical act of forcing yourself to do something extremely difficult that makes you uncomfortable for a short period of time, but makes the rest of the day much easier. Yeah. That's what it is. You got to just feed the monkey inside of you. You got to like, don't deny its existence. Just do something to that thing to calm it down. Give it food, you know? Yeah. I wonder statistically those of us who exercise if we are less inclined to get online and terrorize other people in mom mentality. I would guess that may be true. I would bet that's true. Yeah. A lot of the people that I know that terrorize people, mom and talent, they're extremely unhealthy. They look terrible. They're just, they get addicted to it and they get addicted to interacting online on Twitter all the time and like gauging, you know, the temperature socially of how people think about them based on this like verbose bullshit. They just typed on Facebook, but it's like, it becomes this integral part of the way they engage with other human beings. And it's very non human. It's very recent. It's very non human. It's it's it's too limited in the way you interact with it. It's just so you can get good information online and you can get interesting discussions on Twitter, but you could also get like you're dealing with like legitimately mentally ill people. And I don't use that term lightly. Okay. I'm not saying schizophrenia. I'm not saying manic depressive, but if you are a person that has a gambling addict addiction, if you're a person that has an addiction to betting on the horses, you're mentally ill. Do you have this thing you're sick with? All right. If you can't stop smoking cigarettes, you're mentally ill. You have this thing you can't stop. You're physically attracted to it. You're physically addicted to it. But you're also mentally ill because you don't recognize you should stop for you fucking lung cancer. Right? That's the same thing with everything, I think. I think these are just like normal patterns. And I think people that are addicted to arguing with people on Twitter, they're mentally ill. This is this is serving the same thing as online poker. This is serving the same thing as filling the blanks, whatever you like to do that you probably shouldn't be doing scratch tickets, lottery, whatever it is that you just can't get out of your head because you got locked into it. You're mentally ill. You're mentally ill. Just like when you have a cough, you're physically ill. Yeah. When you're online 12 hours a day arguing with people, you're mentally ill. And maybe you're mentally ill and having good discussions. Maybe you're mentally ill and engaging in sometimes productive conversations. But you're also, you're heightening your levels of anxiety and this bizarre non natural way of interfacing with other human beings. And you're living in that most of the time. So you're, you're going to suffer in the way you interact with people on a regular basis. And you see that bleed out too, right? You see people like act like they're on Twitter into people in real life. And they're like, what the fuck is wrong with you? Like why are you acting like this? Because they're so used to communicating like that on Twitter and on Facebook and Instagram that they think it's normal to just be completely rude to people. Yeah. Can't do that in the wilderness. Right. It's not enough. It's our perception to do that in the wilderness. Right. And you can't do that face to face because it feels weird. Yeah. If you do that, if you, if you talk to people face to face the way people talk to people just constantly on Twitter, you would have this fight everywhere. People would be just fighting. They'd be pushing each other and hitting each other. You'd have murders. Like it's just, it's just a shitty way to talk. So if you're doing that, you're mentally ill. So if you, you have gangs of mentally ill people that are just constantly engaging with other gangs of mentally ill people online all day long arguing over everything, cultural, everything, environmental, every, fill in the blanks, climate change, fill in the blank, Ukraine, whatever it is, palace to free palace time, fuck you. It's all day long. Mentally ill people. Yeah. And I think China's laugh at us. Oh, they said that they yes. I mean, I don't know if they said it all out, but they have infiltrated it. They have done a wonderful job. China. Yeah. Way to go. That tick tock. Very effective. Fuck a genius. Yeah. Well, you've done is genius. Yeah. I mean, they've definitely infiltrated universities. They definitely, they, the grants and funds, they put money into things they don't need to things. It's what they've done is wild. It's wild. And I would say that the same, I guess impulses that make people do what everything you're describing are really the same things that keep people in cults. Like there was a lot of the similar traits of people who become mentally ill because they are constantly only focusing on one person's definition of anything. Yes. Yes. So if cults were online doing that to each other, that's what they would sound like. Um, one most certainly when Mark Andreessen again talked about that as well, he said they have, if you look like woke people online, they have all the characteristics of a cult. They have ex-communications. They'll savagely attack former members. Yeah. They have rules and there's things that you, uh, there's a suspension of disbelief that you have to use in order to adopt certain things. You have to, you have to be willing to say things you know aren't really true. And they all get ready to do it. You know? Well, because it's part of the end group. Yeah. Like that's how you get status. Yeah, but it's just fascinating to see how far that stuff goes up. You know, like even with like people that run universities, like they believe it, people that are in Congress, they believe it. It's like Jesus like this is we're all the cult. Cult thinking is not like, I think people have this thing in their head that cults are like small groups of people that are gullible. No. And I don't think that's true. I think I think you could have a cult of 150 million people easy. Easy. If you have someone controlling your behavior, information, your thoughts and your emotions, then yeah. And if you have a good system set up where everybody police is everybody else, like woke people on Twitter. And then you have a good system of like the person who's in charge, the underlings and all the other people. And there's like, and people are benefited from it in a good way. Yeah, you can get a bunch of businesses going. You can get infiltrate corporations with this nonsense. You can get in the Supreme Court. It's you could do wild things with it. You just need to have like a strong structure of support from the other members online. Yeah, you just need to get people to police each other and place themselves. Yeah, that's the big one, right? That's the North Korean model. Police get people to police themselves. Yeah, get people to rat on each other. Whoo. Yeah, I think you just came full circle on that. Yeah, I think your story is very important for people to hear. And I'm really, I'm really happy that you had to courage to say it because I would imagine it would be very, very hard to tell that story. Very hard to explain the vulnerabilities that you experienced and what it was like to be this 17 year old kid is still a kid who's like, you know, just coming a woman out there in the world. And you just escaped from a cult where you could even see movies and all you sung was hymns and you thought the end was near and then you're out there in the world just interacting with all these people that went to like normal schools and had normal childhood American experiences and you have to kind of relearn everything. Yeah. And there's a lot of excommunication that still goes on in terms of it's my family of origin. It's all every single cousin I had was raised there. I did not have any cousins on the other side. 100% of my relatives were raised in there. And so yeah, you have to be willing to in a sense, step away from the acceptance that you get, which I think had to relate to many, many, many, many people who have nothing to do with religion. But yeah, all the different types of cults in the is like being willing to stand back and say, wait, I don't believe this. I think this story, your story is really important too for people that may be vulnerable. You know, they may be, they don't have the tools to discern like maybe they're being courted by a group. You know, they don't have the tools to discern like what? And just fundamentally, if someone's telling you that they have secret information that only they have and it comes from a mystical source, either comes from aliens or comes from God or probably not. This is probably not, it's probably not. I mean, in my pjesus, again, if Jesus came back, who's going to believe him, but it most likely you're dealing with someone's full of shit. So at least today, we know that. You know, in 1930 when you grandpa first started, me, Jesus, run and wild. Like there's no Wikipedia. You can say anything. You can just go, oh, or Joseph Smith who created the book of Mormon, you know, like that fucking guy. He was like 14 years old. Wow. Yeah. Teddy found golden tablets that contained the lost work of Jesus, but only he could read it because he had a magic rock. And everybody's like, okay. Yeah, that's the kind of thing my grandfather said to and ends, people believed it. There was a lot of those guys back then. Yeah, you could weigh a lot back then. What do you think is the motivation? Like what is it about human beings and almost always men? There's only a few women that have been successful cult leaders. Yeah, it's pretty rare. Yeah, that one that was on the HBO documentary. I haven't seen it yet, but everybody raves about it. You know what I'm talking about? I do. I haven't seen it. The lady became anorexic. What does it love? What was that one, Jamie? What's it called? It's supposed to be amazing, but I haven't seen it. But what is it that that that seems to be a recurring pattern? So I've always thought it really fascinating to say that anyone could be a cult member. Anyone could fall for that, especially if you're young, but it's who would become a cult leader? Right. That's the bigger question. I feel like there's no simple answer for that. But in my grandfather's case, and in many other of these young men cases, they were outsiders in some way and they had some bone to pick and they wanted, I think they maybe started out of wanting belonging, but then they got really drunk on the power so quickly. Like Manson. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I've been teaching in prisons, by the way. It's part of like my, well, it's been part of my career. And I worked with, um, Lesse van Houghton who was a, I mean, she's been really snout, but she was the tutor in the program I was working in. And, you know, she was like, what, 19 when she committed these, participated in, but she followed Manson as if he was a cult leader. It was very similar. And I'm not like talking about the politics of all that or like, I'm just saying that I mean, I'm very grateful that nobody asked me to kill anybody. You know, I'm not, I would like to think I wouldn't, but I don't think any of us know. Right. If you were 12 years old and your whole life, you'd live in that call and you were told to kill some acts. He's a demon. Right. And if you killed them and they were like hugging you, you did it. You saved us, you saved us from the demon. You could prompt. Yeah. I think it would be. Of course, children like that are, if you, especially if you get trained in armies of that. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And then, I mean, that's also why people like people joining the army when they young, not just because they're strong. Right. But also because they're mentally unaware of the conflicts of the world. It's really difficult to get a 60 year old man to go to war based on, you know, we found weapons of mass destruction. Okay, the put on his reading glasses. Let me see this shit. What do you got? Show me what you have. Yeah. Yeah. You need them. Yes, sir. We're going to kill the bad guy, sir. That's what you need. But the cult leaders have something that they really feel like they need, like they need people's respect because like I don't think they could get it in other ways. Right. And so they create this whole world. And honestly, once people start believing that's probably a pretty big high. Yeah. Um, I had David Holtowson the podcast the day and he did that, documentary series that's on peacock about the Harry Christians. And about this one guy that created this sect of the heart Christians and was this is all child molestation and murder. He's they're killing people and it's just it's a crazy. It's a really good doc. He's a really good director. And the documentary series is really interesting. But it's just like God damn, that pattern just repeats itself over and over, a wake up holy hell up there, while while country. It's like everywhere, the same sort of pattern repeats itself. And it always, almost always at least falls apart. It's hard to get that stuff going because may your crazy person. Yeah. And you have to keep up in the ante. Right. It's not like Warren Buffett. He's not out there starting calls. It's not like people are good at organizing businesses. It's like crazy people like wild crazy people. But there's this inclination to get people to follow you and to tell them what to do. And businesses like crazy people like wild crazy people but there's this inclination to get people to follow you and to tell them what to do and to tell them how to live life and to make them worship you. It's fucking strange that that's just some sort of weird evolutionary response like because in tribal cultures there was always a leader and that leader was generally the wisest person who had the most life experience who could tell you hey this is the plant you can't eat don't go over there they'll kill you you know this this thing runs faster than you get away from it that's an ex poisonous like you had to know how to make an arrow you know this this guy knew so that was your leader and if you listen to him you're gonna stay alive and if you don't listen to him you're gonna watch people die right next to you and you go oh they didn't listen and you're gonna be experienced that at a young age where people die because they used to die all the fucking time of yeah just infant mortality was like 50% like that and then you're like what are the odds you gonna live to 30 not so good bro this jaguars in the fucking trees like you're fucked you're in trouble and that's why we had tribal leaders and then as we expanded into these societies and cities and large groups of human beings we still have the desire to have one individual leader because we have this primate genetic imprint in us of the alpha who runs the people to the point where we'll pretend that someone's alpha like we'll pretend joe biding is really running the country we'll pretend and so many Democrats are all in on it like the most culti of cult members the wokest of wok are the ones who are the most likely to try to fucking gaslight you that he's fine and he's doing great and he's the best president ever and just look at the economics and look at the economy's doing better and look at the you know he's on top he's never been sharper like what he shut up you're in a cult you're in a cult just like if you were in the moonies just like you've rearing the holy hell cult it's the same thing it's just patterns of belief and we all have them and we're susceptible to them because life is a massive mystery it's a massive scary weird mystery with a lifespan it's got a finite lifespan you have a certain amount of time here and you never think like you have enough time you never think you did enough and it always feels weird and you never even know what the fuck is going on while you're driving your car sitting on the bus the whole time you're like what is this what is this all about so anytime you can get some relief from that someone comes along they go I've got the answers right come with me Michelle okay so that's not happening anymore no of course but you know when you said that to us thinking like it is it's that the belief that there's answers instead of what I think I think you and I believe is that it's always more questions like we don't have the answers and we will that will be continuing there'll be questions that we never answer in our lifetime well also we exist in a certain frequency in reality but there's subatomic reality that's so damn confusing that somehow another a part of us that we can study like what's all that magic what's all that magic going on where you got particles that are both moving and still the exist and reappear they disappear we don't know where the fuck they're going what's happening matter what is that stuff what's all that stuff there's so much that we don't know there's so there's so much weirdness just in the observable universe that it's uh the whole thing is a crazy mystery and it to not approach it that way and to approach it with some bizarre confidence that you have the answers you're not doing anybody any good because you're full of shit you're you're your full of shit with yourself your full of shit if you believe it your full shit with yourself you're definitely full of shit with other people if you tell them you believe it you you you can't know we have guidelines and there's ways that we can live that are going to be better for everybody and we should definitely go that way definitely don't try to harm people definitely trying to be nice as much as possible try to be cool to your friends try to enjoy your time here try to leave people the smile try to do your best do that stuff like if we do all that stuff we're good but as soon as someone comes along and tells you no you have to do this because this is the word of God like basis vicious because it's been around before it's it's not like this is a unique thing i feel like be suspicious it's some good advice be suspicious these suspicious of anybody that's trying to get you to do things they're trying to tell you to do a thing and that if you don't do a thing you're a bad person and the people that are engaging in other things other than what they're telling you are all going to hell okay let me put my ring let me see this hell you got a fucking youtube video i can watch like how much do you know are you sure do you have the gps coordinate i did the on x maps of hell i don't think you know what you're talking about and if you don't say that if you don't have the humility to say that this is at the very least a massive mystery we know so much i mean we know so much more than we've ever known before and thank god there's people out there that are trying to figure the world out thank god there's people out there that are doing the work and doing the fucking the theoretical physicists and all the quantum mechanics people and all the people that are like trying to make rocket ships think on you're out there but at the end of the day this is a crazy mystery that you go to bed every night you close your eyes and you disappear hopefully for eight hours if you get in your eight hours Michelle and then that alarm clock goes off and then you reengage with reality and assume that this is the exact same world that you went to bed eight hours ago for you assume but you just reengage with reality we look forward to it everyone scared to die but no one scared to sleep and we do it every night no one scared no i don't want to shut the light out i don't want to go to sleep no one scared to go to sleep ever is like oh i got a can't wait to sleep can't wait to sleep and be recovered and then you get up you have to do it it's requirement you have to go out you have to stop if you don't you'll die the universe requires you to stop interfacing with it for long stretches of time yeah ideally eight hours yeah full 30 a day yeah it's a wild thing yeah full 30 a day you reboot yeah we process in our dreams in ways that we don't understand it's very strange yeah it's very strange just that alone is very strange there's many many strange things yeah but that alone is a strange one that we've just accepted because if that didn't exist and all the sudden everybody said listen we have found a new thing instead of just being awake all the time if you can just go to sleep you'll live longer and you'll be better like what are you talking about like you just gonna shut off for eight hours and then what happens to me like can i see no what if someone breaks in my house well you're asleep fuck that no one would want to do that yeah but it's normal so we just do it yeah yeah it's a mystery this is a crazy ass mystery and what happens in your dreams like why are those damn things so realistic what's what don't fuck what the fuck is going on in dreams one thing happens if you smoke pot your dreams kind of dull a little bit sometimes but if you take long breaks off like we do sober October and during sober October no do anything and when you take long breaks off you get wild dreams wild and here's a little pro tip if you want to have the wildest dreams take new tropics before you go to bed take like alpha brain before you go to bed because you want to have these dreams yeah let's go okay i mean when i was a little kid i used to love nightmares when i was a little kid i would look forward to a nightmare i would try to make me have one wow because i like horror movies so it's like let's have a let's let it get some monsters in here or literally i go to bed i was like god oh my god oh my god it's a fox scared out of me i look forward to like having a nightmare dream i had a bunch of crazy ones too that i remember i wrote bunch of darks or so nuts like plot of movies they were so crazy but it just was a thing where i i thought of it as like an adventure ride i would thought of like nightmares as an adventure ride like i knew i kept waking up so okay all right after i was like four or five like yeah i'm waking up so i know they're not real but it's pretty fun of the scary if i could just relax so i was thinking that i remember thinking that as a little kid thinking like i think this is a way to just make yourself have nightmares and just do it for fun just like watching a scary movie wow is any of that lucid dreaming i've only done lucid dreaming accidentally a couple of times and every time i've done it i've recognized that i'm dreaming and then i wake up because i recognize it that's the problem i don't know how to chill do you remember most you dreams no i remember a lot of them though i don't remember most of them i would say i remember a small fraction of them but i remember them for a long time yeah what about you i do i remember a lot of dreams i mean i could never i know what you would know if you remember all of them for one right i know i was no but yeah i still dream about the field really that makes sense yeah yeah because it's in your subconscious and you just like i'm still processing i didn't have a bad time in high school it wasn't the worst i had a pretty good time in high school but i would have nightmares that i had to go back to high school like legitimate nightmares that like i didn't get enough credits so i didn't go back nightmares and high school was not that bad now i can't imagine how much that would be multiplied leaving a cult at 17 more minute years those years still like even all of them yeah they're informative and your prefrontal cortex is not you know complete formed and so it's we probably i'll go back to whatever degree to that part of it but those nightmares must be very vivid for you though and must be very extreme because like i said i would get nightmares from high school which was nothing it was no big deal wasn't bad at all i didn't have a bad time in high school you know but it it was just the idea of being trapped in that fucking school another year was scary and that's nothing yeah it's the being trapped i have a lot of dreams like that yeah whoo do they subside with time they've gotten better you know i so i just two days ago i met this guy who i hadn't seen since i was a kid so for me i kind of met him for the first time you know in the sense of i don't remember him but he said that reading for a juror and he really said this and i it was he said he had nightmares he's always had nightmares this man is late 60s probably maybe even 70 i don't know and he said that um reading it stopped his nightmares because he thinks because somebody validated so he didn't feel like those trap jones had anymore someone validated and named his experience because he wasn't talking about it not even to his own family like his whole life he's never talked about it and so having just seen in a book may not say like i'm not crazy you know and so i just wonder sometimes if our nightmares are also thing i mean it's great that you were like causing ones on purpose but the kinds that are like really deeply to serve us i just wonder if they're the their parts of us that we haven't fully come to terms with i don't know i wonder but some of mine is like godzilla chasing me one of my skateboard like they don't make any sense i think that doesn't sound that scary i think there's certainly like i mean i don't try to have nightmares now i really only did that a few times when i was a kid but the nightmares that i do have that almost all of them are like really primal ones like i've had a lot of nightmares about wolves like a lot over the years like running from wolves there's something about wolves because they're intelligent and they operate in packs and they have some sort of non-verbal communication where they understand each other and some very someone's ass and a lot of ways yeah yeah they they freak me out they really do you know they're not that different from dogs yeah they're a lot different from dogs they're a lot different well they are because they're wild but i have a golden retriever okay they're wait a minute or longer wait a different i have a strange shepherds and then i think it is a love sponge he loves everybody if he came in here he would be part of his pack oh yeah no doubt but he's on a wolf okay there's a big difference i mean he used to be a wolf if you go back 20 000 years ago whatever it was when they started taking these bitch ass wolves were willing to come by the forest fire or by the campfire rather but the the wolves that live and operate in the wild are these ruthless majestic creatures who are intelligent right but the reason that you love your dog is the same reason that wolves love each other you know i mean there is this because they're part of a pack and because they understand relationships and i think the wolves with each other you just not in relationship with the wolf but right i mean oh no they're scary but yeah but they're because they're so good at what they do right but that's why we're scared of deer well yeah yeah we are in the woods with a rifle deer should be fucking scared yeah and that's that's why they jaunt them that's why they run it away real quick and that's the thing with wolves and human beings like we've been food for them for a long time that's what little red riding it's all about that's really that's what the big bad wolf is all about that's that's the whole story the story is about wolves that will eat your kids because that's what they did yeah they eat people world more one had to be they had a cease fire between the Germans and the Russians because too many of them were getting eaten by wolves that's why they had a cease fire yeah they had a cease fire and they killed the wolves and they went back to killing each other you couldn't they couldn't have just like taken a break and said like oh maybe we should be on the same side no they were losing so many people to wolves that they they had these packs of wolves in Russia and this was trench warfare so they were horrific wounds these people would be lying in the trenches with a bullet hole and then you to hear wolves tearing these people apart and they'd be screaming yeah they would send people out on patrol and just find a boot with a foot in it oh my god yeah you should be scared it was you should be scared yeah I mean they're reintroducing wolves now to Colorado they just did and they just had the full first wolf depredation where wolf killed a calf at a ranch and that's just the beginning there's a reason why they killed those things I don't think they should have I don't think they should have made wolves extinct in the western United States like they did they was horrible they put strict nine in horses and they left them out there in the wolves who didn't die they did horrible terrible things but you don't want wolves you don't want them around you don't want a lot of them especially with these bitch ass people today they just you're gonna fucking lose a lot of folks if those things get to high numbers you're gonna lose a lot of folks a lot of people gonna be camping they're gonna get surrounded just need certain numbers needs numbers where they think they can get away with stuff like that you know numbers where there's not enough people with guns they find out that they think people are just hikers they don't seem to have any weapons they know where the weapon is they figure that out over time like wolf see enough rifles they know what a rifle is they're not stupid they're not stupid they're scary animals but they're also amazing but you gotta keep an eye on them people that live in cities don't think that those are seen for today these suspicious well be suspicious of systems right because that that is a system of predator and prey and if you're having a hard time walking up that hill guess what? guess what side you're on? you think you're the predator? you're not. you're not you can't even get up the hill. wolves run up the hill like it's nothing. yeah we they just fucking go over that hill like it ain't shit they're gonna run 45 miles an hour and chase you down eat you stupid. yeah. be suspicious. be suspicious. did they teach you guys when you were doing the survival training how to like do everything like get water hunt for food like make your own fire. i know how to distill um you know water in a pit from plants and how to distill urine and all that great stuff. wow. yeah it's not really very practical skill though you don't really have to do that. no not a daily basis. but if you know how to distill water it's like pretty wise. yeah i mean you can do a lot with do just like by putting you do need a piece of plastic you can use like a rain jacket or like a windbreaker or whatever but you put it you dig a pit and you put all the vegetation and like whatever you can get even in the desert like if you can get you know yaka or whatever and you put it in the pit and then the condensation you know when it rises you need to collect it and then you can collect the do and so you get it off the bottom surface of the of the plastic yeah but you make a little like pull of it and yeah damn yeah and you can you can survive off of that. wow how much water can you get out of do? well it depends on how you ideally you have more than one pit of this but you are going to do at some point move on a little and forge where there's more plants but you can live and you also of course want to know what plants can give you water right until you can find a source of water. what's the good ones? the like which good plants? what's the good ones that are getting you water? well any really the darker green and the you know the bigger the leaf but in the desert I mean generally if you have the things that give you a lot of water are already at water sources right because that's their water rich so it's in the desert where you need it and anything that has I mean cactus can give you water but it's near not going to get as much do as you do off of let's say sagebrush. so sage bushes. yeah you can get some do you want to do you take them out of the dirt you bury them? yeah you dig a pit you don't bury them like they would grow you leave them like lush so you dig this pit so you can use it over and over and you take the brush and you put it in the pit and then you cover it with whatever you know sort of plastic you have if you have a tarp that's great I don't know why you'd have a part of the plant in it or you just leave it leaving it you're not planting it because you didn't yeah it's just you don't need the root so whatever so it's just sucking the water out of that plant as it dehydrates in the heat with the plastic over it in the water. but it's overnight so it's not really the I mean it's yeah so it'll like you've seen condensation like even on your car right and so you're just collecting that it's just a source of collecting it and you put more of it in one place so you can collect more. how much can you get? well I mean if you get a quarter cup you're pretty lucky but you know you just can't move around a lot if you don't want to dehydrate but if you do that enough you can live you'll survive for a while water's really important way more important than food yeah yeah I mean you know that yeah yeah it gets I've survived a long time without food yeah we talked about this dude that was really fat and you went on a fasting diet with the IV vitamins and he did it for 300 and yeah so you could go a year if you're happy enough yeah but most people could go a month pretty easily yeah like even if you're not fat yeah you'd look like shit yeah of course but you could live but you can't do that with water yeah yeah wow yeah yeah yeah yeah I'm sure you hope you don't ever have to use those bills I do hope that and I am sure my skills are not as good as these to be out there. yeah but just what you've told so far of the shit is the fan I'm calling you you should I would say gel I bet it should yeah I mean how many years did you have to learn that stuff I mean I learned them for a lot of years and it gets inside of you and I think that's the thing about muscle memory right and I believe in exercise by the way too I mean I was trained like that's what I can't not exercise and I think that just like exercise like I'm sure you feel like if you don't exercise and as do I but I also feel like when it gets inside of you like what survival is you feel I think without doing some of those things that you're not really fully human I feel that way wow yeah I like to eat off the earth even now like when again you know I still I mean that's what picnics about by thing no I'm in like actually picking things out of the ground that I didn't plant I mean gardening I mean you know like forging off the land if you know what to eat it's still really great to have something that grew there naturally like indigenous plants yeah it's rewarding if you can find a blueberry bush and pick blueberries it's rewarding yeah elderberry yeah I think it's a part of our past too like in our DNA you get excited yeah every chapter of my book has like these descriptions of of of something you can eat in the angel's national forest and oh really yeah I mean not to say that you know somebody would need a little bit of training I'm like I'm not advocating that you just go out there and like you know but I mean if you know what you're doing yeah yeah you always hear that with mushrooms like people fuck up and eat the wrong mushrooms and one of dying yeah mushrooms are scary they are there there there there there there there there there there's a lot of them will kill you yes and then there's a lot of them will keep you alive yeah so if you're gonna survive you should know the difference yeah you see this our garracon that Paul's dad is gaming this is a giant wow that's a real mushroom oh my god it's huge let me check it out wow came off old growth forest wow that's a real mushroom that's incredible no nuts don't eat it no you don't eat that one don't stand on the day I'm giving you some advice no no but he sells them in pills actually yeah his company is called host defense you get it in pill form it's good for your man's system all right so it's boring I think I think so too yeah yeah I'm sure I'm sure even just getting dirt on you and being in the wild and like that's what we're supposed to do right like being in sterile environments it's probably the worst thing for your man's system yeah I mean that's actually been studied yeah like just sort of like exercise right like if you don't exercise your atrophy if you don't experience some other organisms we're we're a host of organisms we're not just all interconnected yes we're all interconnected listen I've really enjoyed this conversation thank you I've been here too your journey is remarkable it's very unusual and I think you came out of on the other end a very interesting person thank you and I really appreciate being here thanks for having me honest been to my wonderful hanging out with you I enjoyed it very much thank you oh tell so tell everybody how to get your book oh right so for a juror field notes first surviving a family cult it's available anywhere books are sold and get an online and um yeah social media do you have Instagram I do I have Instagram I'm on sub stack I am on Twitter but not a whole lot and yeah what is your Instagram Michelle Doud Z Michelle Doud Z yeah this is the other guy all right beautiful all right wasn't the first Michelle Doud is all right unfortunately well thank you very much I really enjoyed thank you all right bye everybody