So you're marched out of the State Department two weeks ago. You've laughed involuntarily and I want to hear why, but first, what did you do there? What was your job at the state? I was a press officer and the near Eastern Affairs Bureau started September 2024. Essentially the main bread and butter roll of a press officer is two-fold. One is preparing the spokesperson before they go on the podium and do their daily press briefing. And second, reporters ask questions all the time. So a reporter with XYZ outlet submits a question and it's our job to use cleared lines or cleared meaning approved lines and send them back to the reporter. And if you have a read an article and it says, a state department spokesperson said, X, those are press officers taking those cleared lines and sharing it with that reporter. Who clears the lines? Good question. So a press officer will draft the lines from there. It will go up a ladder essentially. So there will be desk officers leadership in the Indian press office itself and then it goes up to the seventh floor, meaning the Secretary's policy planning office, the Deputy Secretary of State's office. But it's all them self. Like you're not going to get the Deputy Secretary of State looking at this, right? It's going to just be like a staffer who represents that equity. So it becomes an inclusive process to make sure everyone has eyes on it. And if there are flags, they'll let you know. For example, you could be driving a line on Israel, but it involves Lebanon. But there's another press officer and whole other desk and leadership working on Lebanon that might have an equity that you may not be aware of that fill at the line. So describe the bureau that you work for near eastern affairs. Yes. Well, it's an old school name. It basically means anything involved in the Middle East. So it's Morocco, to Iran, still the whole Middle East, not just the Levant, like the whole Middle East. Yeah, near East. Yeah, they need to update the name. I think people are aware. But yeah, it's the entire Middle East. So they use all these acronyms. So Israeli power senior affairs as IPA or Ispal, Saudi, Oman, Yemen, Bahrain, that whole group being as ARP for Arabian Peninsula. And then North Africa is its own entity as well from Morocco to Egypt. Goes under NA. Okay. So it's the Levant, the Gulf, you're on that for Iraq. Huh, interesting. And that's all in the same bureau. So the State Department divides the world into bureaus. Correct. Correct. Go to the draw if I'm called desks. Correct. Put that down to Chile's WHA, Western Hemisphere Affairs, Asia's EAP, Eastern East Asia Pacific. So we have all these divisions and Africa. Correct. EUR for Europe, Africa's AF. I wasn't NEA and I was a press officer there originally covering Lebanon, Jordan, just for a couple months and I quickly shifted to Ispal. Israel, Palestine. So that's the hottest of all desks, I would think. Yes, most scrutiny, most at stake rhetoric, most closely supervised. I'm just guessing, but right? Yes, it's true. The press officer for Israeli policy and affairs, you're on a stage constantly because you're getting the most questions from reporters. For good reason. This spokesperson is going to deal with the most questions at the podium about the topic. And so it was a compliment yet difficult for me to process the fact that it was requested from various people in leadership when the administration was changing in January. They said, hey, I know you've only been here for a couple of months, but we're going to put you on this position, which was surprising, but I wanted to take on the challenge at the time. So you were asked to do that by the incoming administration of the Trump administration. Well, it was people from, I was leadership in NEA, which some of them were civil servants, but they were experienced people that were recognized how heavy the topic was going to be coming in. How do you get current on that? How do you do your research? So it's multi-fold. So we do receive like in terms of standard mainstream media, we do get like copies of articles and coverage. And it's not necessarily politically isolated, at least I'm getting it wasn't. So I would see everything in my email inbox plus personally, right? I'm always absorbing things. And you're only going to be a good press officer if you're reading Twitter and the standard emails you're getting through the inbox. Yeah. So you're absorbing lot of information. And it's not just the details. Like, of course, if I have a question, I want to go to the Israel experts at the State Department. There's a detail, I don't know. There might be a desk officer or someone like that that would know that those, the numbers or the challenges that I need for a specific press line. For me, though, as a press officer, my addition in those conversations is like more stylistic. Okay. But this line out there, we're going to invite these problems or it's good if we say it this way because this will help us, it will defend us in this other way. So it was a stylistic endeavor for from day to day. And you don't have full control because obviously the personality of someone at the podium is going to say it one way, even though I was hoping this line would deliver this other way, right? You have full control, but you do have a, who's the spokesman for the near? Well, right now it's more the spokesperson of the Thai department that I was briefing. Oh, so it was Tammy Bruce. She left. And then there's deputies that are currently, Tammy Bruce co, she's going to the UN from understanding. Okay. So were you given parameters? How do you get your orders? Like we do say this, we don't say that. So the main day to day activity, and I think people may not be aware of, but we're probably not aware of, is that I have these packets called press guidance called PG. So on Tuesday and Thursday, which are the days that spoke to me go on to the podium, I would have all the sample questions. And some of them are tasked from the main press office in at the state department, but I also would come with my own questions. Okay. We're getting this question a lot. We need to have lines for this. So we can't leave this alone. So I'd have a credit packet clear through the building, like I was saying earlier, through the 7th floor and then I'd present that brief, the spokesperson, about two hours before I showed up on the podium. How do you know what the official US position, especially on that topic, Israel, Palestine? I mean, that's again, the most politicized area there is. And it's the stakes are high. So how do you know what the official US position is on that conflict? It's a very good question. And especially in the beginning of the administration, it's a bit of an art. undertaking the gold for press officer or lines for the principles. Essentially if President Trump says something, if special envoy would coughs us something, I take those quotes and I'm like, oh, that's policy. So if he's talking about, and I think that's literally true, right? I mean, the president has sort of unilaterally conformed reform. And there's no questioning, quote, the councilor of principle, especially President Trump. Or Secretary Rubio for the C department is often the case. So I would take those lines and it would answer certain questions that would come up. Where are we with the ceasefire? Oh, special envoy, WICKoff went on XYZ Sunday show. So I'm going to pull that line and I'll brief the spokesperson and then she or he can quote special envoy WICKoff at the podium again, because that's the policy. That's the easiest way of doing it. You don't always have quotes. So what would happen instead is you kind of have to do every question on that question on. I mean, if you say you should respond in this way and then cite the president or Steve WICKoff or Secretary Rubio, then that kind of ends the conversation, right? It should end the conversation. What was surprising, and this will go back to why when I ended up departing and getting fired. And I guess was that on a specific question, one of the three events I think led up to defiring was on a Monday, we received a question about forced displacement, which essentially I think cleansing. And what our policy was about Israel intending to move Palestinians and Gaza to South Sudan. So to South Sudan, yeah, that was everybody every two or three months, we had a new reporting would come out in the spring. It was their moving Palestinians and Gaza to Libya. There was a rumor about small land, even though we don't recognize small land, but there is reporting about, are we going to do an exchange where we recognize small land, but they have to take on Palestinians. And then we had an Ethiopia round and then the last round that I witnessed before I left was a South Sudan. So that appears in somewhere in the press. It appears somewhere in the press and we received a question. What's your response to this reporting? And then I came up with a line, but it wasn't a line that like I just came out of the blue. It was something that's President Trump and special envoy, Whitcough, I've said in other words in the spring. I said we did not support forced displacement. And why what did they say about it? So that was your interpretation of what they said. Do you remember what they said Whitcough and Trump said on that topic? So specifically special envoy, Whitcough said something, we're not, said something along the lines of we're not trying to evict anybody. So as a press officer, there's an arc to it. Right? You can sometimes do that. Is that quote or you can come up with a new line that reflects that quote? So we've done a lot of segments over many years attacking college. Most of them are not worth sending your kids or definitely not worth paying for. In fact, they're counterproductive to the source of a lot of this country's problems. But that doesn't mean that all colleges are bad. We've looked far and wide for good ones and grand Canyon University is near the top of the list. It's a private Christian university located in the Arizona Mountains. The best part of Arizona, Grand Canyon believes that every one of us is endowed by God with analienable rights, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Right? It's not something that politicians give us. Right? It's something they are sworn to uphold and defend. It's a totally different way of looking at the world. At GCU, purpose starts with service equipping students to affect their families, communities, and the world for good. Whether you're called to business, education, ministry, whatever it is, Grand Canyon University helps you honor that calling while glorifying God through your work, real purpose in life. Over 340 academic programs offered online on campus in hybrid formats. Take your pick. GCU makes education accessible and is tailored to you and your goals. Whether you're starting fresh, you're going back to school to advance your career if you're ready to pursue a degree and a purpose. Grand Canyon University GCU is ready for you. It's private. It's Christian. It's affordable. GCU.edu today. I think forced displacement and eviction are incentives. Right. Any fair person would say that? Right. Keep in mind, this had already been cleared. It was approved for about a couple of weeks before this particular question popped up. Ethiopia rumor was July 28th, put it in the PG, put it in the packet, cleared through. I briefed it multiple times. When that question came up, I said, I would probably have the right to just send that line because I cleared so many times. To be extra careful, I sent it out to the spokesperson and their staff and made sure the most important equity is we're clearing it. From my understanding, I wasn't on the chain, but from my understanding, they went to the secretary's office and they cut that line of we do not support forced displacement. The only other bullet that we have, which is pretty standard, is we don't discuss private deal by the conversation, which is standard. I would always say the investigation is ongoing. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. It's one of those lines that are pretty standard. That line was there. That's all we ended up providing. There's some sensitive, which is found very odd because out of the three events, I can get into the other ones, but that was just number two. The two days before I was fired, that Thursday and Friday, the only feedback that I got because my bureau was confused as to why the secretary's office was coming down on me, because they don't know me. I don't interact with a random press officer at NEA, right? Maybe a little bit more because of the sensitive topic, but chains are generally low. My leadership is that, hey, they're asking where you got that line from Monday. I'm like, at least Thursday, you 40s later. They're asking me where I got this line that I drafted, but they cut it. I went through the procedure. I cut it. They cut it and the reporter never saw it. They explained why they cut it. No. I got from all I heard, all I witnessed was the acting spokesperson saying. You were paraphrasing the envoy, Steve Wacov, and the president of the United States Donald Trump, when you said the United States is not support in forced displacement. I don't think we do support that, do we? By the way, I won't hope so. Yeah. Right. And especially, I'm going to pay for that. And they cut that output didn't explain why. And then your supervisors came to you and said, hey, they're complaining about you. Basically. And they only specified that line, just like the act of drafting it. And I was like, I have a track record. They asked me Thursday afternoon and Friday morning, twice in a row, it was very odd for a random bullet. I was like, I have the evidence from July 28th of clearing this press guidance with that line. And here are the relevant quotes. Anyone say, by the way, you may not know this, but the United States does support forced displacement. No one said that. No one said that. But by the way, sorry, got it wrong. We're all about forced displacement. Okay, we want to kind of want to trail a tear situation here because we're for that. It's tragic because it's such a standard bonker. Yeah, that's something you would want to advertise. Uh-huh. You want to put out there that we're against this. Okay, we still have some moral standing somewhere. And when the Washington Post piece came out like the yesterday two years ago saying, we're there's some plan involving the consultations of Tony Blair of moving. Gossins out and we, we, but we may pay for something a piece of it. I'm like, why? So is this why I got fired? It's because I was, I was still sticking to the slide and they saw me as some kind of obstacle, which I wasn't because I was going through the exact procedures they wanted. But I knew that when I was fired as someone who was again, close with political appointees and was civil servants and was pretty well established in any A. Again, we got to clear earlier, you don't get this roll covering Israeli policy, no fairs on a whim. And I'm suddenly pushed out. That means things are going to go into very radical direction. Well, yeah, I should also say because I know that you will be attacked and I'll be attacked for speaking to you on the following grounds. This guy's a partisan Democrat who liked Bernie. He was a sabitura, a record. I know from our conversations off camera, at least what you said to me was basically agreed with Trump's foreign policy instincts. Yeah, fewer pointless wars like get along with more people. Yeah, that was fair. That's fair. I've always been an advocate for ending endless war on a personal level. So President Trump is saying, hey, we don't want to get into any forever wars. I'm like, that's great. And we technically started with a ceasefire in Gaza and started administration. That was something to do because we expanded on. We were speaking to the Iranians. So there's so many chances for true peace, but things went in the wrong direction. I would say somewhere in the summer, right? I remember listening to President Trump's speech in Saudi in May where he was talking about amazing speech. Love that speech. I remember I was like, I was cheering. Exactly. In my cubicle episode eight department, I was like, it was a great speech. I was two. That was one of the best speeches ever given. And I was, this is amazing. It was ballsy to his speech. Calling out neo-cons, like no one calls out neo-cons of DC, right? We brushed that under the rug. We kept moving, right? So see him as an analyst here and there on TV here and there. They dominate the ambiguous cable news channel. Yes, I'm aware. Yeah. I have to see that. But then why two weeks later where we sat out talking our own talks with Iran and then bombing them, right? So the events, like the idea that I'm some part of this is just wrong. I guess our personal avenue, I don't want any more endless wars. And President Trump was in line with that. And I was doing my job in line with the procedures that were necessary every single day. Yeah, but it sounds like you agreed with them. So I guess that's my point. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. A lot of these, some of the labels are real, but some of them are also created and certainly sustained in order to keep people from listening to each other so they don't discover they actually agree on a lot. Yeah. And if you love this Audi speech and I love this Audi speech, then we're probably not too far from each other then because I thought that and that was a Donald Trump speech. And by the way, if you're such a partisan Democrat, you're admitting on camera that you love to Donald Trump speech. You're not too partisan, I guess. But anyway, I just want to say because I'm pure. I want to see as much as matters. Yeah, it's like it's the, it's the issues we have in foreign policy that I matter that I care about. Don't care about the labels per se. Well, I don't either. Well, they're clearly meaningless. Yes. If we're both cheering on the, the reality speech. So yes, okay. I just wanted to establish that. So you start hearing from your bosses like, hey, what is this thing that you put in there about opposing force displacement? Yeah, we've always four. Yeah, four or five days earlier, not even like the next day. There was a delay annoyance. It was weird. Huh. So you said that there were three examples of this where they found problems with your work. Right. And some of this, it kind of made sense from hindsight because I didn't like in the moment and it realized. But Sunday, Israel had had a struck attempt with several journalists living inside and concluding on us who had two millions of people had watched cover the events in Gaza. They all died. I drafted a line a few lines. And by the way, there were not saw some softy lines. The only thing that was there that they didn't like was a did share condolences, which is pretty standard policy window lenses. What do you mean? So I said we share condolences for the families of the kill journalists. That's all. Well, that sounds, that sounds like hate speech to me. Yeah. Condolences to the families of people who got killed. Yeah. Non combatants killed in war. Yep. And what's so disappointing too was that. Wait, wait. So what happened when you put that in there? I was immediately told from a senior official that we don't know what Anas did essentially. And I was like, that's odd. And what he did, like we don't know what his like conduct was. Like we don't know. We didn't like we need more information. He might, it was sure he was looting to the fact that he may have done something or he's a problematic actor in some way. But it was weird. Okay. Let me just say, I would be totally comfortable sharing condolences with the some have been Laden's family. I hate some have been Laden on the other hand. If somebody dies, it's okay to say I'm sorry to his family that he has murder. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. That's immaterial. I would say that to the family of an executed murderer in a prison. It doesn't mean I support the murderer or the murderer, but this is family. Like yeah, it's okay. That's called like human decency and anyone who's against that. Yeah. And it's even we're setting up this constant. This is my issue that I noticed from the get go, the constant deferring to Israel. It was like waiting for some state man, like let them speak first. And then on Monday, Israel said, all Hamas, which is a thorough way line they've used. All Hamas meaning what? They're journalists. We're all Hamas. Yeah. Or at least with Anas from a member correctly. And so they brushed that away. Were they? Look, my point when I heard that was what does our intelligence say? If they were like being super strict and said, hey, we're going to triple check using our US intelligence of who these people are, maybe, maybe, right? I still don't agree with cutting the condolences line, but sure. But why is there, oh, Israel said this, done, we don't have intel services? Right. So what's with the instinct to defer to Israel when we have the entire apparatus, like a check that? And then by Tuesday, like 17 different intelligence services in the US country that take, you know, trillion dollars a year, whatever the actual budget is. And we don't consult them at all. We wait for the Israeli spokesman to tell us what reality is. Awful. That what you're saying? Yeah. And how is that America first? Whole apparatus of mirroring certain Israeli statements and waiting for them to comment first was something that I found tragic. It was odd. And that's when it happened by the press briefing that Tuesday, we were like, we referred you to Israel, which was a line that popped up in my press guidance way too often. People don't generally brag about their wireless companies. But if you're something to brag about, imagine that your wireless company was so great that you told random people about it. That could actually happen with pure talk. Their service is amazing. It comes from the exact of the same cell towers as the other company. So it's just as good, literally, but for a fraction of the price. And maybe more important, pure talk has actual American values. They just forgave $10 million in veteran debt, giving away a thousand American flags to veterans. That's not how corporate America tends to act to put it mildly. They've also raised almost half a million dollars to prevent veteran suicide. So they're decent people working there and a great 5G network. You got unlimited talk, tax plenty of data, just $25 a month a month. That saves the average family over $1,000 a year. It's time to switch your wireless company, pure talk. Go to puretalk.com slash talker, save an additional 50% off your first month. Again, puretalk.com slash talker to make the switch today. It is wireless. You might actually brag about it. We were so we don't have a position on it. Right. And that came up on any topic that was somewhat sensitive or waiting for Israel to make a move. Does the State Department have any position that contradicts the position of the Israeli government that you're aware of? No. I think no, the closest, I think on for US interests we do, but in our current policy and posture, we do not. So not one, the closest we go. Give me siblings. I do. Do you love them? I love them. Do you have any sticking points with them? Is there something you don't fully agree with? As any siblings do. Exactly. Exactly. So loving someone or having an alliance with someone or even like sharing the same parents as somebody doesn't mean that you have to agree at every little point. It would be weird. You did. It would be weird. Yeah. A jetticle twin? That's a little odd. This is getting a little weird. Why is it, why is it not like this? Very strange. And the closest we came and there was no follow through was when I actually like the statement. It was a thousand things that I had personal issues, which was irrelevant. But a master hug could be when there was these tie bed tax questions in West Bank. He did put on a statement saying these tax are unacceptable. We call an Israel investigate. But there's no follow through. What do you mean? Do you have a statement that says, oh, I remembered very well. There's a follow through. And like, oh, that's a good statement. That's, oh my God. You can't attack Christians with US tax dollars. Sorry. Yeah. Yep. And not allowed. Yep. I don't care who you are. And it was just like it was one statement and there was no like, and if we got questions and he would successfully investigation, be free to Israel, right? So soon no one of this day department looked into it. Not that I saw. This is a majority Christian country. But nobody felt like that would be a good use of American tax dollars to find out what this was or ask anybody any questions. And that's the thing. Each time there's a call for investigation and a very rare opportunity that that's front of us, there's no follow through. You strong statement. We did the thing and you don't hear about it for weeks and months. So there's no one at the State Department who cared. Look, I don't want to speak for the entire, I think there were people that cared. I think there are Christians. I care. And look, there are a lot. There are civil servants or political appointees, forester officers that see all of this and they're concerned. And but it's this style of constantly deferring to Israel. That's at the forefront. So we can criticize up to certain points. And it's awful because if we want Israel to investigate, then we should be following up and ask, hey, what happened to investigation? I thought you were investigating. Where are the prosecutions? Who did all the damage? Who did the same why? Yeah. But we never hear that. We never hear the follow up. So there's no as far as you're aware, mechanism in the State Department to, because you've described a relationship that's unique. There's no other country in the world that has this relationship with the United States. And a lot of resources go into supporting that country. But there's no mechanism in the United States in the US State Department to follow up on this. Look, in the public realm, because I was working, I worked as a press officer, right? So I'm always working with reporters and how, like this, the presentation, those things matter. So if there was a system of following up, I didn't see it. It's possible. Personally, I've doubt it. But on the public realm, you would have known about it because what if somebody asks you? Right. And you would think that if there was follow up, you'd want to advertise it too. Like, hey, we followed up. But they were, the preference was to defer and deflect and give it to you. It's not what it gives you. You persecute, you know, Christians with American tax dollars, nobody cares. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. You're making me mad. No, it's just a frust- it's frustrating. No, it is frustrating to see people get shat, because it's not a neutral situation. Like some people are winning and some people are losing. And if the losers or people that you didn't do anything wrong, the Christians aren't in Hamas, like what's their crime? The scenes are horrific. So on a human level, it shouldn't matter. But if that's the whole thing of having a ambassador out could be there, it's like, at least maybe you'll care about this. And then yeah, you put a strong statement out, but don't follow up. Yeah, they don't care at all. That's the point. The self-described Christians don't care at all, by the Christians. And by the way, the whole justification for all this, you just said it. These journalists get blown up, they were Hamas. Okay. End of conversation. No one can possibly claim that a Christian family are in Hamas. Okay. So like what, tell me, you can't claim that they're in Hamas will simultaneously claiming that Hamas is, you know, group of jihadis. They're Islamic extremists, which they also claim constantly, which I don't know if that's true, by the way. It seems more like a political organization. But whatever it is, they're telling us constantly, they're al-Qaeda. So it can't also be true that Christians are member of al-Qaeda. Sorry. Yeah. So then we know they're not in Hamas. So why did they get killed? Why was there tricks blown up? Why were they killed in that hospital? Like what is this? And there's not one person, the State Department, who cares enough to get to the bottom of that question. Yeah. And all you saw, all I saw, President Trump did call Prime Minister Netanyahu and then he gave an apology for the church that was attacked in Gaza. One of many. But there's never follow up. There's never like, hey, this is the prosecution. This is where our investigation landed. It's this quick two-hour brush on the rug to the State of the Now. There's never like, hey, this is the prosecution. This is where our investigation landed. It's this quick two-hour brush on the rug to statement out, and then you don't hear anything ever again. Yeah. Wow. OK. The third example of work that you produce that your superiors were unhappy with, and that led ultimately to your firing was what? So it was a Tuesday, so that's a press guidance day, all the sample questions. It was actually arguably, we said OBE would which meant overcome by events, which means that we're beyond its relevancy. But it was still could come up, so I left it in there, was a reaction to Speaker Johnson visiting the settlements in the West Bank. I had a line pretty standard and not very specific, but I said, we support stability in West Bank. Stability? Yeah. We support stability. That's all. So the last piece was comma, which helps secure Israel. But I think the stable comment was, I don't know, too much, because if we say we want stable West Bank, are we accidentally being critical of something Speaker Johnson or Israel is doing? Right. So what is it? I flush that out if you don't mind. Sure. I know what you're saying, but I'm not sure everyone else. No, that's a good question. So why would the US government, so the US government is against extending condolences to the families of non-combatants killed. Correct. Correct. And the US government is also now in favor of the forced movement of large populations. That's one day worse. Right. Okay. And now you're saying the US government is against stability. Right. How are we against stability? Why is stability a bad thing? Now, stability is a word that's used a lot. And we are on paper saying we support stability and the region all the time. But in this specific context, when discussing settlements, it will sound like we're critiquing Israel indirectly by saying we support stability and reaction to a question about settlements. Right. So that was how I interpreted the issue. So in other words, that would, you might be suggesting that the US government opposes radical demographic change in the West Bank. Right. Right. Now, I had this line again, just like the forces, but it had a cleared previously. But this is where what was discussed when this first broke my firing and the Washington Post was that senior officials from embassy Jerusalem, David Noisings specifically, would occasionally pop into my docs. Now, it didn't happen every single day. Pop into your docs like at a Google doc, right? Or a Google doc. It was like, it was like, I don't know, the brand doesn't matter. But I'm in general. Internal system. I would share it with in the morning, the equities I was mentioning, one of the equities is embassy Jerusalem. Okay. So an equity just first state department speak people haven't heard it. Tell us what an equity is. So someone has some stake in those lines. Okay. Then obviously Jerusalem does. Obviously because they're the ones that are the US embassy in Jerusalem. The US embassy in Jerusalem, American diplomats, I would post to Israel on those press briefing days, I would share it with them for them to review the document and be like, okay, these are our press lines for these sample questions. Are you okay with them? Now, it was interesting because they often did not clear. They didn't reject it. They just was a non response because the press officers there would defer up the chain to David, David Milstein and a Basterhucope because they didn't want to put their name on it. Because if there's some of it they didn't like, no one wants their name on a press guidance that wasn't approved by these influential people. Who is David Milstein? He is the senior advisor to Basterhucope. And what's his, how old is he? What's his background? Is he a career diplomat or he's a, for my understanding, he's a political. I believe he worked on the Hill. Oh, did he work for Ted Cruz? Yes. Yes, he worked for Ted Cruz. Okay. And he is the steps that of your best friend Mark Levin. He's Mark Levin's steps on. Yeah. He's working in the state department. Correct. Interesting. So every head of household wants to keep the family safe. It's your chief duty. Simply safe makes it easy to do that. Now conventional wisdom suggests that a standard alarm that goes off during a break in is enough just having alarm. Well, it's not enough. It's not even close to enough. Think about it for a second. You don't want people in your house in the first place. True security means preventing that before it begins. And that's why you need simply safe. The system is designed to be proactive, not reactive. And here's how it works. They use smart cameras to identify anything lurking outside your home. If there is something lurking outside your home, they immediately alert professional monitoring agents who intervene in real time through two-way audio, confronting the intruder triggering sirens and spotlights and requesting rapid police dispatch, all helping to stop the intruder, release outside your home, not when he's already in your home. Does that make sense? Yes, it does. It's real security. And that's why 4 million Americans use it every day. With a 60-day money back guarantee and no long-term contract, simply save earns your business by keeping you safe and satisfied every day. Visit simplysafe.com-chuckers to claim 50% off a new system. Simplysafe.com-chuckers. There's no safe like simply safe. So David Milstein is a political guy working now for my Huckabee in Jerusalem, and he was going through your lines. Correct. Okay. Now, on paper, he could be, but the way that he would edit my docs as aggressively as he would, and we can get into this, but the other statements and pieces that were reported in the Washington Post, he would push his agenda. That was very aligned with Israel that I found very problematic. Now, in this specific example, because we're discussing the third example of why I was fired, was that he changed the stability line to, we commend Speaker Johnson for visiting Judea and Samaria. So we as a government- He's Judea and Samaria. It's a term that is, it's like religious. It's about Israel's land grab of the West Bank. Are Judea and Samaria administrative districts? No, it's not, they're a mayor of Samaria. Does it exist? There's no actual place called Judea and Samaria. The civil authorities don't recognize Judea or Samaria. No, okay. No, it's the more extreme wing of the elements of the Israeli government, and David Milstein was in line with that language, and it's designed to erase any Palestinian legitimacy that this is supposed to be. So the point is, by using those terms, their biblical terms, they refer to regions described in what Christians call the Old Testament. And the point is to remind everybody that this land was promised by God to the Jewish people's, the Hebrew people, and that, you know, anyone who's lived there subsequently for the last 3000 years has no right to it. Right. That's the point. But from a sort of government perspective, Judea and Samaria are not real places in that they're not not recognized. Not used dates. They're not provinces. They're not. And do they have clearly defined borders? Not for my understanding. I mean, they do not. And that would increase. That would give you the open door. It opens the door to more land grabs. You know, it's okay. But if a place doesn't have a clearly defined border, then how can the US government refer to it in any kind of official capacity? They can. They can. And it's scary too, because if you look at the airstrikes that Israel are doing, like, Israel is doing in the Syria and their building settlements, even outside the go on heights, it's all part of this. This, I don't know what it is. This idea of a greater Israel that people are discussing, those beyond these borders. So it's scary. And it's against the stability of the region that we've been calling for as a government for decades. Certainly in the modern era, definitely since the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1918, you know, you've had clear borders between countries and in fact, we're fighting a war against Russia right now on the on the premise that they violated those borders by moving into Eastern Ukraine. So like the US government takes borders very seriously, obviously, not including our own. But as a matter of like, statecraft and diplomacy, that really, really matters. So you would never use a phrase in an official communication that referred to a place whose territory you couldn't define. That would be 100% crazy to do something like that. 100%. Okay. So you think this Milstein guy, who is Mark Levin's stepson, you say, it's almost like, it's almost like you're making this up. It's like a joke who worked for Ted Cruz in the Senate. He added this to the statement. Correct. And then did it go out. So from that point, I cut it because I accepted most of his edits in the document because going to battle with him was a whole headache because he'll call, he'll push certain things. He was known for doing that. Like he'll he'll, the adiosian phone call was not the favorite thing. Like what was you like? Tell us for those who don't work with Mark Levin's steps on it at the stage. Sure. Sure. So if you would call and you just push it, why was that removed? Why was XYZ done very often? And if you said no, there was a tendency to go up the chain in order for him to push the agenda of any given day. And this is something that I dealt with since where is his issues? He's he the DCM or what's he's just a senior advisor to Master Huckabee. He's like an assistant to the US ambassador to Israel. Correct. And he, the sticking with the public reporting from Washington Post, like he would push in one in one occasion, statements that were in the voice of Secretary Rubio, not even spokesperson. And you drafted them. We would push them through. I want the statement out. And I want the statement out. Yeah. If you would go through and be like, I drafted this, this is the statement I want, I would go through the process of clearing it, but he would fight for it. Like he would be in the document, getting an argument as to people one by one in order to kind of overwhelm the process and get certain, um, his agenda out there the way he wanted. It's very difficult. You know, what authority? I mean, that's pretty jockey behavior. It was a guy who's in aid to my club could be it was when we're capable news. It was called around building and, and it was very consistent. Um, what it persistent is, but he lives in Jerusalem. It does. We mean call rallies and policy comes from DC. Like this is obviously they have influence and they have discussions, but the policy comes from DC. So if we didn't, what do you mean call around? Do you have you go up? You would go either laterally or up the chain and call various people and say, hey, Ambassador Huckabee, you'll say Huckabee usually and say wants to stun or in for XYZ reason. And, um, if that person didn't pick up, it would go to the next person. So you, so even if I, I was discussing equities earlier, if one particular equity said, we can't do this, then he would go up. Well, I don't care because the sky above you may clear it. What? And how do see if everyone's number? That was, that's what I was wondering. I don't know. But David Milstein in, in an assistant in the US embassy in Jerusalem. That's, I just want to restate. I mean, going up, going up around this. Yeah. That's not a high level post. It's like zero authority to do anything. And it's drafting a statement on behalf of this is very audacious to draft a statement on behalf of Secretary Rubio. Secretary state. Yes. In one occasion, um, again, referring just to public reporting was the statement, uh, to condem Ireland for considering a bill that would put economic sanctions on Israel. Condem Ireland, as you can imagine, folks, David Milstein was demanding in effect the Secretary of State condemn Ireland because Ireland defended the government of Israel. Yeah. I actually remember correctly strongly condemned, which doesn't really until my speak, you know, that's wrong. But yes, strongly condemned Ireland as a nation. Well, the government, I guess, I don't, I don't, I don't remember the language, but did Rubio read it? That was a rare occasion where it went up the ladder and it was eventually, uh, killed, but it required the European affairs bureau and NEA and everyone to, it took a lot of effort because you so, um, uh, laser focus on getting that through. And who is it? That'd be good for the United States, kidnapping Ireland would be good for Israel could use our political and diplomatic capital on the statement that, uh, would punish Ireland for considering something. The official story on 911 is a complete lie. The 911 report is a joke. You have CIA following two men all over the planet and eventually even to America, right? And you don't tell the FBI 911 commission cover. So what did happen? What did the government know? What did foreign governments know? There was a cover up why it's been nearly 25 years in his time Americans learned what actually happened. We're going to tell you releasing one episode per week. You're not going to wait. If you remember, you don't have to. You get all five episodes, the day it drops, right then, add free. Our first episode airs Thursday 911, September 11, we will not want to miss it. Join us now at Tucker Carlson dot com. Did you ever see it sounds like you had a lot of contact or could see David Milceon at work a lot? It sounds like he was a pretty big figure in your office and DC though. He's an assistant to the day. He was like, oh, you don't hear from three days all of a sudden you're getting a a phone call and a bunch of edits on something and they disappear again. Did he have your cell? It works though. Yeah, he did. How do you get your number? Well, at that point early on, I think, so an asked that I share with him. So that was, that was on my end. Wow. But did you ever see David Milceon thinking about what's good for the United States? We're getting aggressive on behalf of what our interest might be as distinct from Israel's interest. I've perceived a lot of his actions as very Israel first from my point of view, because that statement didn't make sense. Those edits, the press lines didn't make sense. And in particular with Judea Samaria, that not only would not make sense for our dangerous videos, for what that means, because as you discussed, there's no land barrier to that. But it hurts our relationships to reach in. For example, we rely on Jordan on so many things. We start calling it Judea Samaria. That undermines our military relationship, our relationship dealing with refugees in Jordan. Also, some of that land is in Jordan. Exactly. Right. So, I mean, you can't, I mean, if that would cause problems. And that's one example. So these are not, this is diplomacy. This is the state department of the United States of America, which is still a global superpower even now. And so Jordan, Jordan economy relies on USAID. Yep. We profit that aid at the request of Israel, because Jordan is filled with refugees in 1948 or the created Israel and subsequent refugees, 67 and filled with refugees, including from Syria, or that we fought on behalf of Israel. So we pay Jordan. We have to pay Egypt to keep them calm. And now you're saying he wanted to issue a statement saying to Jordan, by the way, part of your territory and your what you thought was a sovereign nation actually doesn't belong to you. Yeah. And just so terrible. And so I mean, we can go back that day three, because I cut that line. And by the way, this isn't a unilateral action by me. There are others who agree with me. So I'm not doing it with the backing of my own thoughts. Well, that's not a hard run. She didn't smear. I mean, isn't there. I mean, it's been a long time since around the state department, but I mean, I always thought there was like a like there's a protocol to things, which in some cases is silly, but some cases is real. Like do we refer to that region as Judea and smear yet? We're don't we? Like this is something that's been gone over before, correct? Yeah, no, we don't. And we don't we don't never have Secretary Rubio did not use it. President Trump did not use it. Ambassador Huckabee has now that was that's different. Did anyone ever ask Ambassador Huckabee? What what land specifically are you referring to when you say that? Not from what I've seen. Because reporters are morons. That's why was somebody asked me could obvious question. Like Judea, it's very where's that? Can you draw it for me on a map? Show me the boundaries of this place you're talking about. Even if they did ask, the lines wouldn't even answer the question directly, right? Because you would in person they should ask him. Yes, I agree. Yeah, what what are you talking about? Where is that? Yeah. No one will ever ask that question. And Ambassador Huckabee always had extreme comments either in person on or on his Twitter account. But for most of my time at the State Department, the response would be, well, those are Ambassador Huckabee's words. So we do this dance. But now that I especially after firing me, you're getting an unleashed and we see Jerusalem, who's going to do anything to stop them? Because they already have so much influence to begin with. But when I'm used as an example, they fire me as someone who did the very basic thing of cutting a line that did not make sense. It's also inconsistent with long-standing US policy. Right. And if you want to keep your job, who in the future is then I want I'm not here's where you're confusing me now. I know that you say he's Mark Levin's stepson, but I mean, nobody takes Mark Levin seriously and no one watches his show. And like he's just not a real, not a real person. He's like an angry man on Twitter. Who cares who steps on he is like, why doesn't anyone say, hey, tell that Milstein kid to shut the fuck up? Like that's not hard. Why doesn't someone do that? Honestly, that was that was my question. I did not know why people would like people would acknowledge the pushiness. But that's all I really got. I don't want to ever told them to stop. It was difficult to say no to them. I'm a lot of clients. So people did say no, but it took a lot of effort. So from my vantage point, I'm wondering why would someone have so much influence and why are people almost tiptoeing around it? Right. Sounds like they were. Right. And you'd have to take a group effort of like, okay, this bureau and this bureau don't want to put the statement out. And then it would go away. But that was it. So it's really a lot of this you think based on your experiences coming from this one guy. Correct. Now it was him, although you're right that he does have limitations over his title, right? He can't and that advisor to Bachelors could be can't fire me. But he does have particular people on the seventh floor, when I mean my seventh floor is people around Secretary Rubio that from my perspective, he looped in the neo cons that were influential and they had the power to do so. So he would rile them up on Israel or me or whatever issue there was and they would come down. So my firing didn't come from Milstein. Of course came from Secretary Rubio staff and these are like a couple of heritage foundation guys who want form policy. You can say, oh, President Trump, you know, he's going to have heritage guys there that says his right as Sotomayor election. But if you listen to President Trump on form policy, it doesn't make sense to have, but if heritage guys around you. So you said that Milstein, who is a nobody on the org chart, had sort of amazing power, including making personnel decisions effectively because he would just go everyone's up over everyone's head along the chain, up to and including the seventh floor management level at the State Department and had influence with people on Secretary Rubio staff. Do you know who? My understanding was that it was his deputy chief of staff that came down in order to essentially fire me. Now I think that'd be Dan Holler, formerly of heritage possible. Okay. So you'd heard that. I heard that. But it was pretty clear to you that it was David Milstein, the assistant to the House ambassador to a foreign country who was basically line editing statements out of State Department HQ. Yeah. And what was another hint too was that I had flagged for those spokesperson staff the intention to add in Judean Samaria, just the FYI if this happened, and the next day, which is Wednesday, instead of like moving along, the staff asked, actually, acting spokesperson asked to speak with David Milstein about West Bank lines, but without me. And then the next day is when Thursday is when people started coming down on me. So the way I pieced it together was that that conversation about West Bank lines and Milstein being aware that I cut the Judean Samaria line led to the Thursday, Friday, crack down from the secretary. Just to be clear again, putting Judea and Samaria in an official US government communication is like using the term Narnia or something. It's not a real place. Right. This is fantasy land. And it's beneath a great power to even have dumb conversations like this. It opens the door to instability. It opens door to hurting our relationships significantly with our partners. It doesn't serve US interests at all at all. Okay. Did anyone else at this state department share these views? Like that that crosses just as someone from DC. I just like, no, that that crosses like a bright bright. Yeah, look, there there are folks who might be close to that worldview. But from my personal interactions, Milstein was far this out there. Did I have to ask this, but I just want to be clear. I don't think you should punish people for their relatives. So I'm not mad at David Milstein because his stepfather is a douche. I mean, that's certainly not his fault at all. And neither is David Milstein Mark Leven's fault. So I just want to be clear about that. I don't believe in collective punishment unlike some other countries like Israel, which is big on collective punishment. I oppose it completely. It's a Christian. So I'm not engaging in it here. But did you ever see Mark Leven over there? Did he have any role in the Irish state department? I never came across anything. I think there's a lot happening above my head, regardless, just even my firing. It's like MBC Jerusalem was contacting this guy who was then trying to crack that on me. And then it's a mystery for a day or two why that's happening. And then it becomes clear. So those conversations are concerning. And it makes me question like if we're talking about the Saudi speech in May of President Trump, how do we go from that kind of statement to these kind of policies? And so that is my biggest question out of all of this. Why did this pivot happen? And what does this mean for Israel policy moving forward? It's already extreme to begin with. Is it going to become even more radical? It already has. Does anybody else? I mean, are there other people at state department? So you came in not as a former Trump staffer, but as someone who has you said agreed with his basic impulse and foreign policy, which is like, hey, let's let's have more peace less war. There must have been other people there who were like full blown America. First people I would think would hope. Did anybody that never say to you, this isn't really America first. It's true. It's look, people were happy after Trump won when like, okay, we're doing we're getting Trump too, but we don't have John Bolton and Mike Hayo. Exactly. And the daily back again. Right. The issue is a lot of the personal problems are still there, but at a more, it's like it's more subtle. An ambassador Huckabee to me, it's still part of that same grouping in terms of the damage it can do in our foreign policy. Right. And what should give me an example of the damage you think Huckabee has done to American foreign policy since well, it's close attention to his statements. And I really haven't. Well, that's it's it's the lack of accountability for well, having been seen around adding Judaism area. You know, right? Like these are your trusted senior advisors, right? And so there's that there's the no follow through on what happened in Taipei and in the West in the West Bank and we'll have another church in Gaza. It's our entire Israel policy. He goes out there. There were tweets from several weeks ago where he was attacking the UK Prime Minister ambassador was he started calling the Prime Minister out for questioning Israel's conduct in Gaza. And he said, if you something along the lines of if it wasn't for Dresden, you'd always be in German. So green lighting, the slaughter of Palestinians, etc. It's okay, which was horrific. George Dresden. It's on Twitter. It was it was horrific bombing of Dresden. I the way yeah, he was comparing he was comparing Dresden to what's happening in Gaza and saying, I don't think there's anybody. It's hardly a pro hitler. I'm anti Hitler for whatever swarth just to be clear. It's it's hardly pro Nazi to say that what the allies didn't the British really mostly had Dresden was a war crime. I mean, nobody nobody would. So why should say other one? He endorsed dread the Dresden bombing who gives an ambassador the green light to poke at a allies prime minister at the UK, the true ally. And to like the the the the nonchalant attitude towards like the slaughter of people, both in Dresden or comparing it to what's happening Gaza is it's yeah, that's not so of course it's not that's not the Christian view. You know, murdering in a sense is always wrong period. That is the matter who does it as we're policy. I despise the UK and it's prime minister and I'm totally happy to hear any on both. But it should be from the perspective of what's good for the United States. Now what's good for another country like that's bonkers. That's really yeah. Does anybody say anything about that like internally? Is there any effort all the time? We're like, oh, cringe, people cringe at it. Let me see all those tweets. But well, so typically in administration, you know, the ambassador serves the president as his diplomat, you know, the chief diplomat in the country to what he's posted. And you know, there are a million examples all the time of the ambassador getting called back to Washington or getting a cable from DC. Whoa, that's not our policy. You know, pull it in line with what the president's view is because that's who you work for. Right. So if and did anyone do that with Huckabee? Never. You have he's representing Secretary Rubio, Secretary Rubio's representing the president and no one is stopping Ambassador Huckabee from going fully unleashed. And that's why my very basic edits and suggestions from the from that week was such a red flag that we had to get rid of immediately. What that means is that if we're not stopping Ambassador Huckabee at that level, that becomes policy. And yes, yeah, that's right. Right. So that's it. And if I'm going to be fired for for lines of what were or should be, and I think are President Trump's views, then things are moving in more radical direction. And they will. Yeah, I mean, I guess I am for moving in a bunch of different radical directions like banning high interest loans. You know, I'm strongly for that. What I'm not in favor of is moving in radical directions on behalf of a foreign country whose interests are not the same as ours that are aligned in some things and diverge at other points, but they're not the same. Why would you want to be radical on behalf of another country? Right. It makes no sense. Well, it's unpatriotic. It's totally wrong. And it's America. But they're not the same. Why would you want to be radical on behalf of another country? Right. It makes no sense. Well, it's unpatriotic. Yeah. It's totally wrong. And it's America last. It's also a form of treachery, I think, subverting our foreign policy on behalf of another country that wasn't not a citizen. That country would eat this mind tax dollars. What are you doing? Right? Right. And we did all of this. We're burning Dibbon a capital left and right. Australia, the UK, Canada. With all these US allies considering recognizing the power of the United States. And we're going out there attacking them one by one on behalf of Israel. Those are our partners. Is it worth it? But we're also not, I mean, they've, all those countries have basically eliminated human rights in their own countries. Eliminated freedom of speech, freedom of movement, freedom of association. They've got political prisoners. It's crazy what those countries are doing to their own citizens. We don't say a word. But if they criticize a foreign another country, then we attack them. Yeah, we have other issues we could discuss with them. But instead, we choose to make Israel this odd red line. And it takes a lot of Dibbon a capital to attack your allies. We need them for so many things. It doesn't matter if it's trade or war or so resolution of the UN. This is too perfect. I just said I want to ask you a couple of just policy questions. I mean, and just if you don't mind. Sure, because they're speculative, but I just want to draw on information that you gleaned in your job at the State Department. What is non-emotional and clinical as you can be? What is the plan here with Gaza and the West Bank? What do you think? I keep wondering like, okay, every day it said, no, we killed them, but it was a mistake or we thought they were Hamas. Okay, got it. What is the plan? Are they really going to move 2 million people out of Gaza? Do you think that's actually going to happen? This is what I'm afraid about. On the West Bank, I think we were setting up annexation. And I think the news from the past couple of days shows that that's true. What does annexation mean? There's going to be an Israeli takeover of the West Bank. And basically, area C is supposed to be where the Palestinians had full control. Israelis want to take over that and call the entire West Bank and call it as part of Israel. And then to the Palestinians who live or get voting rights, these are all questions that they have not answered. I don't believe anyone wants to answer. Why it's such an obvious question. I know. What's your plan? What is no one asked that question? Like, where people even the IDF in some occasions ask, hey, this is the military takeover. What are we going to do? And the ministers don't care. For whatever it's worth, it's not my country and I'm not that interested. But I just noticed that the IDF for all the grief that it takes is actually been a voice of restraint in Gaza and the West Bank. At least publicly, they're like, wait a second, you're asking. I'm just going to go inside and go into Gaza City. They're like, hey, this is going to be exactly the same thing. They're just a military with a bunch of reservists. Some professionals, they're lots of reservists. Like every military, they kind of want to know why they're putting their lives at risk. That's at least that's my read on it. Yeah, it's true. And that's a whole another discussion, but I am worried about the political and direction of Israel to be more and more extreme. And those guardrails are gone. But they're taking over the West Bank. We don't know what that looks like. It's extremely dangerous. But what's the pretext? The residents of the West Bank had nothing to do with the attacks on southern Israel, right? But it opens the door because you're so focused on Gaza. And this is, but is there a justification for it? Is it like they don't have any hostages in the West Bank? Do they? No. No, there is no justification. What's awful is that instead of focusing on securing the release of the hostages or just securing their own country, they've used this entire war with nearly two years now to pursue opportunities. We're going to bomb Beirut and kill all these civilians. We're going to bomb Syria, kill civilians on too many occasions there. The bomb raids on Yemen start a potential war with Iran that if President Trump had an end in it could have gotten into a respire old. And so it's very dangerous that we're letting Israel take the front seat of our U.S. foreign policy when we have the power to end these wars. We're paying for them. And we paid for the, you know, the Israeli strikes on Iran. And I've said this to anyone who'll listen. I think this will end the Republican Party. I don't think they're going to get elected to anything anytime soon after this. They don't pull back and establish independence from this Israel any other foreign power. It's not about Israel. It's about any letting any other foreign country run your country. That's you can't have that. Everyone hates it. It's super unpopular and it's very obvious. And if you want more Republicans in office, you can't act like this. Like I think they're blowing up the party over this. That's my feeling. I'm saying this with love. I'm like, you I'm a pretty vote that much. But when I vote, it's Republican, you know, it's true. They voted for America. I worked for vote for this. No, yeah, absolutely. And think about the, there's a, on one end, it's the America first aspect that's free to support because this is America last in every possible way. And on the endless war front, every campaign, every winning presidential candidate said we're not going to get, we're trying to avoid these wars and they don't follow through. And yet we're not funding this, this disaster. And Gaza. But you said, do you think that those, I mean, estimates, fair, we don't know if people have been killed in Gaza. No one's allowed to find out. Yeah, the 60K is definitely what the real number is in Gaza. I've read other folks who've like give their estimates and it's always 100,000 up 200,000 even more. So the numbers that I've seen on the estimate scale of are perfect. You are in intelligences have good estimates on this. I would imagine, but those haven't percolated a matter of the state department at your level anyway. Yeah, no, absolutely not. And I wish we could be discussing this. And I'm also horrified not just from the sheer numbers of killed. It's the lingering psychological factor of these poor civilians, like children who've lost limbs, children who lost parents who the damage is going to be decades and decades long. For sure. And there will be radicalism, you know, and probably including violence. And I just pray it's not directed against the United States, but I fear that it will be. But that leaves what 2 million people still in Gaza, Palestinians, mostly Muslim, but also Christians. What happens to them? I just keep wondering what happens to them. The policy, the comments, the policies have always shown a certain disdain. Like, oh, we'll pay them off, try them to move out. They're not actually starving. It's all these. They're not only are they getting bombed and lose their homes and their fame embers. They're being like thrown around like this annoyance. And it's horrible. But just based on the reporting, it looks like we are trying to push them out to a different country. Every two months, there's a new rumor. Seems like we're talking to these other countries in Africa. The US government is? Well, though, the depends on each specific case, there has been a reporting that Israel is trying to do this on their own. And if we're involved and there's also been some reporting on whether our own government officials have spoken with like the living government as well. So do you think it's possible that US government officials have talked to foreign governments about accepting the population of Gaza as refugees? Do you think that's possible? Yes. Do you think it's that happened? I, it's probable. That's disgusting. I mean, that's just like shocking to me. I don't want to believe that could be true. And why are we doing that? And we have to do with this. Right. And it's always about our diplomatic power. Like, Israel's, why powers limited? But who can get these objectives done? We can. So that's why in our last act is a superpower. Yeah. That's why these officials from MC Juice, are dangerous because they're, they're, connections being made. Right. Like you committed trial. Well, first of all, Mike Huckabee endorsing Dresden that, you know, I just refer you to the New Testament. That is not, that is not permitted for Christians to be in favor of that. Just, it's just not even close. So I don't know why I know Huckabee. I've always liked him. I don't know what in the world. If he actually said that, I don't know what he was thinking. I'm going to look it up the second. We get off this interview. But that's really shocking to me that he would say something like that. And in general, there's been a core thing I think of people watching the stuff, celebrating page attacks and people getting their dicks blown off stuff. I mean, like, why would we celebrate that? Yeah. But Ben Shapiro was on there jumping up and down with Glee when that happened. So it's, it's a, it's a indictment of like our soul. Why are, why do we lose this ability to empathize? If you think it's thrilling that a country would indiscriminately detonate explosives in people's pockets, or they don't know who's holding those things actually, they don't know who's standing next to them. If you think that's great, you know, children died. Oh, I know. Uh, you know, anyway, I, I'm really sickened by it. And I'm infuriated by the requirement to celebrate it. Right. Why are we in this, in this era of, of like, celebrating these violent attacks and celebrating a new weapon that comes out. But each time there's a diplomatic endeavor to end a war, it's so controversial and so heavy and people, um, it's sold to people in such a negative way. So that, that dichotomy is, is, is a true problem where as empires die, people go crazy. This is one of the things that's pretty consistent through history. They lose their sense of reality and they become violent violence worshippers. And I just hate to see it happening to this country that I love so much and that I'm never leaving. But like me, this is really dark. Yeah, so dark. It is dark. So what, um, so you don't know bottom line, what the plan is for the population of Gaza or the West Bank. Yeah, I do know they cut my line on force of placement. And now there's new reporting on them, moving them out of Gaza. So it's not headed into the right direction. So America is for force displacement. I think this country was found out if you will be, so bonkers. Okay. Last question. What was your firing like? Um, do they explain to you why you were being let go? Never explain anything to me. I, and technically I heard that NEA, my bureau near Sniffers, technically never heard either. So really came from up top. So very odd. I did ask you about that line. That's the only hint that we have. Um, look, the state department with all the issues that it has does have amazing patriotic Americans working there every day. I worked with them. Um, they're, they're trying their best. They're, they're doing their work. They're smart. And I, I miss working with them. I do, uh, I was someone that was well established in the building with political appointees and civil servants and, and they just pull the rug out of, from under me, out of the blue over what I explained to you earlier, which was pretty basic stuff. And, uh, on the Sunday, I believe it was August 17th, lost access. And then I got a text from a contractor. Let me know. Did you call, have you called David Milstein to ask what happened? I have not, I have not. Um, maybe we should call him after this. Good. Very good. Look, this whole situation was so unexpected. I was living my life, uh, going to work every single day. There are five days a week. I was doing a lot of overtime, uh, by drafted tweets that Secretary Rubio put out, including I was up at 11 p.m. at 12 a.m. on the horrific killing of the two Israeli diplomats. I was the one who was up in the middle of the night, drafting a tweet for that to come out. Do one's rumored in the US. Correct. Yeah. So I was there for all these, these moments and working alongside people with different political backgrounds and, uh, to know that these, these folks just without discussing with me, without getting a no me without talking to me, uh, saw those lines and they were like, um, and, uh, it's, it's awful and it just in the office itself, it just puts us chilling effect for everybody, you know? So I, I will, I will miss those colleagues, but they're good people. They're going to, I mean, the interest of the United States should be the beginning and the end of the concern of the state department. Yep. Period. Absolutely. So I appreciate your taking the time to do this. Thank you. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. On another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. But we did do that on YouTube. We think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.