the general gonna experience. It's nerve-wracking, man, because the people that have that kind of money and that kind of power, they want to maintain that position and they want to maintain that influence over people and the best way to maintain it is to like tighten down on what people are allowed to do. Yeah. Well, they have to comply. I mean, the CEO of Pfizer, there was a famous speech where he's giving, we're talking about a pill that you would have to take that sends off a signal to show that you've taken it. And he says, imagine the compliance. This is what he says. Yeah. Have you seen any other? No. Let's find that. Find where he says that because it's so bonkers, like compliance. Like, oh, my God. You know, it's comply. Yeah. You're making people that you see a force, that word, that term just the thought process behind that statement is so great. And courage would be better. Comply like you have no choice. Here it says. It says, edited to cut important context. CEO, Albert Bora explains. So what is the actual, but it's okay. Says the video discussing ingestible pills with sensors has gone viral, falsely presented as an interview from 2022 and edited to cut out important context. One Twitter user shared the clip on May 20 here commenting Pfizer CEO, Albert Bora explains Pfizer's new tech to Davos crowd, ingestible pills, a pill with a tiny chip to send a wireless signal to relevant authorities when the pharmaceutical has been digested. Imagine the compliance. He says now, is that really what he said? See. So what does he really say? Yeah, there's what's cut out if he says that. See, this is one of those things where you got to wonder if they're trying to gaslight you with the headline. He commented on biological sensors during a conversation on general technological advances in healthcare and pharmaceuticals. So what does he said in response to a question from the audience, ideas to engage patient. He calls the research and field fascinating. He says that there's already a pill approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. He moves on to describe this pill and where the clip version seen on social media begins and he later concludes, but of course, they'll be an initial cost and someone needs to invest. Bora was not talking about a Pfizer drug or technology, rather who's describing a billify my site, a drug with a digital ingestion traction system. Right. So that is it. Okay, for the treatment of schizophrenia, acute treatment of manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar disorder and for use as an add on treatment for depression adults. So he was talking about a different pit, but he was talking about a pill with a sensor. But the point is that is true. So they could say well as for this skits of friend, you know, man. So that's why they that's how they got it approved. But now it's out there. Right. Well, now it's an actual technology. And if they can mandate a medication that you have to take. So they're something else. They make it sound good by oh, that maybe that would help those people, but now it can be used on everybody. Yeah. So here it says that. So it basically is a biological chip that is in the tablet. And once you take the tablet and it dissolves in your stomach, it sends a signal that you took the tablet. So imagine the applications of that compliance. Okay. So did he say imagine the applications of that compliance and then they edited to say imagine the compliance. That's what it's saying. Let's see him say it. Here's here's where the video. Yeah, let's play the video and then let's play the video or be this one. It is basically biological chip that it is in the tablet. And once you take the tablet and dissolves into your stomach, sends a signal that you took the tablet. So imagine the applications of that compliance. They sort of competence to know that the medicines that patients should take, they do take them. It is fascinating what happens in this field. That doesn't come from me. If that's what you really said. But he's saying so if you have a schizophrenic patient, they have to take it. They to know that they did or didn't take their medicine like they're supposed to. Yeah. But yeah, you could use that now on anything then. You could use on anything. Once they get it down the whatever approved, then it's there. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. And once it's been applied before, they can apply it to other things. And if they can mandate that everybody takes a medication, they have it. For health and safety. Especially if you have an application. Now if you have an application, this World Health Organization digital passport, it sends a signal to your passport. And if you don't, you're not going anywhere. And they just say it's for health and safety. It's all bonkers. Yeah. And the fucking headline that they had to that is like, yeah, that's that thing. that they know that gas. We were reading this thing about Al Pacino. There's this whole article and the type of the article is Al Pacino. Feels like it reports are that Al Pacino felt like the girl hood, winged him and this and that. And then below that in small letters, after we talked to him, that's not true. So the head, so look at this, look at this, check out this fucking. Here we'll go back. Look at this. So this is a really special coming at this time. Al Pacino 83, break silence to celebrate 29 year old girlfriend pregnancy after claims. He demanded paternity tests because she hoodwinked him. The actor revealed he and his girlfriend, Nure Al Fala. We're expecting last week. Initial reports claim that Al was not pleased over the news. Sources told Daily Mail that wasn't true, which he has now confirmed. Then why is it a fucking firm? It's not true. It's still in the headline. Right. That's in little tiny letters. Yeah. Below the big headline that says, break silence to celebrate 29 year old girlfriends pregnancy after claims that he demanded paternity tests because she hoodwinked him. Yeah. Claims. Claims. By who? Yeah. But that's a headline. So they were allowed to do that just like they were allowed in that last headline. That's what drives me crazy. So what was the last headline go back? I sort understand this one because there were a bunch of claims that he was mad. And they're like, he's, he's, he's, no, no, no, no. Not the oppochino one go back to the other headline, the Borla one. What was the headline? Did this credit? Yeah. And says that it's five or two. Check. Yeah. That's right there. And that's not Pfizer's tech is the problem. Okay. So it's, but it's new tech. Yeah. And it's, but it's still a CEO of Pfizer. It's a world economic forum. It was also in 2018 and they're saying that this was new and a year ago. Well, it's not even 2018. It's still crazy. Yeah, it is. It's still crazy. And I get it that it was pre pandemic. So it's a different thing. And in application for schizophrenia, for a friend, I understand that as well. I know people that are schizophrenic and I know people that go off their medication and lose their fucking mind. And it's dangerous. It's weird. They would probably when Brody was off his medication, right? There was a moment when Brody was around the store. We used office medication and people were trying to get him back on it. And, you know, he was really struggling. And I've seen it, you know, so if you had a situation like that or you can ensure that Brody was taking his medication, maybe Brody would still be with us. I don't know. But maybe maybe he'll be okay. Maybe. But it's also human being. And like maybe you should just try to get someone to be with him and make sure he takes his medication rather than forcing a new technology down the throats of everyone for a very small percentage of people that absolutely have to take medication or they go crazy. Because most people don't have to do that. Right. So to have that kind of tech available, that freaks me out.