The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hey Joe nice to meet you this is you person finally. Yeah, man. It's uh, what has it been like for you? The Babylon B rise and attack and all the chaos When did you guys start? 2016 what was the impetus? The impetus was uh, nobody was doing it You know, there's nobody this like doing satirical comedy from like a conservative perspective, I guess Adam Ford's the guy that founded it and uh, and It just I mean I don't know there was a void there You know, but he was filling that void so he's like he publishes this site Using like a WordPress template and like puts out some articles and they go viral so quick like within two months He's getting millions of visits so I don't know He just had a sense that like somebody you know, there's so much comedy like the left dominated comedy. They were just dominating it Nobody was no cancer to that um It's a good question. I mean So everything like all of these institutions the instant like you know the media Education institutions corporations all these things. They're all dominated by the left so Comedians though. I mean as you know, there's been this like there's been this opportunity this big opportunity to kind of like step in and provide Comedy that makes jokes that the left isn't willing to make and so they were dominating for a while But now I think things have shifted because you've got all these rules about what you can't and can't joke about and the people who are willing to make jokes That kind of like sidestep those rules They're you know, they're meeting a demand Yeah, the meme space though has always been very right wing in a lot of ways because it's like the thing to make fun of because Since the media has been so dominated by the left whenever there's like a narrative that just gets pushed like that Sort of ignores logic and ignores reality. There's like a thing that happens where someone goes Yeah, but what about this and like that has been like the meme space like memes have always been like very funny Like some of the really funny Trump memes and some of the very funny anti-biden memes and covid memes They were kind of like on that vein. Yeah Well, you know, yeah when you've got a when you've got a narrative that's being advanced and it's being pushed on everybody You know like I don't know I my personal take on it is that comedians job is to like poke holes in it You know, yeah try to like find its weak spots try to find like the hypocrisy try to expose whatever absurdities They're like the narrative you can't just buy the narrative as it is you got to challenge it some way Comedy is a great way to do that So I don't know I think comedy that challenges the narrative is is key And it's like that's what people are gonna find funny because it's like you're trying to hold people in positions of power accountable That's like that is punching up right that's what comedy is supposed to do Hold a lot of these supposed to be funny this whole punching up, you know when people cheer by the way Cheers. Cheers. Dude my favorite far right extremist Who's never voted Republican? this The that It's like this whole idea of like punching up or punching down things are just supposed to be funny one of the best bits of all time Is Sam kennison's bit about starving people in Africa? And it's the most punching down bit in the history of comedy Means literally talking about starving children right about him sitting at home You know how triny enjoy his dinner and Sally Fields is on TV Asking him to donate money to starving kids and he's like why don't you you're right there Right, you know like this the whole bit watching send someone like me who says hey we just came 5,000 miles with your food it occurred to us there wouldn't be world hunger if you people would live or the food I love it. It's so good desert right. I mean it's it's a great bit and it's totally punching down Well, I mean so when I said that when I said you know we're supposed to be punching up I'm saying that's what they say right not saying I agree with that. I don't even say that though Comments don't even say that no comics don't say that The people who are critical of us say that you know because that's I mean that's the reason we're in Twitter jail right now Supposedly we punched down. You know like we made a joke about somebody who's in a marginalized or a press class and it's considered hateful Condo well you called Rachel Levine the man of the year when she won the war She was she when the man of the year she's dominant. It's like it's that's like what a rigged game Like when Caitlin Jenner she was a woman for six months. She got a woman of the year. Right. What the fuck Imagine if you're a woman for 40 fucking years Dish bells an amazing joke about that But it's just the whole thing is it's these narratives. They get pushed They're they're they're bizarre in that like they're they force compliance like you can't have a nuance perspective You can't look at it. You can't you can't if you can't make fun of This idea that someone could be a woman for six months and then when women of the year Right, like what the fuck are you talking about? You have to be able to make fun I mean so what happened was USA today did a story about how they named Several women of the year and Rachel Levine was one of them so Rachel. He was named as a you know transgender Health Admiral in the Biden administration and they named Rachel Levine one of their picks for women They had several that they picked for women of the year so there were women and then there was you know transgender and And we did a joke about how Rachel Levine was our pick for man of the year Right, and you know that was considered misgendering by by Twitter's policy, which is hateful conduct under there And so unless you delete that you guys are in Twitter jail unless and until we click delete on that tweet Yeah, we're in Twitter jail and well and this is the problem It's like the the delete button says you know you have to acknowledge that you engaged in hateful conduct when you when you click delete And I'm like the reason I refuse to click the buttons because I don't agree that I engage in if well first of all I agree with you, you know go back to what you said a moment ago like Comedy should be funny right right like when when we're sitting there trying to think of jokes like the thing that should be going Through our head is is this funny that's the question we should be asking ourselves right is this funny not is it Is it targeted at somebody who views themselves as marginalized or oppressed and they're gonna come after me and try to destroy my life and career Because if I'm trying to think in those terms or or if I'm thinking in the terms of I'm up here They're down here Shouldn't joke about those people. They're beneath me You know like that's so condescending to have that thought if I was in a marginalized community if I put my if I try to put myself in the shoes of Somebody who's considered marginalized today. I wouldn't want anybody trying to protect me from jokes like I can't handle it Like my skin is too thin to handle a joke You know like that's condescending too, but it's that thing where you know my friend Morgan Murphy is kicked off Twitter forever too Because she got in some sort of a debate. I think I don't remember who it was about but she was basically her She's a feminist and her problem was that transgender women are entering into these female spaces and sort of dominating them with these almost like male perspectives on female issues and It pisses her off. She's like we have to acknowledge that women are a real thing And then people were like, you know, but this is a real woman She's like a man is never a woman and she posted that on Twitter and they said, you know This is hate speech. This is your your whatever you're doing. You're What are your misgendering and so they band of her life forever? Well for that which is crazy the fucking Taliban is still on Twitter I know well, there's a you know, there's so many things that you can say and this is where it's weird The content moderation conversation is a big conversation that needs to be had when you're talking about like well What is what what should these platforms be concerned with when they're talking about content moderation? And you know In my mind and when you think of like section 230 and its provisions in the language that's in there And you know like what they get immunity for when they're engaging in content moderation It's like what's in view there is like lewd and indecent content, you know like things that wouldn't be appropriate in the actual physical town square um Death threats and things like that stuff that's like not even lawful speech. I mean obviously, you know, there's a there's a sure There's a place for like taking that kind of stuff down. Her ass like terrible harassment We like sending somebody somebody's address and telling them to go through that person I mean There's obviously things that should be moderated But what you see is so much of that stays in place Especially if it's coming it's aimed at the targets that are acceptable to to harass. Yeah I've been saying that's the right. Yeah So much that remains in place, but then opinions like okay, you see like You know like A family-friendly drag show that kids are like tipping these dancers and stuff like that And you call that grooming behavior You know now all of a sudden you're banned for that now the family-friendly drag show isn't considered Looting in decent. It's not that's not moderated So it's the criticism of it that gets moderated. Yeah, that's a little wild, but yeah, that's you know That's the that's the forced conformity. It's the forced affirmation. You know this idea Why if you know Twitter can have whatever policy they want for content moderation delete my tweet If you don't like it take it down, you know like they can delete it Why do I have to delete it and say that I acknowledge that I engage in hateful conduct? It does not go like a step beyond just content moderation Or sense their ideas that if you delete it they're giving you the power to come back Like just follow the rules and you can come back and they're giving you a doorway Instead of just banning you forever. They're saying look we we have an option for you to come back I mean, but they could easily do that they could delete the tweet and say just don't do it again You know that give me a warning and say why we've got you to leave it's already up You're already said what you wanted to say And this way you could say more shit now You know what I mean? It's like I don't think we would last much I think it'd be only a matter of time before we had another one and that you know a permanent suspension or something like that Well, you see what else Alex Baronson. Yeah, he got reinstalled I know that's kind of a new in court. That's a new precedent Yeah, it's fascinating because he was correct. Yeah, and now when you look at the data and cook because basically What he was saying has all been proven in terms of studies and scientific Whatever, you know data that has been accumulated over the course of the last two years on COVID vaccines and lockdowns and all these different things. He was correct. Right and It's been found out now that the White House actively Contacted Twitter and tried to get him banned and now he's gonna see the White House right which is wild Which is one of the arguments that people on the right make that these are not private companies just don't just engaging in regular These are like they become state actors Yeah, when you have the government behind them saying okay, it'd be unconstitutional for us to block this speech herself But we can outsource it to this privately owned third party and they can do it. They can't do that Still considered government censorship that become that's where it becomes like a first amendment issue beyond just you know Saying these are private companies that can do whatever they want Right like what happened with the hundred-body laptop thing right that is an egregious Assault on reality. Yeah, I mean that that we deserve to have all the information at our disposal Right terms of like what is actually going on? What has been done is their evidence of corruption and if there's evidence of corruption and it's Sensored by a company that is obviously not just in in contact with the current administration and you know the previous democratic party, but it's also What they're doing is working with them? They're they're doing their bidding And that's where it gets really weird because it is so biased in one perspective Right and they're not just Objectively disseminating information based on whether or not it's been proven to be true No, they're suppressing information. That's true because it it fucks with what they their desired result was get Trump out of office Right and that collusion between the government and these private companies ultimately that's going to end up coming back to bite them Because they're not going to be able to moderate So there's going to be some kind of pushback on that there's going to be some kind of legal change or something Yeah, but I mean like to to answer more directly that question like why we haven't deleted that joke The ji- we haven't tweeted since March right we have 1.5 million followers We can't reach on Twitter. We haven't tweeted since March. Why not just delete the joke well For one thing I said we wouldn't but I mean the main reason is because I don't believe That the truth is hate speech. I don't I don't want to play along with this game that like you know They bake if you go to the hateful conduct policy on Twitter's website you pull up the hateful conduct policy It starts out with like this ringing tribute to free expression right they say that Twitter is supposed to be a platform for free expression without barriers Those are exact words they say without barriers and then you like scroll down in a hateful conduct policy and it's talking about like Misgendering and dead naming and all these things the dead name ones wild. It's wild. I mean you got to go back and rewrite history Virginia won the Olympics like you say Bruce Jenner right like that Now if you go to the Wikipedia page about that it probably says Caitlin right says Caitlin want it You got to go back and rewrite that but I just don't want to go along with a system where you know we're They say on the what they what they offer you as a platform for free expression But then in reality and it's supposed to be without barriers But then in reality they have these ideological terms that you have to agree to and so They're making it especially from like a comedians perspective You know when I talk about like poking holes in the popular narrative They're rigging the system so you can only affirm the narrative You have to affirm it like we try to poke we try to speak a truth there We try to basically say hey look This is a male person and if you consult your dictionary today It might change tomorrow But if you consult your dictionary today like a man is an adult human male Like there's true this joke has like a grain of truth to it and you're not allowed to say that on twitter So like I don't know I feel like it's a protest It's like I look I think you should be able to say that to and to make for And you shouldn't bake into your terms that to and to make five and you have to say that or else you can't tweet on this platform It's like I don't want to be on a platform like that I'd rather stand up and say you know look we're not going along with that And did you guys have the same post on Instagram? We did yeah didn't hit the Instagram Interested and Facebook? Yeah, we didn't get on Facebook for that one either So just Twitter. It's so is Twitter the worst with that stuff then? No Twitter's the one that's forcing us to delete something ourselves I mean like Instagram is you know Instagram Facebook We've had plenty of issues with them with like getting flagged for like inciting violence with a stupid joke Which is a violent situation? What was the joke? Uh, we did a joke about how During Amy Coney Barrett's confirmation hearings We did a Monty Python joke about how she was being compared to a duct to determine whether or not she was a witch And then the in the caption said like we must burn her And that was and that was like we said we must burn her so like the the automated system flagged that is like a threat And then we appealed it and somebody manually reviewed it and upheld the ruling that it was incitement to violence But like this is a Monty Python joke. This is crazy But we've had that stuff happen on all those it's it happens everywhere It's just Twitter is the one that's like going a step beyond and saying you have to acknowledge You did something wrong and delete this and that's where it's like a little bit different I think you guys getting banned from Twitter was one of the influences that led Elon to want to purchase Twitter Um, he hasn't talked about it publicly, but I know he had a real issue with it I mean, I think uh, I think it's one of them Yeah, I mean I wouldn't say and I'm never taking credit for it like oh we are the reason that must because some people have said that You know like oh he did this to save the Babylon be I don't think Elon Musk is putting tens of billions of dollars on the line to try to save The Babylon be but but I think I think he's genuinely concerned about speech. You know He's called Twitter the de facto town square. I think he's right I mean I think these platforms are the town square and if free speech doesn't exist in the town square then Something's got to be done about that so um, I don't know. I think that it factored in It's one of those things is like okay the Babylon be can't even make jokes on this platform like this is not a free speech platform What's not as simple as a private company anymore? It used to be it's a private company They have their own rules But when it's the number one platform for distributing information by Average citizens, which is what it is right. It's a little bigger than that and I don't know what the response to that I don't think the response to that is let's get the government involved and regulate it But I think there there's a responsibility that they have and this is what Elon believes that they have a responsibility to you know, he's a free speech Absolutely, this is what you guys are because it is what they are. They are the town square right you have a responsibility to Allow everyone to communicate Otherwise you create this divisive Environment where it just divides the country even further without the ability to discuss things like Without the ability for people to criticize that post that you guys made about Rachel Levine or Laugh about it or make other memes or all these different things without that ability Then you're gonna get more people angry more people to feel isolated disenfranchised and it creates a Problem that we already have it accelerates it throws gasoline on a problem We already have and that problem is this country is divided in a lot of ways and it's divided in a lot of ways because of the narratives The media pushes the fact that the vast majority of mainstream news in media is leaning to the left and the ones that are on the right You know, it's like What do they have they had OAN news and newsmax and it's just not that effective? They're not that they're just too goofy and so they were too easily criticized They're goofy. The people that were on there were not like the best Representations we're not talking about Ben Shapiro. We're not talking about you know Intelligent right wing punt and Matt Walsh these guys who are intelligent right wing pundits and and Influencers that that's not what it was these guys were goofy and you know, it's it's easy to criticize It's easy to to say oh we need to shut that down That's the worst thing you can do for everybody The worst thing you do for everybody is to make an echo chamber and that's essentially what they're With their policies are doing well and you end up with echo chambers on both sides because you have the people the people who leave and go to like another platform They're just talking amongst themselves Because nobody like left of center came with them They're not interested in a free speech platform where you can where like conservatives can speak freely and give their opinions and and say The word groomer you know, they don't want to be on a platform where that's allowed now if they go to end up in their own Yeah, they banned it. Yeah, it was banned it All the all the big tech companies in concert all at the same time It started I think it started on reddit so like reddit stopped allowing you to say it called The ones kind of Jamie wasn't it's not is it in certain rooms? They've banned the term groomer because what about heterosexual groomers? What about men who go after like really young girls and befriend them and groom them because that's real Yeah, that's a real and it's always been disgusting. Well, it's all real, but I mean the The term itself is now designated a slur. How is that possible? I just don't understand why you would throw the baby out with the bathwater The band okay groomer guy James on this James and Twitter has a ban on college transgender people groomers. Oh But what about groomers that are transgender? What if they're real? I mean there are people that groom people That's a thing well, okay So if we're talking about like a family like a family-friendly drag show right like how's that possible? The drag how do those terms even work together? You know, it's a family-poor and theater, but but it's not a transgender person that's performing It's usually like a drag queen is typically a gay man whose dressed as a woman. He's not necessarily Transgender he doesn't identify as a woman. He's just that's the show is to dress like a woman right? That's what drag is it's not it's not transgender So if you consider sometimes they do consider themselves sometimes they do But how would you know if you're just if you're just watching this on Twitter and you see it and you say I think that's grooming you're not necessarily targeting a transgender person you don't even know if they're transgender for all You know, it's a for all you know, it's a straight man who's who's been hired to do to do this drag performance You don't know but it seems like a piece of duct tape over a leaky damn To say that you have to ban the word groomer. Right. It seems so crazy I just can't because that's that term To all not ever use that term for trans people, but what about a trans person that is engaging and grooming behavior Right, that's that that look I'm sure That the vast majority of trans people do not support pedophilia right so if someone is a pedophile but also trans Wouldn't it behoove them wouldn't it help their cause to like say like this is not good? This is this is bad. This is not what we want. We don't want people like this connected with us Yeah, it thinks so. Yeah, you would think so. I Don't know. I mean as far as like taking it to the point where you ban this language It's not the answer. I think that I think the answer is okay Look, you know if there's if there's a huge swath of the population has a problem with this With this behavior and look I can speak for myself I can tell you why I think when I when I use the word groomer if I use it in a tweet I'm referring to behavior Okay, I'm like it's a criticism about somebody's behavior around kids Right it has nothing to do with that person's identity or like who they sleep with or the color of their skin Right. It's not targeted at a person for their identity And we can flate these things. I think that I think so much You know with the with the left's kind of heavy-handed censorship They do a lot of this conflating where they take criticism of behaviors and treat it as criticism of Identities right and people it's not the same thing It's not and you have to be allowed to criticize behavior because there's genuinely is like you said real bad behavior That actually harms people and we're not allowed to talk about it. Well, that's the problem also when they have this sort of blanket Free pass for people who are trans where you're finding people that are Sexual abusers with a long history of being sexual abusers like people that have literally been incarcerated for various sexual offense sexual assault and and these people are going into women's locker rooms and saying that they're trans now and pulling their dicks out and you know there are a lot of people that just genuinely are transgender people that would like to use a woman's locker room but there's also people that are They're sick. There's something wrong with them and these people Do harass women and sexually assault women and you're giving them access to women in a very vulnerable place with no protection for them at all And that was you know that LA case where the massage The massage place. Yeah. Yeah, that was the case that person had a history Pull up that that story They were just exposing themselves, right? Yeah, I think there was a mother in there with like a teenage daughter Exactly. Yeah, and they was a way right. Yes Was it envy massage followers? I was called but that person who did it had a record I mean it wasn't it was pretty clear that this person had already engaged in some seriously problematic behavior Right. Yeah, but even if they haven't in a context like that where you've got like a biologically male person. Yes And a women's space like that and a mother's in there with her child It's like you know regardless of how that person identifies It's not an attack on them to say hey look, you know like I don't want my daughter seeing a naked man's body in the locker room And so that's you know stuff conversation when you're when you're talking about like that person may not be in a fender of some kind They may not be trying to put anyone in an uncomfortable situation But you know you still have the concerns. It's the same thing like with sports too Well some people might not be but some people definitely are And some people have a history of it and decent exposure child charges filed against trans woman over LA spy and so okay So now they've They this is this is 2021 But what what did the person did something in the past? They have a history of this See if we can find that This person I'm 99 percent. They're gonna please said she has a criminal history. Yes She's a registered sex offender Okay, Marajr has been a registered sex offender since 2006 So that's 16 fucking years of being a registered sex offender as a result of convictions for in decent exposure in 2002 and 2003 So 20 fucking years Wow, this is this is crazy because you're giving someone who is a sex offender Access to women where they can do the exact same thing where they were arrested for and now they're They're celebrated and you're gonna have people protest for them. Right. It's fucking crazy We now trial on seven counts of in decent exposure that were first filed in 2019 according to court records After the video legend someone exposed himself went viral the spa became the target of right wing demonstrations Well, I bet a lot of those people weren't right wing they're probably just fucking parents Which many chided as transphobic many did oh the you got sources many what kind of they write these things What is this LA Times fucking of course Um Became the target of right wing demonstrations of many chid is transphobic after extremist groups such as proud boys See see what they're doing here? They just they're shit in the punch bowl by saying Transphobic extremist groups proud boys that can connect in them all together. Yeah Um, the recording which surfaced in late June showed an irate customer arguing with employees After she said she had been she had seen a customer with a penis in an area That's reserved for women. The Wilshire Boulevard Facility has some gender separated areas with changing rooms and jacuzzis now Those what they'll try to do and this is the thing in it all goes it all goes back to this punching down conversation with comedy It's like we can't joke about this situation. You can't joke about it because It'll be perceived as the the target of the joke is a marginalized person Right in truth and this is that this is the truth This is the reality and we all need to start recognizing it the people that you're not allowed to joke about or else you lose your career You get canceled you get banned from the public square those people have tremendous amounts of power They have tremendous it's scary power honestly if you can't even joke about somebody or you get penalized and punished and you could potentially lose your job Then who's marginalized who's oppressed like who's who's on the outside there who's having to like Hold back what they really think and feel and silence themselves and like do the tyrants work for him by doing by engaging in self-censorship You actually have a situation where it's the exact opposite of what they say the people who are who have a problem with this are the ones Who in the people who are supposedly in the position of power are the ones who are most vulnerable in the ones who are most likely to have all the powers that be Destroying their lives. I think we're in the middle of the fog of war It's like a fog of war in this culture war and there's so much chaos going on and you know so many people are trying to score a victory for their perspective and their ideology that they're they're missing The big picture on this that free speech and freedom of speech and free expression have always been very important for sorting out What's right and what's wrong? And it's not good for anybody when you silence that if someone makes a joke on Twitter Like if you guys did something that was truly offensive You would lose audience members some people who supported you would not support you anymore Happens for every joke. That's but but that's supposed to be the free market. Right? That's supposed to be the free market of ideas like if your idea of suck people go all the day I don't like them well, then they can you do it by the way if we put out jokes that you don't like They're offending you. Yeah. You can block me. You can mute me like they we the platforms have given you the power to decide like who you Listen to right, but then you have to do platforming and like take me down They'll say that you're encouraging harassment right and so it's not just you but by putting it This is the escape clause right not just but you but by doing what you're doing you're encouraging others to attack Which is crazy right it's it's considered harmful. Well, I would I would take issue with that idea too I would say that you know so much of like this effort I think a lot of what these policies come down to is safety You know you're saying it would be harassment it would be intimidation It would be a call to violence or people could perceive it as a call to violence and these are you know these people might get attacked They might face some kind of you know Physical intimidation in the streets as a result of whatever so it's a it comes back to safety in it and I don't know in my in my view in my thinking You know, I think it's healthy to be willing to laugh at yourself I think it's healthy to be exposed to ideas that challenge you even harsh criticism. I think it's healthy to be exposed to harsh criticism jokes at your expense all of these things like Build character in a person You know like we have all of these methods in place now to like insulate people and keep them safe From ideas that might hurt them or jokes that might offend them. How is that really better for people? There was an interesting Unquished on that because the problem from ideas that might hurt them or jokes that might offend them. Is that really better for people? There was an interesting study that was done. Well, let me push down on that because the problem with the transgender thing is, this is the elephant in the room, is that it's easy to make fun of a very obvious male that wants to be a woman. You know, if you attack them or you are, shouldn't say attack, if you mock them and belittle them, like there's nothing they can do that turns them into the physical form of a female. Like if Rachel Levine was attacked in jokes or was someone criticized her or mocked her in jokes, it's not like fat shaming, right? Like there's an argument like fat shaming, like there's the reason why you're upset is because you've eaten yourself into this position. This is your own doing and you can actually not eat yourself out of it. You can exercise your way out of it and many, many, many people have done that. Right. But they've actually become smaller again. It's almost the same argument you would say about people who are handicapped. Like if you mock a handicapped person, they're not going to go, you know what? I shouldn't be handicapped anymore. This criticism is really getting me to the point where I'm going to be mobile. If they can't do anything about it, right? So she can't necessarily do anything about her physical appearance. And that is the argument. But it's a slippery slope. I'm just speaking in general terms about this idea that like doing everything that you can in your power to moderate speech to keep people safe from ideas or jokes that might hurt them is not necessarily helping them. In fact, I think it can be harmful. I was going to mention a study that was done by this nonprofit group in New York. And they were taking a look at the playgrounds in New York. And they were studying like whether or not they were trying to answer the question, whether or not the playgrounds have been made too safe. And they actually determined that they had. It was this weird thing. Like all these playgrounds had been like redone. So they had really cushy, soft flooring. And you couldn't really fall for many heights or get hurt on these playgrounds. And what they found was that it was actually teaching kids that like falling on the ground doesn't hurt you. And like that doesn't help kids. You know, they learn on the playground that they don't get hurt when they fall and then they go climb a tree over a sidewalk and fall and it does hurt and it shocks them. And they're learning the hard way. You know, now they got a broken arm. I think that some of the efforts, it's one of these things. It's just like a self-defeating thing. You know, you try to create a safe space, a safe environment. In some cases, I think you actually do more harm because you're protecting people from what? Like I said before, I mean, like being the target of a joke, like, I don't know. I don't want anybody telling me that like, oh, you can't joke about me because you might hurt me. I think that's offensive. That's more offensive than any joke you could tell to my face. Well, the other argument in your case with the Rachel Levine thing is that we're being forced to say something that some people don't agree with. Right. This is not like they're forcing this opinion as fact. And there's a narrative that a transgender person is a woman. And a lot of people support that, but a lot of people don't support that. Right. So there's a debate. There should be a debate. There should be a debate. There should be a debate. And if you want to say that that's the woman of the year, well, then it accelerates the debate because you're not, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're king your checker piece, you know, right? You're doing something where you're, you're not just saying that this is a woman, but this is the best woman we have, right? Which is kind of wild. That is kind of wild. That a male that becomes a female or becomes a woman is the best woman we have. Right. How offensive is that to women? It's, it's almost like like you better not criticize. We're going to go even further and further and further and we're going to take this to this crazy place where these are the best women we have. I, it does just such a tremendous distinction and difference between somebody going on Twitter and tweeting something like all trans people should die. Someone's going to take that clip out of context, by the way, and say that I said that. Sure, there are. But like, if somebody went on Twitter and said that, I think that's wrong. You shouldn't say it. Okay. You shouldn't say that about everybody. If you target some group out and say these people deserve to die, they should be put in gas chambers or something like that, right? That's horrible. But if you say, if you make a joke, a motorcyclist identifies as bicyclist and sets world record. Right. You know, you're making a joke to make a point. You know, you're so funny. And it's a funny joke. It went viral. Millions of times. And we're criticized for being like antagonistic towards these communities by making jokes like that. And it's not the same thing as saying like, it's not okay to be trans. What it's saying is it's not fair to the bicyclists to have a motorcyclist competing against them. Yes. And so what you're doing is carrying that transgender athletes versus biological females, which is what people do, which is a valid point that's not rooted in hate. Right. In fact, it's rooted in concern and compassion. When you try to say that this is a hateful position, I turn that on. I turn it around. I say, well, look, you know, like what about women? Like who's showing compassion and concern? Who's trying to protect women and keep their sports their sports? I mean, what is the percentage of people that are upsetting the far larger percentage that are biological females that are competing against this person to protect one person's feelings by affirming them as a woman. They're making all these other people victims of unfair athletic events. Right. Because that's what it is. You know, there's somebody just sent me this study that they've done studies on the performance of various people, whether it's trans people or not. And they, someone just sent me this, I'm going to send it to you, Jamie. You know, there's clearly some kind of advantage for some sports. And to say that any differently after you see what happens with like Leah Thomas or whoever the bicycle is, is and, you know, some other athletes sort of started to dominate in those spaces. It freaks biological females out. Because if you're a male and you've had testosterone pumping through your body most of your life, all of your life until like a couple of years ago. And then you transition. Like that's not the same as being someone who's never gone through puberty. It's not. That's why the swimming organization changed a threshold for transgender athletes, people that have not transitioned after 13 or 12. So avoiding males going through puberty where it would give the minimal amount of biological advantage. And people talk about outliers. They always want to talk about outliers. They always want to talk about someone who is like the elite of female athletes, the freak of the freaks. That's there's a giant difference between the elite and elite of females and the elite and the elite of males. Like if you're going to do this thing where you're going to the far ends of the spectrum, you got to go all the way. Because I don't give a fuck what the elite of the elite female boxer is. She will never be Mike Tyson. Mike Tyson in his prime was the elite of males at the far end of masculine. The elite of females at the far end of feminine. You have to look at the full spectrum. The elite of females, the full full end can't compete with non elite males. It's a giant difference. And when you add in someone like who's the elite of males, you get a chance to see the actual spectrum. Did we have a boys team beat like the US women's soccer team? Yes. Listen, you can take 10 high school boys in this country that are competing in track and field and they would be the greatest female athletes of all time. These aren't Olympians. These aren't world class runners that are in the world championships. These are just five to 10 high school boys. It's not fair. And that's all we're saying. It doesn't mean that you're not a woman. It doesn't mean I won't call you a her. It doesn't mean I won't say whatever name you want. I will. I don't give a fuck. I want you to be happy. The crazy thing is we're saying your name is no longer, it's sephina now. And you want to be a woman and you really believe it? I'm like, okay, I don't give a fuck dude. I think it's crazy though when women defend it. And I just saw a woman on Twitter the other day, she was saying, look, I'm 6'4 and 240 pounds. I would destroy other women in rugby. I guess she's in a country where rugby is popular. The people in the school are just like, you know what I'm saying? No. And this is nonsense. And I mean, no, I think she was 6'2". She's 6'2", she's not 6'4", 6'2", 2'40". And saying that she would dominate these women. I'm like, well, okay, I mean anybody who has a size advantage in contact sports, whether it's men against men or women against women. You have a size advantage. That's an advantage. It's literally what I just said. It's the outline. Exactly. And she's using herself as an example of that. And I said, you know, it's like humble bragging. Yeah, I don't know how you use that as a justification for saying, well therefore, it follows that we should allow men to come into women's sports and dominate them all including the 6'2", 240 woman. They're making a rational argument. They just haven't played it out to the end. The rational argument is that there are outliers and female spaces. There's outliers, there's athletic outliers, there's outliers in everything. Intelligence, hand-eye coordination, there's outliers. But there's outliers in males that far exceed the outliers of female. Kamala Harris just said we all have the same capacity. Did you see her say that? We all have the same capacity. I tried to realize it because, you know, equity says. Unless I'm mocking. Was she talking about economics or was she talking about life success? Opportunity, you know, we don't all start on equal footing, but we all have the same capacity. So if we put ourselves on equal footing, we'll all reach the same result. It'll be equity. Yeah, that doesn't work. But what we should do is make it so that it's not so hard for people who live in disenfranchised communities. That's a real concern that we're not addressing. And I think if you wanted to really give people the best chance in life, don't give them a fucked up childhood. Figure out a way to somehow or another revive communities and give them a sustainable future where you don't have a long history of gang violence and crime and drug sales and violence. We cannot deny that it's a big difference growing up in the suburbs of, you know, fucking the Hamptons versus growing up in Baltimore. It's a fucking giant difference. It's a huge difference. But you don't be level the playing field by like if someone can't see over the fence, you don't level the playing field by cutting out the legs of the person who can so that they both can't see. Yes. Yes. You're talking about a funny meme. Yeah. Yeah. It's great meme. It is good meme. But we can do the other thing and make this. This is what I always say about America. Wouldn't it be better if we had less losers, right? It'd be better for everybody. Well, what's the best way to get less losers? The best way to get less losers is to help people get the fuck out of where they're at. And there's some people that just got a shit roll of the dice and a lot of conservative people don't want to recognize that. They don't want to talk about that. They always there's this narrative, this pull yourself up by your bootstraps. There's people that don't have fucking shoes. There's people that they got a terrible role of the dice. And by the time they're working and integrated into a system, they're 18 years old or whatever they're on, that's 18 years of a fucked life. And that can be fixed. Just like we have enough money to send $40 billion to Ukraine and 87,000 new IRS agents. You know what else we have money for? We have money to revitalize cities that are fucked and we've never done it. We don't know. But should that be done by the government or privately? And I would think that with a lot of conservatives who are often criticized for that mentality that, oh yeah, equality is just making sure everybody has the same opportunity. Nobody needs a leg up. These people should pull them up by their bootstraps. I do think that people generally speaking Christian conservatives are very compassionate and do a lot of charity work. Yes, they do. They do want charity work. And so they're willing to put their own time volunteering and donating money towards causes that help with those things. You look at like crisis pregnancy centers, for example, which Elizabeth Warren wants to shut down for some reason. I mean, these are helping women in need. And she wants to shut them down. And these are people who are volunteering their time, their resources, their money, to help people who are in a tough spot. And it's completely charity. It's kindness. It's love and compassion. But it's always, you know, always painted with a brush of, oh yeah, you know, you're on your own, we only care about children before they're born, not after they're born, you know. But I do think honestly an argument can be made that conservative Christians are the most charitable people there are. They're very charitable people. I think what the problem with someone like Elizabeth Warren's idea that you should shut down a place that has an ideology that millions and millions of people believe in, that life is sacred and that in that this is somehow an assault on a woman's right to choose whatever her decision may be. They're worried about other influencers. They're worried about pressure. You're not even allowing for choice if you shut down the alternative. You're right. What's the choice? You're right. I'm pretty absolute when it comes to that with not just free speech amongst every subject, not just amongst a woman's right to choose or abortion laws. And this idea that you can't have someone who is a Christian who talks to another person who's a Christian and maybe they were on the fence about something and you convince them to have a child and it's the best decision they have ever made in their life. And they love their kids so much. They couldn't imagine they were thinking about getting an abortion. That's real too. That's real too. There's also women who have been raped, who should not have to fucking carry some rapist baby. There's women who have been sexually assaulted before the age of 14. There's also hold on though. Hold on. There's not me. That's real too. We all have to agree. We have to agree on both of those things. There are also though. I'm not going to argue with you on that point, but I will say there are people who have been born of rape and are alive right now and are pro life. And they go around speaking talking about how I had a right to live and they will go out there and make an argument, a pro life case. And they're a born of a rape. You don't have a right to tell a 14 year old girl she has to carry a rapist baby. I'm just saying that's real too. Yeah. I understand what I'm saying. What I'm saying. You don't have the right to tell my 14 year old daughter she has to carry her rapist baby. You understand? Look at that woman in the eye who was the one of them. You understand that? That's a 14 year old child. And if you have a 14 year old child gets raped, you say that they have to carry that baby. I don't think too wrong is make it right. I don't think murder is an answer to, I don't think murder fixes a rape. What if we're talking about an abortion when the fetus literally it's like six weeks, four weeks, three days. What if you just turn positive just now, positive for pregnancy? I don't know. Well, I just disagree that whatever just happened, you can like draw a line on when you can't once a second. I don't think you draw a line. Like if you can, if someone came inside of someone and they cracked the egg and then bam, they took a plan B, you shouldn't do that. Uh, well, I mean, that's if it's preventing the pregnancy. No, no, it's a, it's a abortion. That's what plan B is. It makes your body abort the conceived pregnancy. So it does. Is it? I mean, I'm pretty sure. Let's Google it. I know that women used to do something similar that would take like a shit ton of birth control pills. It's the conception. It's different than if it's terminating. No, no, it's terminated. Yeah. I'm 90% sure it's terminating. I think it's after conception. That's the whole idea of that's why it's plan B. Plan A is don't get pregnant. Plan B. All I'm saying is it's real, it's real, but you're saying is real and those are tough situations. It's also real that sometimes these babies are born and they do and they grow up to be real people with feelings or alive. They're humans and they're pro life. Here, can we get click on that? So I get the full sentence because it seems like it keeps going. All right. The morning after pill is a type of emergency birth control contraception, emergency contraception is used to prevent pregnancy for women who've had unprotected sex or whose birth control method is failed. Protonement. Protonement pill. No, no, no, is intended for backup contraception only not as a primary method of birth control. Morning after pills contain either live on no, just draw gestural, live on no gestural or you lip, press, stall, acetate, a live on arrest, live on no arrest gestural. Live on, we want to try that. Try that word. Live on our gestural. Live on no gestural. Live on. Is available over the counter without a prescription, but put go to the part where we're reading and the synopsis that it. Yeah. Here it is right right there. Keep in mind the morning after pill is in the same as blah, blah, blah. It also known as RU 486 or the abortion. Oh, we have to do not end up in a few. It hasn't planted. They were primarily by delaying or preventing ovulation. Yeah, we're talking about I was talking about the different thing then. I was talking about RU 486. This drug terminates and established pregnancy, one which the fertilized egg has attached the uterine wall and has begun to develop. Okay. So forget about plan B. What about RU 486? It's the same question. The same question is if someone knows their pregnant or they test positive for pregnancy and they take a pill that can get rid of that like the day of you're against that. I would say I would lay it out like this. I would say it is wrong to intentionally kill an innocent human life, abortion intentionally kills an innocent human life. Therefore abortion is wrong. And I don't think any of the, I don't think any of the examples of like, oh, well, how developed is it? You know, can it, can it think? Is it conscious? Can it dream? Can it feel pain? So for you, it's the moment of consumption. If it's a human life, an indistinct human life that I think it's wrong to, to end its life. So you think that even once, do you think that the like once the conception happens, there's some sort of a miraculous event like at the very moment, like you could literally get to the point where the sperm cracks the egg. If you could scoop that egg out right there, would that be abortion? Well, I mean, at some point, you're going to have to say there was a magic moment that happened because you believe that we eventually become valuable humans, right? Well, listen, where's the, where's the moment where you think the magic happened? Let me tell you my perspective on this because I've said this multiple times, but it bears repeating. Um, I think abortion is a very human issue in that humans are, we're messy. Yeah. And it's a very messy issue. It's, it's, it's complicated. Bill Burr has a very good bit about it in his last comedy special, where he says, I agree with your right to choose, but it's also killing a baby. Right. You know, and it's a very well. I like that bit. It's a good fantasy. It's about the oven, you know, baking something in the oven. Yeah. When you talk about like someone who's at six months or nine months, it, when it gets, that gets crazy. That's like you're literally killing a baby. You're killing a baby that could exist outside the world. What if rape produced it and it's eight months old in the womb? It's a good question that when that's also what makes it a very, very messy, it's talk conversation. You know, there was a story that came out recently that, um, someone that said that this woman got in trouble for having an abortion, uh, because they got a hold of her Facebook messages. And then my wife sent me the actual story that the actual story was, it was a late term thing. She was trying to poison the baby. But the, the, the actual story is that she took medication online. She had a miscarriage because of that medication. She took stuff to kill her abortion, to, to start the abortion rather. And then heard him on buried the stillborn. Investigators seeking a warrant said they later learned her mother had bought the oral medication online to end her daughter's pregnancy. That information was gathered in part from pr, but find out how far along she was. Cause I think she was far along. And that's, you know, that's where it gets crazy. 23 weeks. Perhaps as long as 29 weeks. Wow. Oh, under Nebraska law abortions are legal up to 20 weeks. Yes, she was passed that threshold. How many months is that? That's six months. What's 29 weeks? That's really long. So I'm certainly aware we're at that's that, that, that area we're talking about where it's like this is this weird place where it's like, okay, that's a baby. Yeah. This is not like a clump of cells. That's an actual baby. Right. That's why it makes it such a crazy issue. I mean, when you get, when you start talking about harmful misinfer, I mean, I'm, I'm, as you can tell, I'm pro life. Yeah. And like so, you know, when we start talking about harmful misinformation in the types of things that are considered like that I say or that we tweet or the jokes that we make that are considered harmful misinformation. I'm like, well, what about, what about calling that baby a clump of cells? I think that's harmful misinformation. Cause then you're, you're encouraging people to kill it. Like it's nothing when it's actually a human life. It's a developing human life. I think abortion is healthcare. The way that rape is love making. If we want to, if we want to use rape as an example, I think it's, I think they're, they're opposites. And, and it's like a, these are euphemisms that we use. You know, we use the word healthcare. We're talking about a procedure that ends an innocent human life. And we're calling it healthcare. That's like calling rape love making. And this is why it's such a human issue because I see what you're saying. And I think that if Christianity had been any other religion other than, you know, I mean, Christianity is the most mocked religion. Like we, we want to look at religions with respect and dignity, whether it's Islam or Hinduism, we look at those with respect and dignity. And even if they have practices that we don't agree with, we sort of give them this leeway that it's part of their religion. Yeah. Christianity is the, the most openly easily mocked of all religions. It's, it's the most derived for whatever reason. Well, we tolerate a lot of it. Plus we also, you know, I think one of the things that was refreshing to me about the Babylon B before I got involved in the B when I saw it for the first time, I liked the self deprecating humor. I liked the willingness to go after our own and make fun of ourselves. I think that's really healthy. I think it's very, I, everybody. Look, like if we were, if we were able to laugh at ourselves, we wouldn't have people breaking down crying on TikTok because one of their students used the wrong pronouns for them. You know, like it's, we're so sensitive. We take ourselves so seriously. Like we can't even laugh ourselves anymore. We're standing up. Audience capture thing. We're running onto the stage and slapping comedians in the face when they tell jokes. We don't like different stories. That's a different story. But I think with the, these people, the, the thing about if you go on quick TikTok or Twitter or any kind of social media and you have a story like that, where it's really, you know, if you're a man with a beard and you have blue hair and you say you're a woman and you teach your calls, you're man or you're, your student rather calls, you're a man. And then you want to cry on TikTok. Can't you see why that's kind of an issue? And I know there's, you're going to get a shit ton of support from people that say you're right. And that's why people do it. They do it because they know that there's like a lot of love in, in, with that narrative. There's a lot of love you say that. So if you put that out there, you will get a lot of people supporting you. And, but then you also get a lot of people attacking you. Right. And then they have to smear those attackers and these hateful people, hateful comments and transphobic comments online because a male with a beard and blue hair who thinks he's a woman, because he decides he's a woman and is just fully biologically male and is in a class and a kid, a little kid, not me who I would definitely call a woman, whatever your name is, I'll call you whatever you want. Right. A fucking five year old doesn't understand this, right. Especially if this five year old grows up in a Christian household. Maybe they don't discuss these things. Maybe, but we don't respect that religion the way we respect other religions. It's very interesting because in this particular argument, and again, you and I are opposed in some ways about this. But I think what we agree with is that what you are trying to say is that all life is valuable. All life is valuable. The moment of conception is valuable and it's so important that we be this loving Christian community and I'd like to be a Christian to hold that view, by the way. And I think there are, there's plenty of pro life atheists who would say, you know, what I was saying, you guys ask Christians. That's how you think about it. Right. You guys, you follow your guidelines of your religion. And that's what's in your guidelines of your religion. It's not like you're pushing it onto the people. Right. But this is what you're promoting. What's what you're saying. Right. And it's the only thing that's fucked is the right to choose. That's the only thing that's fucked. To force that onto a kid is, to me, it's chaos. That's crazy. It doesn't make any sense. But what you're saying other than that is like life is valuable. Like yes, and people have almost where the victims of abortion and they weren't. They went on to become these amazing people. And we would have lost them. Sometimes it's a failed abortion. Like there's people who've survived like a saline abortion and they're damaged as a result of it, but they, but they lived and now they're born. They usually go on ironically enough to become pro life activists. Oh, that's crazy. Yeah. That's wild. But it makes sense. I mean, that's what made you wouldn't you be a pro life activist? Probably wouldn't be. Yeah. Of course you would be. It's crazy. Yeah. It's crazy how that works. Right. Yeah. It's just human beings are a weird fucking creature. You know, and this is one of the battlegrounds of the two ideologies. This is where they get together as with abortion. It's one of the most heated battlegrounds because the people that are pro life have this in many ways, it's a loving view that all life is sacred. Right? That would the best way to. Yeah. And then the people, the other light. End of it. See where this is going. If you tell a woman what she can and can't do and tell a woman what her decision is. If she decides that at two weeks, it's not a fetus. It's not a, it's not a baby. It's not a life. It's a clump of cells. Like if she makes that decision and she wants to move on with her life, that's that I don't think we should have the ability to tell someone what they can and can't do like that. But again, when it gets to like where it's six months, it gets kind of crazy. Right. Like that's that's actually a bit. I appreciate that you distinguish the two because I would say, you know, when you talk about outliers and sports, for example, those outliers being used as examples to try to shove an argument through. Right. That's done with abortion all the time. We use the, you use the example of the teenage girl who gets raped. Right. You know, like that. I mean, that's tragic. Genuinely tragic. Awful. Awful, terrible stuff. Super small percentage of abortion. I mean, most abortions are contraception. It's like, you know, they're used as like late a contraception. It's, I got pregnant. I don't want a baby. I'm getting rid of it. Right. That is the vast majority of abortions. And so, but yes, I do think though, what's interesting about this topic, because you know, you go back to like the harassment, intimidation, content, moderation, free speech, all of that stuff. You know, depending on where you land on this, you should, you can say almost whatever you want. After Roe v Wade was overturned, the kind of stuff that people were saying about the Supreme Court justices and how they should never know piece again in a, in a, harassment and intimidation, all of that's perfectly acceptable. Yeah, all of that stuff is evil. That's all that stuff is evil. All that stuff is evil showing up at their houses and, and essentially what they did was law is a complicated thing where you look at rulings and you go over decisions and you try to find out if it applies to what you're talking about right there. I don't understand the argument. Like I would have to go deep, deep, deep into the argument. But I think their position was that the way Roe v Wade was structured, it was not compliant with the law. Is that correct? Yeah. That a good way to describe it? I think so. Yeah. They weren't saying it. I mean, it's a mischaracterization to say that they like banned abortion. They didn't do that. They basically just said like the States can determine this. This is not like there's no, there is no federal protection. There was no constitutional right to it that's explicit in the constitution. That was inserted in there. And so they're saying we're going to toss that out and put it back to make your own abortion laws at the state level because this was imported into the imposed on the constitution, not derived from the constitution. That's essentially so for a conservative perspective, this would be a good thing because this would give people the ability to make their own decisions without having the federal government dictate something. Right. Yeah. And move to a state, you know, that has, you know, this way it's like not federally mandated. You can live in a state that's pro life. You can live in a state that's pro choice. You know, like you can make your own, that gives you more leeway too to decide where you know the problem people have with that is if they're stuck in a state where it used to be legal and now all of a sudden it's not. And there's no federal protection for it. So they can't get it. And so then you have someone who's forced into keeping their baby. And it's the same sort of argument that we were talking about before. Like if you're a young person, if you're a 20, 40, whatever. If it's your body and it's your choice to decide whether or not you keep that baby, if you take that away from them, they would have to move to another state. And they're like, you're giving people like a very complex scenario. That's it's a series of hoops that they have to jump through that didn't have to jump through before. I mean, laws are there to protect life. You know, I don't know. When you talk about your body, there's another body at stake at that point. Right. There's another body. But you think there's another body at stake instantly. Well, yeah, I mean, yeah, there's another for your belt. your body, there's another body at stake at that point. Right? There's another body. But you think there's another body at stake instantly. Well, yeah, I mean, yeah, there's another for developing one. Yeah, developing one. Yeah. It's size and location and degree of development is different, obviously, but that's true of a two year old from a 30 year old. I mean, we go through development for a very long period. Richard Dawkins once tweeted something about how a human embryo at whatever stage is in this language from a pig embryo. And Richard Dawkins said that. Yeah. Yeah. See if you can find that. And I was like, that's crazy because the human embryo will become a person. Yeah. How can you even say that? Doesn't it make any sense? Like that one is a human. One is a human. One is a human developing human and the other is a developing pig. Yeah. It's nonsense. It's nonsense. It's not an alien. It's not an animal. He must have been drinking. Yeah. Yeah. With respect to those meanings of human that are relevant to the more morality of abortion, any fetus is less human than an adult pig. That's silly. Wow. It's a human in development. That's even worse than I thought it was. Yeah. That's where I was more charitable with my description of that tweet. That's ridiculous. Oh, I'm tweet right now. Did you reply to it? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I was having a disagreement with this strange boy. I said, as I said, initially, it's certainly more human than a pig that is zero potential to be a person. Right. That's ridiculous. It's ridiculous statement. From a really smart guy. And I would say, I would just argue that the, and we can move on to a different topic if you want to get off this one. But I would say that it's a, it's a person with potential, not a potential person. That's more than I think you got it. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. No, I see what you're saying, man. And this is why people need to have chairs against her chairs. See what we just did. We had a peaceful disagreement. Yeah, we did. That's, that can be done. Respectful disagreement. But what we would agree on, I think 100% is that we should be able to have that debate. 100%. There should never be like terms of service on Twitter that say, you can't criticize abortion. You can't criticize transgender ideology. You can't joke about these things. Yeah. Not that abortion is a funny topic. It's not funny, but it is funny when Bill Burr talks about it. Yeah. Yeah. But it's only funny because Bill is a genius at like carving out a perspective on things. Right. You know? Right. He is. You know, what we agree on 100% is that there should be you should have a conversation. I don't think this effort, the content moderation effort, which is not aimed at the lute and the indecent, but it just opinions that the powers that we don't like. That effort is limiting what information we have access to, limiting what we can talk about. And we're supposed to be better informed as a result. You know, the arguments that they give are that we're somehow we're going to be better off because we don't have access to all this misinformation. We're better informed by hashing it out and talking through it and saying, we might learn something. We might change each other's minds by engaging and debate and you take that away from everybody. And I think it's the most valuable thing in the world. I think it's the reason that must go out and not because of the B must go out involved because he saw that that threat to speech and the in the free exchange of ideas because we're also going to have it. If you're not going to have it on Twitter or Facebook, we're also going to have it. Twitter is the problem in the format because think about what we you and I just did. this would be horribly frustrating to do through text. You would have to think about the exact wording you'd have to respond to what I said. And maybe you might insult me to get a little jabbing on me. But I insult you back. Get a little jabbing on you. And we're not in front of each other having a conversation like this. The beautiful thing about having a conversation with someone is that you're right there with them. And if you're a good person, you don't have to be an argument with someone. If you could have a conversation with someone without being in an argument with them, you can't. I supported my position. You supported your position. We just talked. And we can't be communicating. You're going to have a really hard time doing that on Twitter. Even someone who's like a genuine kind person, I find myself to be a genuinely kind person. I try myself. I try very hard to be a genuinely kind person. I really do. And so like if I'm engaging with people on Twitter, I don't want to get into one of those things. I don't want to like shit on them. I don't want to fuck with them. I'm not interested in it. I could do that at a conversation. I'm not sure if they shut it down. If I have to shut someone up, but I'm not engaged in that sport. But some people do. And the problem with that is that becomes sort of a way that you learn how to share ideas and communicate. And it favors being mean, it favors like taking things out of context, favors, dunking on people. All of that wouldn't happen if you talked to that person in real life. The problem is we're taking what's essentially a complex exchange of ideas and philosophies and interactions you do. And with words, you're also doing it with tone. Right. Looking at each other. Clearly I respect you. You're a really nice guy. I think you're very intelligent guy. I like talking to you. I don't want to get in an argument with you. I don't want to hurt your feelings. But I also want to say what I'm saying. And I want to see where we have middle ground and where we disagree. But in persons, the way to do that. we're designed for it. We're not designed for text. It's just bad for us. Yeah. Yeah. I get that. Plus, it's a preserved written record of how mean you just were to somebody. Exactly. Well, it's just, it doesn't fade away. It's there forever. It's not how weird it's not. Sometimes you say something. If we say something in a heated argument and I regret it, I can apologize to you. And it fades away. It goes away. Yes. It doesn't fade away when it's a written record on the internet. Well, it's just like having a conversation. Sometimes you say shit and you're like, oh, why did I say that the word? Because you're thinking out loud. And sometimes you're not good at it. You're just, you're running with words and you're trying to figure out how to structure them together. It doesn't always work out well. But when you do that on Twitter, the problem is now it's printed and published. It's there forever. Right. It's just like a dumb thing that you might have said yesterday in real life. It's not like this is something that you're like staking your intellectual reputation on. I've researched this thoroughly. And these are my opinion. No, you're just fucking tweeting something. But the problem with fucking tweeting something is it's a weird way to communicate. It's permanent record that is casual thought. Right. And that's a lot of it. And some people put more effort into it and they really like structure their tweets and those people are mentally ill and they should go find actual physical hobbies, a real human being should engage it. You don't spend an hour on each tweet. I don't think through it. Well, I mean, if you had something important to say, yes, there's nothing wrong with that. My point is that that's the problem is people do that all day long. That's their sport. Their sport is like getting in arguments and virtue signaling on Twitter. And I know people who have lost their fucking minds doing that. And I recognize that the same way I recognize when I was in high school, my cousin's friend started selling Coke. I noticed that guy was losing his fucking mind because he's doing Coke all the time. It's the same kind of thing. I know people that I'm friends with and I'll go to their Twitter page and they're insane now. All they're doing is tweeting about the Democrats, pro Democrat this pro, they're talking about obscure congressmen in South Dakota. Wild shit and their career has completely fallen apart. Their career has fallen apart. There's very few of them that are really successful that engage in this kind of constant all day long psycho behavior. It's all people that are literally flailing. They're mentally ill and they don't see that way. They see that somehow they're out there fighting a good fight like one tweeted a time. It's wild. It's madness. I do think that engaging in those forums, if you have something to say on issues that you think are important, rather than keeping it in and holding it to yourself for fear of whatever backlash you might get or getting sucked into an argument, I do think there's benefit to that. It's just in moderation, not taking it too far and making it like your thing is like you're on Twitter all day, debating people or trying to beat people over the head with whatever your political ideas are or your moral ideas or whatever. But advancing, trying to be interesting, what we do with the be, satire itself is like you're on one hand, you're just trying to make people laugh. But you're also trying to make them think. You're trying to engage the ideas of the day. The way that the onion defines satire and one of their encyclopedias or whatever is it's being a smart ass while saying it's for a higher purpose. That's funny because the satirists will tell you it's for a higher purpose. They'll tell you like we're trying to speak truth through these jokes. We're trying to tear down bad ideas and address them. And I think there's a benefit to that. I think it's why we want to be in the conversation is we don't have a mission statement at the Babylon be, but if we did, I would say it's to ridicule bad ideas, ridicule them. Did you know it deserved mockery? Did you know that Hayoka has ever heard that term? I do not. It's a Lakota term for a sacred clown. They had a character that was in their tribe that would make fun of everything. He'd make fun of the chief. He'd make fun of the best warriors. He'd make fun of the women. He'd make fun of the children. He'd make fun of everything. That's great. The tribe had a philosophy that could not be made fun of was bullshit. You had to find the holes in things. And one of the ways you would find the holes in things is to make fun of them. And then there was an important part of the tribe. And they were the sacred clown. And that's a Hayoka. And that's a satirist. That's the Babylon be. That's a good stand up. That's a lot of comedy. A lot of meme comedy is coming from that perspective. They're mocking something that is available to be mocked. There's some things that are not available to me mocked. Like horrific murder of a good person. It's not available to be mocked. We all agree because we don't want that happening and this is not something we support as a society. But when it gets down to debatable ideas, then you've got to find out how mockable is that debatable idea. And when it comes to Rachel Levine winning Woman of the Year, that's pretty fucking mockable. It's mockable. It's not mockable. It's not mockable. Doesn't, you know, like to say it's hateful to market. Right. Like that's a mockable idea. Right. But I also think that there's a moral obligation to mock some of these things. And this is what we're getting more. A moral obligation. I would say the absurd has only become sacred because it hasn't been sufficiently mocked. I think we have crazy ideas, crazy ideas that comedians to some extent bear the responsibility for becoming popular because they were too afraid to mock them. They were too afraid to get canceled. They didn't want to make fun of it. You know, like kids, kids are so impressionable. Kids don't have like a theological foundation or a philosophical foundation. They can't ward off bad ideas. Like they just absorb whatever you throw at them. But let me talk to you about my tribe now. Yeah. Here's the thing about comedians. We make fun of things we think are funny. Right. So we don't have an obligation to decide that something is funny. And if you say that we have an obligation, like who is our representative that has that obligation, they're individual artists, some of them are absurdists, some of them are guys like Zach Galfenakis or like Mitch Hedberg that just write non-secured or jokes. Like they're not responsible for anything. The idea that comedians are responsible for mocking something. Well if there is a comedian who sees something there and he wants to talk about it on stage, then he's responsible for making it funny and it's an important subject and it's something that you can mock. Just do a good job on it. Make sure it works good. That's the responsibility of the individual. But it's not like we have a committee. We're not like a government organization. No no no. We're not like the FDA. We approve bad drugs. Yeah. We're not that. We're a group of artists. But we have an obligation as comedians to be funny. Yes. So when you said, okay, so you were talking to Gina Carano recently and you talked about how, well shit is the funniest shit. That's what you said. Well shit's the funniest shit. And we make fun of that. It's ridiculous. So ridiculous. And somebody's got to make fun of it. I think at a minimum the comedian has an obligation to be funny and not dance around those things that deserve mockery. Agree. And so you can look at it from two perspectives. If you want to be funny, you've got to go after the stuff that's really funny and you shouldn't dance. You shouldn't try to avoid that just to not ruffle feathers. The key is just whether or not you think it's funny. Right. That's the key. Yes. It's like some people don't have a joke on something. Like I don't have an abortion joke, right? But Bill Burr had a great one. I didn't think it was, I didn't think the idea of it. Like it didn't pop into my head as good subject matter. It popped into my head as a problematic human situation. So when I look at comedy, like I have to decide what I want to talk about based on what I think is funny. It can't be any other thing. Now if I look at something like Rachel Levine, women of the year and think it's hilarious, I would probably do a bit about that. But she probably already done that bit about Caitlin Jenner winning woman of the year and compared it to Eminem. And it was hilarious. It's brilliant bit. So that subjects dead to me now. So I move on. But that's how we do it. So like if there's a thing that I think is funny and I decide to talk about it on stage, then I agree with you. Then I have an obligation to see it through. So I would put satire in a different category than just generic comedy, just jokes for the sake of jokes. The onions thing about, you know, it's being a smart ass and saying it's for a higher purpose. Generally, throughout the history of satire in particular, especially like political satire, right, that's dealing with the issues of the day in the culture. The idea is to, I heard somebody define it as, you know, satire, weds, wit with moral concern. Okay. So you're taking, you're looking at what are the social cancers? What are the things that are bad for society? And you're finding a witty way to excise them, to cut them out before the cancer can kill the host, right? And so also the sadder times you're just mocking them. You are. And you're not just mocking them and Dane and the silly and that they're deserving of it, but you're also finding those things that are like dangerous, that are harmful. The social cancers and you're saying, okay, look, we're not running around. We're not an attacker with a knife trying to stab and hurt somebody. We're more like a surgeon with a scalpel trying to cut out something harmful so healing can happen. And so there is like, the sadder is still has like this mission that goes beyond just, I want to make people laugh. And abortions are great example of this because abortion is not a funny topic, but we've done satirical jokes like Bill Cosby claims sexual assault is only 3% of what he does and Planned Parenthood defends him for that reason. Like because Planned Parenthood claims that abortion is only 3% of what they do, right? So like, we'll throw it. We'll do like an abortion joke like that to show, you know, the absurdity of Planned Parenthood trying to get off the hook by saying this is only 3% of what we do by saying, okay, what if Bill Cosby said sexual assault is only 3% of what I do? So we're making a point there that's not just like going for laughs. You see what I'm saying? And what you guys are doing is trying to speak to a voice you don't think is being heard. And that's why it's being very successful because there's not a balance in narratives when it comes to like left or right in this country and when there's become more important balance because now we're banned. Right. And there's unspoken stuff that you can't talk about that a lot of people wish they could talk about and those are the things that you could poke fun at and they get a big response. And they get shared a lot. I mean, obviously you guys are still on Instagram. You have a lot of people on Instagram and you're still on Facebook. And I think there's some sort of, we got banned on TikTok recently. Digi. Yeah. It's probably good. It should be off the top. No, it's not. You should be off TikTok. I don't even know what we want to talk about that much. We don't even like it. We're not even making a big deal that we got banned on TikTok because maybe we should have been in the first place. Do you ever read the terms of service? No, not in detail. But I read about people. We read it at me and Theo Vaughn read it out on the podcast. It was bonkers. Frightening, huh? It's bonkers. They get access to your microphone. They get access to all your keystrokes. Right. They get access to other computers that aren't connected to your phone. Why is Apple allow that in the app store? I have no idea, but that is one circumstance where Trump was correct. When he was talking about banning that, look, that is Chinese spyware that's dressed up as the most addictive social media app ever. It's wild. It's a Trojan horse. Yeah, when you, when they back engineer that shit and find out exactly what's in there, they're freaking out. They were like, this is like the most invasive app we've ever discovered. It's so crazy and it's so addictive. It's fucking genius. I was trying to well played. You got us. And now they're trying to turn Instagram into TikTok basically, essentially just like more fit into that to compete with it. Well, you know, I mean, that's what they always do. That's where stories came from. Right. Yeah, they always find the best features that some other application has. They all do that. Twitter, Twitter, remember that. They did fleets for like a minute. What they're doing, sub-stack. Yeah. Twitter, right? They're allowing people to pay, which is interesting. Pay to be like a super tweeter or something like that. Right. With super supporter, super follower, something like that. Yeah. Hello. They all do that. They all, I guess that's what you have to do. The thing about these companies is that these are all companies that, you know, they have stakeholders. They're stockholders. It's a lot of responsibility. Yeah. They have to do their, like if a CEO doesn't capitalize on some opportunity where there's a really popular thing that keeps happening, like that's why Instagram is always pushing the, the videos. They're so the, the reels they want Instagram reels to be like the most important thing on Instagram. Right. The other things don't get nearly as much traction. Right. Now I go to, I go to make a new post and the first thing that's an option is real. Like, I don't want to just post a real every time, you know, well, they know the people going on. They know that them tick tockers, they got them. Yeah. Tick tock got them. They came along out of nowhere with the most addictive app ever that's also spyware and no one cares. Not good for teens either. Not healthy. Well, all that stuff is bad for kids. You need to keep your kids off it? No, I don't. I don't, I don't think my children should not be exposed to things that are in the world. I think the more you protect them from certain, I think you have to have communications with them about it. I talk about it openly. I've described one of my friend, my daughter came on the other day. She goes, one of my friends is so mad at you because her mom watched a video of you talking about the terms of cervix on tick tock. And she made him deleted off his phone. It was hilarious. Like a good, you should do off your phone too. Yeah. I'm like, to listen to me right now, honey. This is dangerous. But it's, that's how I deal with it with my kids. I give them the opportunity to make their own decisions. I think it's very important. And I don't think in this world. I think this world to keep your kids off social media, you, you might think that's good. And it's probably good to regulate it. And it's probably good to have discussions with them. But everyone's on social media. This is the new world. This is keeping kids from listening to rock and roll. That's this is, this is keeping kids from wearing skirts. We're in a new world. The new world involves social media with most people. The key is going to be how to engage with people and how do you treat people on social media the way you treat people if you were in front of them. If there were a genuinely nice person and you're being genuinely nice to them, we should discourage, continuous everywhere, including, continuous and comments, continuous on tweets, continuous and Facebook. That's not good. And to encourage that kind of communication, that shit is going to come back on you. You're setting a tone and you see it with so many people that these attack dogs, they develop like a fan base of other attack dogs. And then someone goes after them. They go after them. They start attacking them. They start make and they hate it. Because everybody hates that. It's a shit way to talk. If you were having a fucking dinner conversation at your house with a couple of buddies and one guy brought his friend and his friend has just been insulting asshole. He just wants to mock everything you do and shit all over you and talk about shit you didn't seventh grade and you're like, you get this fucking guy out of here. Sounds like a good time. You'd be like, get this fucking guy out of here. This guy's rude. It's this that leaves room for mockery of leaves room for comedy. But I think what we have to be really careful with is we're setting a tone for communication because most of the communication that people do today, where it's with other folks that they don't know, a lot of people are like the majority of their communication is on social media. That's crazy. It is scary though. The teens are suicidal because of what they see on social media. I mean, I don't think rock and roll ever had that kind of like, you know, like, letting your kids listen to rock and roll. There was a lot of, that was a debate at one time, right? But I don't know. Social media has like, it has the ability to put kids into very unhealthy mental states. That's what they thought about rock and roll. Yeah. It's just the exact same thing they thought when they wouldn't let Elvis shake his pelvis on television. Yeah. Exactly. They're like, oh my God, rock and roll is going to ruin my children. Right. This is the world your children are living in. Your children are young human beings. This is the world they live in. Give them a strong set of morals and ethics. Show them by the way you talk to people by the way you behave that you're kind and thoughtful. Show them that you work hard that you have discipline and that you admit your faults. You're always trying to do better. Show them that. They can apply that to all things in life. But to just try to pretend that we should all live in a world that is completely alien to the world that we currently live in seems to me to be ridiculous. That doesn't mean you should be on like Chinese spyware. I don't know. But if my kids want to do that, that's what they're going to fucking do. Because they enjoy the fun of doing TikToks and shit. There's a real world that we live in. That real world is fucking complicated. I think the most important thing is to let your kids understand this shit is complicated. Let them understand that there's a lot of games of foot. There's a lot of things going on. There's moving pieces. There's a lot of narratives that are being projected that aren't accurate and they do it on purpose. And these are people that are in the fucking highest echelons of media. And they're putting out lies and nonsense. They're acting as a propagandist for the state. They're doing what administrations want them to do versus what their journalistic ethics should compel them to do. And this is happening left and right. And we know that 75% of all advertisements on television are pharmaceutical companies. That's fucking wild. That's wild. That the vast majority of what people see on television has to be in line with the hugest advertising budget that the world has ever known. That's some wild shit right there. And that's the pharmaceutical companies. Really? And we're all cool with that. Equipping kids, though, to deal with this stuff, I absolutely agree with you. I totally agree with you. And I think it also goes back to the point about mockery. I think that kids should see you modeling good behavior. They should also see you mocking ideas that deserve to be mocked. Because otherwise, they're going to take those ideas seriously. They're going to think that there is such a thing as a transgender three-year-old. You know, just because the boy picked up a Barbie for two seconds. Well, there's so many stories of people who were when they were younger thought they were a boy. And then they grew up and just became a tomboy and then became a regular woman. And they're like, oh, would have I had lived today? Oh, and what a crazy time for gays and lesbians. Like lesbian women who are a little bit more masculine in how they dress and how they feel. But they don't identify as male. You know, they're attracted to women. They are themselves women. They identify as women. But they're not like girly, you know? How crazy does it mean to their... It identifies women. That's like a normal term now. Yeah. Isn't that wild? What is a woman, Joe? That's a woman. That documentary is fantastic. It was. It's really good. It's really good. I encourage everybody on the left, on the right, in the center, libertarians, watch that documentary. What is a woman? It's very interesting. Because he does the best job I've ever seen of having a poker face through the entire thing. Very interesting. Not being a material. Not being a material. Yeah. And he's letting them go. And you notice how like there's a couple of conversations in that documentary too where there were just questions, just simply questioning what do you believe it? Like what's the truth here? And it actually got people irritated the point where they wanted to kick him out of their office. Oh yeah. And I'm like, you know, this is how you react. Like when you've spent your entire life and your current job is to suppress the truth. The mere question about what is true is enough to upset you. Yeah. That's crazy. That one he wasn't being out of the show. The one politician that ended the conversation quickly shut it down. Yeah. Yeah. And I remember what his question was was pretty, innocuous. Yeah. It wasn't like sniping question. Right. There was nothing nasty about it. She's asking questions. Like you should be able to have answers to those questions. You should be able to have answers to those questions to people who agree with you. Right. And you should have it have you if you hold that idea in your head and your politician, and you might actually vote on these things and you might have to actually have a say on these things and you might be able to promote these ideas. You should tell me what you think about everything about crosswalks. I want to know what you think about stop signs. I want to know what you think about everything. You should be able to tell me if this is something that you have an actual perfect your professional politician. You're supposed to have a fucking opinion on these very important issues. So this is a important issue and somebody brings it up and they just maybe they oppose you. You can't talk to someone who opposes you. Right. That's preposterous. Right. You have to be able to. But that should just immediately disqualify you from being a politician. Someone should just say, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You can't say we're not going to talk about this. If you wanted to talk and then this comes up and you don't want to talk about this. I'm interested with what you think about the question that I get all the time. Oh, isn't your job easier now because this is such a target rich environment? Like there's so much, like we can't even decide what a woman is. Like a Supreme Court Justice nominee was asked what is a woman and she is a woman by the way. And she refused to answer that and said, I'm not a biologist. It's like this kind of, you can't make it up. You can't make it up. Right. And we're doing satire and comedy. I think in my opinion, when people say it's a target rich environment, yeah, of course, some of these things are easy to make fun of. A lot of these things are easy to make fun of, but like you could literally just publish what he says verbatim and it's funny. It's hard to examine. It's a mind judge movie. Yeah. It really is. It's like you, theocracy. It's like making comedy harder. I don't know if you've seen it. Did you see the spreadsheet that I shared that has our 70? It's now 76. 76 jokes we made that came true. No, no, she pulled that up. Yeah, we tell it. I don't even know. It was on my own. It's on my Twitter. I don't know how to have it directly. It was a spreadsheet. Google sheet. He will find it. 76 jokes we've made that have come true. And it's things like, you know, Gavin Newsom named you, Hall salesperson of the year. And then like, and then Fox News puts out a story that like you halls running out of trucks so fast because people are fleeing for Texas that they can't keep up with the demand. So it's like, well, you did this way before the election. We did it a month before they actually published. There you go. That was quick. The left column is the joke. And then the right column is a real story. Let's see what they are. Can you get, you can't zoom anymore from here? There we go. Blind boy needs. Whoa, that's huge. Look at those pop up windows. They fucking occupy everything. Okay, scroll up. It looks like you'd read this. There we go. Oh, it just keeps going. Oh, what is going on with these pop up windows? You fucks. It'll make that a little lower, a little smaller rather. There we go. New York time praises Soviet Union for unprecedented gender equality in labor camps. Click on that. How is that? How he? Well, that's our article. And then the real story is like over in the right column. Is that it? Yeah. Okay, click on that. Biden's pick for banking regulator once praised Soviet Union for having no gender pay gap. Wow. So it's not in camps, but it's pretty goddamn close. It's close. I think some of these are like, it's like a partial, we call it a partial fulfillment of a prophecy and like it comes half true. And then sometimes it comes like totally true. And then sometimes it comes even more true than like it's it's even more exaggerated. Look at it says there. Say what you will about the old USSR. There was no gender pay gap there. Market doesn't always know best. What the fuck are you talking about? Right. And here's the thing that's gross about that. The grossest part. She knows the gender pay gap is not as simple as your carpenter. She's a carpenter. Right. And she's actually saying quality works. She makes $100 an hour. You make 150. That's not what it is. No. No. A gap is not as simple as your carpenter, she's a carpenter. You both do the exact same quality work. She makes $100 an hour. You make $150. That's not what it is. No. No. What it is is men choose different jobs. It's like waggers and architects and whatever. It's all the, and they work more hours and women get pregnant and they have babies. They can't work. There's a lot. They make decisions because their mothers that they don't want to be, the husband can pay all the bills. They make decisions within the household more regularly that they make less money overall with all humans. But it's not the same people making the same job. Like if they do the same work, why wouldn't you just hire all women? Because they're just as good and you could pay them less. That's so dumb. It's, but it's a lie. It's not dumb. It's a lie. Because people know, and a lot of people don't know this. I had a friend who went and who was arguing with me about it. Like we were talking about divorce on them. And he was saying that he thinks that maybe it's to make up for the fact that there's a gender pay gap. I go, what is the gender pay gap? We had a conversation about it. He goes, well, women get paid, you know, 75 cents for every dollar of gaggos. I go doing the same job. He goes, yes. I go, no. He goes, really? I go, no. No. It's different jobs. That's what it is. No. If you can say that there's some sort of a gender bias within those jobs. By the way, I would call that harmful misinformation. Why that's harmful? Look at all the resentment it creates. Yes. Look at all the strife. Look at all the division it creates. You end up with a political divide. You end up with people like acting, acting like they're getting the short end of the stick and thinking of themselves as a victim when they're not. It's just not true. It's a misleading narrative. Right. And it also flies in the face of real gender discrimination that probably does happen in some jobs. Right. So it fucks that up. Right. Because it like paints this unrealistic narrative when there's, you could highlight an actual real case, like real gender discrimination, whether it's in with specific fields or specific companies where like there's an old boy's network, the control, who succeeds and who doesn't succeed. And it's not based on merit. It's just based on, you know, cronyism. Then it makes sense. But if you're saying that and you know it's not true and you know it really is that women choose different jobs and that men go in a different fields of work and sometimes they're more dangerous and men are much Jordan Peterson talks about this so eloquently. Yeah. You know that men are more likely to die. They're more likely to get murder. The more likely to commit suicide. The more the men prison. Yeah. It just goes on on on on on. But that this in specifically when it comes to work. Right. That this they get killed at work and often they tie on the job. Right. It's like and they choose these paths based on, you know, a lot of traditional male characters. Or often then women because they're roofing more often than women are probably right. Yeah. But that's the whole point is that he's saying these are dangerous jobs at these men gravitate towards. Right. And also like very physical jobs like one of the last time you saw a female garbage man. Right. I mean, I'm sure they exist. I'm sure there's a garbage woman out there. I'm sure she's mad at me. Well, the fuck are I listening to you why I'm working now? Hey, Jerry asks. She needs a she needs a transition. I've been working at talent asking Florida, swinging garbage for 16 bucks a year. I'm sure there's a woman like out that out there probably going to cigarette hang out of the core of her mouth. But for the most part it's garbage men in the case. Masonry, you know, like a heavy duty construction jobs. The vast majority are meant, you know, walking up on those fucking beams 30,000 feet in the sky. Not that high. Right. I mean, right. The skyscrapers. Those those like flying out. A lot of those are men. And a lot of people that, you know, gravitate towards certain fields that require extreme competitiveness in the work environment, you know, 16 hour days, like lawyers and doctors. Oh, I've heard Jordan Peterson talk about that at length and the lack of appreciation that's there too. You know, like men are like men are making things work. They're fixing things that break. They're building things that we need, you know, and they're working themselves the bone to do it. And there's like very little appreciation for those types of jobs that they're doing that are just back breaking labor. It's very really appreciated in terms of like what impact it would have on society if they didn't exist. Imagine a world with no plumbers. Right. You know, good. All right. Imagine a world with no electricians. You have no idea what the fuck is going on in that box. Right. He got a call a guy. Right. You know, imagine a world with no carbarders. Like how do we make a house? We have to make our own house. What? No framers. What? No cement guy. I'm going to figure out a mix of it. What the fuck is the, you got to run a toilet line? No, we're going to make an outhouse. Right. We're going to shit in a hole in the ground. I'm going to keep going over six months. Yeah, go down real quick, real quick. Yeah. But you know, that's like teachers. Right. Teachers are one of the most important parts of a child's development is the education they're exposed to when they're a child. But we don't think about that as it being that valuable. We don't pay them very much. We treat them like shit. Right. It's not a great job in terms of like the financial reward. It's not very celebrated. We only think about them when they suck. We're only mad at them when they do something wrong. Yeah. Like teachers are responsible. Like I've had a lot of bad teachers by the way. Absolutely. Absolutely. Well, I'm on the, I'm the opinion that most cops are good people. That's why most interactions that people have with cops, I think cops are representative of human beings. And most human beings are good people. Most the vast majority. That's why you can go to the mall. That's why you get for the most part without mass shootings. Right. You can go to dinner at a restaurant. You can go but because most of the time people are great. Most of the time, even when they have like disagreements, it's rare unless you're hanging out in the wrong bars. Right. But most of the time people are great. And I think that's the case with everything. I really do. Great. I think that's the case with most things in life. Do you think, though, going back to that our jokes keep coming true and all this nonsense? Do you think comedy's harder now or easier? Is it a target rich environment that's easier to make fun of or do you think it's more challenging? Well, you're going to get criticized more. You know, but that's part of the job. You know, this idea that comedy is under attack, you know, it means it's just people's opinions. They're expressing their opinions on something. They think you suck or they think you rude or they think this and that they're allowed to have opinions. The problem is not that. The problem is when you want to suppress a person's ability to say something that you would criticize, that's where our problem lies. A problem doesn't lie in criticism of comedy. I think that's important. I think criticism in everything and you might agree with it. You might disagree with it. You might think that criticism is ridiculous. It's completely out of context. You're taking it out of this is not what you're saying. And this is really what they're saying. Or you could say, you could look at it and say, I agree. It's valid. I think I think that joke sucks. I think that comedians mean. You're allowed to think that too. That's a part of being a person. There's certain people that are so goddamn sensitive. They believe in microaggressions. This lightest little look that someone can give you. She's microaggressing me at work. And you can go to your fucking human resources person and make a formal complaint that someone's enacting microaggressions. And there's where the debate lies is it better. Is it better for society? Is it healthier for us? Is it better for that person if we mock that or if we coddle it? We coddle it. Microaggressions are the best example. It's not that coddle. If you say something really fucking dumb to a guy at the office, he should be able to go, okay, and just walk away. Right. That should be his right. And if you want to go to human resources and say that, you're going through a simulated pregnancy and he didn't support you. And you were telling him about how you're in the third trimester of your simulated pregnancy. And he's like, okay, and he just walks away. And you've got a beard and you have blue hair. And your name is Alice now. And for the last six months, you've been Alice and you've been pregnant. What am I supposed to do? Right. You tell me what I'm supposed to do there. I can't go, okay. Yeah. You know, if you tell me that you're a fucking psychic and that you're an intuitive and that you're tuned into the world, you're an empath. You're telling me all this and you're getting together with a bunch of people that don't believe in possessions. And they're all polyamorous. And I go, okay. And I walk away. It's the same goddamn thing. You're saying something that's outside of the norm. You're talking cuckoo talk. You have so many people who would argue with you and say that you have a moral obligation to affirm a firm, a firm, a firm. It's the right thing to do is the compassion thing to do. It's the loving thing to do is affirm a firm. Compels beach. the belt speech is always dangerous it's always dangerous you it's it is akin to uh... you mean that's a problem with some people have like the pledge of allegiance i think that's compelled speech but i think that's patriotism and i think you know with a good pledge of allegiance and a good idea of what we represent as a person like a mantra that we can chat i could see their argument though but i think that some conspeck that the the pro-pollinates of compelled speech only want their side to win but what if it comes back against you man that's Hitler right that's fucking mal that's that's stalin that's when when it comes back on you and there's a dictator saying something you disagree with but they're compelling you to say it the compelling you to do it just because you think that it's a kind thing to do to transgender people if you allow that right to exist in modern society it will go into other things and if we go south if something goes bad if there's a civil war or a nuclear war with another country and only a you know half of us survive and we get some hardcore really fucking authoritarian type dictator run in this country they will turn that shit on you and the idea that that's never going to happen is preposterous the idea that that can't happen it's happening right now in other parts of the world that shit could have what's happening in china could happen here if we allow a centralized digital currency and we allow social credit score system and what shit goes south and we have like our uprising against the government and so the government's locked down put more rules in place and they decide whether you can and can't travel based on your tweets that shit could happen right here yeah and the same sort of compelled speech that you would think would be compassionate towards causes the user you support the problem with that is that could be applied to almost anything right and in worst case scenario circumstances which is what we always have to think about and it's a pressure for it being okay for the powers that be to yes force those rules then what if the powers change you know and suddenly exactly who disagrees with you or that this is the problem that that the left has that the left is redefining things every moment that the goalposts are shifting the goalposts are always shifting for like what's acceptable and what's not you know conservatives tend to conserve right at least that's what they should be doing is is is is preserving what they believe is true and good right and but the the then the left also is going after what they think is true and good but it's a moving target all the time and so when the target changes all of a sudden your view that you tweeted out like a year ago is bigoted today don't you think that's a classic power structure power struggle power struggle i think that's a classic power struggle between people who are in power and people who want to be in power and between two opposing parties if you made one team you made one where blue jersey the team you make more yell at jersey the fucking yellow ones kind of kick the shit out of the blue ones those blue ones are all pussies and the blue ones think the yellow ones are going to quit that's just how people operate man and if you give people an ideology a rigid ideology they can fall and this is my problem with calling yourself left or right as a lot of shit on both sides i agree with but when you give yourself a rigid ideology then you prescribe you you subscribe to that ideology that becomes you and then you defend it because you're defending your identity you're defending your defending your your way of life against all these mindless but if you think it's true then what's wrong with you if you think it's true then you should stand by it the problem is when you have that's not my point the promise is that okay what's up my point is that people just do this right they just do this they decide on the conservative christian uh... i'm an atheist liberal people just decide things yeah and then they find ideas within there that they can sort of a spouse and they can get in the more you do it the more you get love from your community and the more it kind of rationally makes sense to you and the more you vehemently opposed anything that's posed to that right and more you find the sworn enemy of the GOP dig everybody's like yeah and you got a rainbow in your twitter flag yay you're doing a great job you're doing the right thing you get all the right or on the other side you whatever whatever conservative ideas that you attach yourself to you'll you'll only hook line sinker bind those whether it's first amendment whether it's second amendment whether it's what whatever different issues border control whatever different issues people have and everyone who loses all new ones everyone is just fighting for one ideology or another ideology and then people switch how about those wild folks right they are seeing the air of my ways and i'm going to the other side and everybody's like come on over come over and people get excited and then all of a sudden they have a completely different philosophy than they had to six or seven years ago like you did when you went far right yes that's what they said if you if you even defend freedom liberty freedom freedom speech you're far right yeah well i'm so left it's hilarious to call me far right is preposterous you know it's so dumb that's but i like guns you know i i believe that human being should have the ability to defend their their home and their property from bad people because i think bad people are real thing you know and i think this idea that you're going to somehow know they make the world a better place by getting rid of guns that are owned by law-abiding citizens and that the crime the people that commit the crimes are going to follow those rules and they're not going to have guns anymore well you're talking about a population of guns it's larger than the population of humans right that's a lot of guns to keep a track of do you guys as you have track of all the bullets you're still allowing people to make parts what he's saying you want me to give up my guns for what reason like and this like you fucking you fucking little dicks you just want to keep your guns like now i want to stay alive i want to stay alive if it's between a bad person or me i want to be the person that makes that decision right i want to be the person who's trained in firearms who knows the fuck he's doing and i i don't want to be helpless but if guns are bad are banned then the bad guys won't have them and then and then you won't have to defend yourself with them you're wearing a man that argument it's just too many people but the problem is not guns the problem is mentally ill people that's the problem the vast majority of people who have guns are just like the vast majority most people they're good people yeah it's that's that i think that's across the board our problem is with mental health i brought up tweet about that once that we have a gun problem we have a mental health this problem described as a gun problem yeah i agree with that it that is what it is it's a mental health and you got a dig it what's the root of that where where where we generating all this why do we have a mental health crisis on our hands you know what are the root causes of that and dig into that and nobody wants to well they do that we want population densities you know population density uh rats studies they do mirrors human behavior when they have rats and there's like a lot of room for rats to roam around and they they behave normal the behavior like rats but as soon as you get too many rats into an area they they start developing all these like weird ticks they some of them sit in the corner and rock themselves back and forth they could become way more aggressive way more conflict they start caring about what pronouns you use wow they start you know there there's too much there's too many different fucking opinions and ideas and humans and that that's what's causing a lot of what we're seeing right now and then it's compounded by social media because we're communicating in this ineffective way instead of and also a lot of people have been taught how to communicate in a kind way in a friendly way how to have a conversation with someone that you disagree with and just talk to them like a genuine human being and try to see their perspective and try to find merit and steal man their perspective you know that's that's a very important thing for all human beings like if you're a person who's a liberal and you don't have any conservative friends I feel bad for you if you're a person who's a conservative you don't have any liberal friends I feel bad for you because you're not exposed to a variety of different people and some people that think ridiculous ship but then they think really admirable shit and it might be the same person well and you may have some ideas that deserve to be challenged that you should let go of and they're never challenged because you never talk to anybody intelligent who has it an opposing view yes that you might actually learn something from yes yeah this is a strange time because I think there's almost too much to keep track of you know there's a hundred million streaming television shows there's so much content to be absorbed from the internet there's so much content and people are constantly being distracted whether it's by social media whether it's by real life and to form like concise opinions like to have like a real understanding of why you believe something and what you believe it takes a lot of time and it takes these kind of conversations and the way we have this conversation like you and I put our phones off sit across each other and talk and it's weird because because we're doing it for a podcast it's like a way that we probably wouldn't do in real life if we're doing this in real life we probably go to dinner we probably have some food and talk and we laugh we talk some shit but we probably wouldn't get heavy into something like that like whether it's abortion or or you know we would probably you see a different perspective and just let it go yeah we don't want to get contentious at dinner exactly yeah but it's like like the beautiful thing about the conversation we had was I don't even know if it was really considered contentious no we didn't we didn't see eye to eye on some aspects of it we do see eye to eye on other aspects of it that is what I think most of the country is on most things I think the problem is when people get rigid and they subscribe to only one ideology because they think they're supposed to and they don't formulate their own actual opinions on things and they don't want anyone else to be able to have a different opinion and that's where that can happen on both sides for sure yes and that's where you know I'm in full support of you guys yeah and I think what Twitter does did is wrong I really do I think it's bad for them too it's bad for the reputation it's bad for it's bad for goodwill you know I think allowing conservative people to talk and joke around about stuff is just as important as allowing progressive people to make Trump memes I mean I think you know how many fucking hilarious comedy shit was made about Trump you know it was great stuff you know let me let me tell you one of my favorite joke actually on that sheet that we were looking at for a moment was a Trump joke we did a joke about Trump in 2019 about how it said Trump and it was quoting him I have done more for Christianity than Jesus himself and it's just like you know we're stuffing words in his mouth that he's never said we're we're playing off as ego you know he's claiming to have done more for Christianity than Jesus himself didn't he say nobody loves the Bible more than me probably yeah didn't so what me and didn't me and Whitney Cummings go over these things but he so I mean it was probably in the context of him saying that that we made this joke knows but anyway this goes viral right and people on the left are sharing it like crazy because they want to believe that that he really said something like this just heating it up and so it goes mega viral shared millions of times so Snopes gets involved and they fact-check it and they read it false like Trump never said this he did not claim to do more for Christianity than Jesus himself then he fast-forward to 2021 and he calls into some radio show and he tells the host this radio show that I've done more for Christianity and religion in general than any other person in history oh my god so two years later three years later he's literally and he took it a step further this would be the yeah because he didn't say I've done more our joke was he'd done more for Christianity than Jesus he actually said he's done more for Christianity in religion in all religions than any other person in the history he took it a step further so I mean I like I think it's a funny example for a couple reasons I mean it got fact-checked you know it was us making front of Trump you know we're always accused of being like and I'm sure you you're probably accused of being like a Trump supporter even though you're like you know everybody if you disagree with them on anything the label you far right the label you and you'll they'll put you in Trump's camp and there's and there's no escaping that you know you're aligned with him right and uh and we make these jokes about him and they don't even realize we're joking about him because they think it's true and then it comes true it's just unbelievable well the onion made a joke about Bernie Sanders supporting or accepting my endorsement that he shouldn't have done that because he shouldn't want to win something it was way better than one of the just so yeah I forget how it went but it was hilarious yeah because like that was the first thing that I was canceled for it was like saying I support Bernie Sanders right and then like how can you call me a Trump supporter when you say I support Bernie Sanders right that's the dumbest fucking comparison yeah there's a little bit of a little bit of a Bernie's idea about taking a little bit of uh stocks speculation taking a small percentage that and using it for health care and student loans and all that shit and public education I'm like that would be a brilliant idea it's a brilliant idea because it's a fraction of a penny from each transaction yeah it's amazing it's a great idea he said it would generate an immense amount of money it wouldn't have an overall effect on the economy he didn't believe I don't know if he's correct because I'm not an economist I'd love to talk to an economist that would tell me that it's bullshit but it was a fascinating idea that's what I supported I'm like that seems like a good idea because in a lot of ways um kind of a die hard hippie yeah like I've really think that we could all get along together and do better but I'm also realist when it comes to human nature and discipline and and people's uh you know willingness to cave in to bad ideas and to self-loathing and to you know and that's why I tell people like it it seems like a non it seems like a trivial thing to like to exercise but I'm like it's one of the most important things you're ever going to do because it's hard to do and you need more hard physical things to do in your life everybody does it keeps you robust it keeps your mind working well resilient you can't you resilient but more importantly than that it's great for your mental health because if you do something really fucking hard look it could be a 90-minute yoga class a hot yoga class those are the best if you do that that's so fucking hard to do that the rest of your life will seem easier right and that's what it's all about with people if you think about people that come from like a really bad childhood and they have this incredible willpower where the fuck do you think they got that from they got that from being beaten down right you know and if you do you can do that to yourself those things that it applies to yourself and there's too many sedentary people in this country and those people are upset by almost everything because their body is all wash with fucking chemicals and hormones and corn syrup they don't know what the fuck they are they have no real foundation for who they are as a human they don't understand their human potential they never push themselves past the boundary of where their inner bitch wanted them to quit that's important for you it's important for human beings for all you can't force them anybody you can't force anyone to do but you can encourage people to do it right you can incentivize it you could tell when incentivize it how uh i don't know i mean not like with i'm not saying like a like an offer disincentive that would be like a penalty if you don't do it but incentivize it positively somehow yeah a lot of a lot of workplaces are trying to incentivize getting healthy that's good you know they'll give you some kind of benefit for like if you work out if you use the gym you know and then the people that don't work out right claim discrimination yeah like they're fat shaming yeah i have a hormone problem yeah you probably do have a hormone problem if you fucking eat terrible food and get to be 600 pounds you're gonna have a hormone problem you get a lot of problems yeah your whole body's cholesterol problem yeah you got a lot of how stupid though that you mentioned that was like a the initial cancel attempt on you because you voted for Bernie Sanders or you supported you endorsed him right it's like imagine going to a comedy show and you're like you see like you know there's a comedian that's on and you've heard of him and he you're supposed to be a funny show so you go to buy tickets and then you ask you want to you want to know first off wait a minute who did this guy vote for like how's that relevant to whether or not you're gonna I want people to ask that question cares no no it's important because if you want that answer I don't want you showing up right I want that ask that question please ask why voted for I know but it's just stupid question which is people out I guess yeah but I mean what a stupid thing to be like what you're not gonna laugh at his jokes if he voted for someone that you don't like exactly his jokes are funny or not you know yes they stand on their own they're funny or not and that is what we're supposed to be doing and this who who do you support I don't want to support who you support that was one of the crazy things after uh Biden won where people are calling for black lists of people who supported Trump people publicly endorsed Trump or talked about Trump they were talking about making them un-hierable yeah do you know crazy that's a ability project they call there or something like that you know crazy that is to do to fellow Americans it's like to try to remove you're coercing them into you know you have a there's a that's a disincentive you're penalizing them for not going along with where do you think this is going do you think the children are gonna suffer the person gonna lose their job what if they become homeless like what what what is going to happen what kind of a physical abuse is going to happen to these people what what horrible things you enacting on people that are in the rain like a part of that person like if you can't so that bro who knows what kind of devastating effect that's going to have on the rest of their family what if that person commit suicide with because they lost their job because they get canceled because they supported Trump that's real shit right people have killed themselves for very minor attacks on Twitter I mean some people are very vulnerable and if you want to be this super sensitive woke kind compassionate person you're supposed to apply that to everybody okay you're not supposed to only apply that to people whose opinions agree and in line align perfectly with yours you're supposed to look at people that are Trump supporters or whatever supporter they are that you disagree to Santa supporters and you're supposed to find common ground with them and find out why do they like that person what and and try to have a communication line with them where you're both being kind and friendly and just try to talk about stuff well you're certainly gonna have to better success changing if your goal is to change their mind you have a lot better success treating them as a person right then vilifying them and calling them names right but punishing them by removing their livelihood right because they maybe in your eyes were incorrect about their political support that's crazy that sounds more like fascism it is fascism yeah I mean that's what is the death the pull up the definition of fascism because a lot of times it gets equated to the right but I don't think it's supposed to be I think it's supposed to be whoever's in charge like a yeah mild state authority you know yeah state authority it's gonna have to do a state authority and so they're gonna see what they're gonna try to differentiate from fascism by saying well you're just being held accountable for your actions by people who don't want you know it's the market working it's right but you're you're doing that at the benefit of the state your acting isn't you're an actor for the left-wing party that's what you're doing if you're penalizing people for they're gonna lose their job they need to show by the way the last state this definition was edited because they change these things all the time but look at this part a tendency towards or actual exercise of strong autocratic or dictatorial control early instances of army fascism and brutality uh forcible suppression of alt position yeah there it is I mean that's it's part of the definition yeah okay a political philosophy movement or regime such as that of fascism fascism is easy oh god damn these fucking arms they always get you they're like oh not right now bitch um that exaltes nation and often race above the individual well there you go it stands for a centralized autocratic government headed by a dictatorial leader that easily could be the leader of a fucking social media platform severe economic and social regimentation a quality of outcome enforceable suppression of opposition banning you from social media for a disagreeing right banning you and forcing you out of your job for disagreeing like it's it's a line with that type of thinking it's a control based problematic thing that we've always agreed leads to horrible results it doesn't lead to good results if it's applied to a good cause it's still a bad philosophy it's still a bad thing to completely discourage or attack opposition like that and and make it so that they can't talk it's it's not good for anybody and I know it's not dictatorial in terms of it's not actually the government it's a but the goddamn they're so aligned with them it's so obvious that they'll do things that benefit the side that they want to and that's never been more clearly expressed than during the hard-biden time right that's wild shit man but you got a leading up to an election you're insulating it's your preferred candidate from criticism and it's the New York Post that's where it's wild right it's one of the oldest newspapers in the country right that is a long established newspaper yeah they talk a lot of shit they have funny headlines but it's New York you kind of have to have funny headlines it's part of the the Jack Dorsey came out said they messed that up right didn't he make a statement say Twitter messed that one up hey man Jack Dorsey is a different animal than Twitter itself yeah he really is Jack Dorsey's an interesting guy very thoughtful guy and I think it's great that he stepped down he stepped away from Twitter his um philosophy is that it should be decentralized and he's working towards doing something like that now yeah something new yeah he also wanted to I mean he had an idea that wasn't popular amongst the other people of Twitter he wanted to have a wild west Twitter you want to have a regular Twitter and then they're like we forked and Twitter yeah yeah that would have been crazy I wonder which one would have been popular if there was no like suppression right of wild west Twitter that would have been where everybody was fucking I mean are we talking are we talking like even unlawful speech or no I think they were always going to have no dog Right of Wild West Twitter that would have been where everybody was fucking sure. I mean are we talking are we talking like even unlawful speech or? No, I think they were always going to have no doxing because for trying to ask stuff like that no doxing no You know no calls to violence. No nothing you know. I mean the first amendment doesn't protect all speech right it's like that's really in line with the first amendment I think that was the idea behind it right that they were gonna have you know your ability to express yourself right Burg regard this the language you use what's wild about Twitter is like you can show porn Really why say in the content moderation should be that the idea behind giving them immunity to moderate content was to be able to take down things that are like Objectively and decent or lewd or obscene. You know like content that was mostly to protect people first I think it was more about doxing and harassment. I mean it's all in there. It's in the language of such a very Started it started in response to doxing harassment. They didn't respond to porn. Oh, that's there They don't have a problem with it pornography. It's very interesting because like I follow They have a problem with harassment either by the way I mean look at libs of TikTok and like if you like libs of TikTok will simply showcase like what's happening They'll set they'll post a video of something. They'll say oh there's this family friendly Friendly drag show coming up. You know like and this is a flyer that's being publicly advertised, you know and and Then they will go hard like Doxing and Intimidating and trying to harass and shut up this account. That's drawing negative attention to things that they don't want to receive negative Attention it's like they're doing what they say you shouldn't be allowed to do But it's justified when they do it because they don't like the activity or the speech of the person that's saying it This see the thing about libs of TikTok is people look at it and then they make this defense and this defense is This is not indicative of the greater whole of educators or of Liberals you found an egregious example of a far left Loon and everybody is now going to tack everyone in that group But that's not you can't but it's not it's not like what libs of TikTok's is posting is fake Right, so this is the thing these are real. Yeah, and they're much more prevalent people realize well We're dealing with a lot of humans. That's the other problem. We deal with 330 whatever million people we have in this country You're gonna find a lot of really ridiculous people and if you highlight those really ridiculous people It does have the unintended consequence of forcing people and thinking that's happening everywhere around them And then people who are not doing anything remotely like that get lumped into that same group That's what people are scared of and they're they're Overreach they're overreach. They're overreach to do that is to ban the word groomers Right, they're overreach is to stop your ability to express yourself The overreach is to ban libs of TikTok that would be the overreach well The way that they lump themselves into the group like libs of TikTok won't explicitly lump everyone into the group They'll just showcase the content. Yes, and then but they will lump themselves into it by defending those those things They'll say well, why can't a teacher talk to children about sex and gender? Why can't they? demand that they be addressed by certain pronouns Why can't they be the confidant that children come to because their parents won't accept them for who they are? Right, so they're the mom and dad now and they're gonna Be loving and affirming of that child like they defend it so they come into fence It's like it's not like these are outliers that they're that they're saying oh no No, we want nothing to do with that we don't believe in that they actually defend it hard They go in hard defending it media matters all these people they go in hard and they suggest What are they defending they're defending the insane videos in the behavior? I think we have to talk about that on a specific case by case basis because some of the videos those people are and say like the thing They are saying I would like to see if they defended that yeah, I know what they'll defend. I mean I gave a couple examples little defend for example Teachers coming out to their children and talking about sex and gender talking them about critical race theory and and how white kids should giving giving kids an assignment where the white kids have to Move to the back to the back of the room and the black kids move to the front to separate them and show how white kids are privileged Now we're gonna have the blacks at the front and a kid in the white kids Are they doing classes? Yes, they're doing that in classes. Wait a minute What classes are they doing that where they make all the white kids sit in the back of the room? There was assignment that racial discrimination. It was one assignment. Yeah one day. Yeah, yeah But they defended this stuff and we we did one we actually highlighted one okay But if you wanted a kid to feel like what it would feel like if you were a black child living in the early 60s If you wanted to express how wrong that is wouldn't you do it that way? Like wouldn't you know an exercise you're not talking about like if this was like every day I would say that it's fucking crazy racial discrimination But for an exercise to let kids white kids know what it would have been like to let everybody know even the black Hold on even the black kids to let them what it would be like. Let's imagine if this is 1963 This is how we would have to do it Okay, so I want all the white kids to sit back there and all the black kids to sit here And then you would say you see how terrible that would be if I treated you only by something you have zero control over What your ethnicity is and not by the color your skin or the content to your character as Martin Luther King would want you to do it and then you could actually like bring the kids together with an understanding that at one point in time There was horrific racism and it was prevalent all throughout America And that people like Rosa Parks did have to sit the front of the bus and get arrested so that people understood that this was going on that people did have to sit at that counter and And let people know that this is a this is a real thing that's going on And this is contrary to the way the way we should all feel about human beings I agree with that a hundred percent if the lessons were ever framed in the context of The content of your character matters more than the color of your skin then that it would be totally not though because we're looking at the lesson materials Like what what what's being exposed to your situation is your talk is the lesson where it's talking about how white people are privileged You know your skin your guilt. It's all about white guilt. It's all about white's have are oppressive race They're privileged and to acknowledge your privilege. You need to do it. So they're teaching women That's all about it. It's about it, but it's a lot of it is about the history of slavery That's the reason why they're doing these are these are these are these are critical race These are critical race They're trying to say that you are that currently in our current system The current system privileges white people and not black people Your guilty just because of your skin color for being white and you need to be quiet But it's because of history of slavery, right? That's how they look at well That's how they look at it. This is the example But they're not suggesting that all that matters is your character not your skin color They're suggesting your skin color matters very very much I understand what you're saying But what I was saying was I could see how that exercise would work. I yeah That's why I was saying it that way if you had a really good teacher and they explained it in that way It could be less objectionable for sure you would say this shouldn't be the case with white people in the back And but it should be the case with no one you should be judged as an individual How about one lives of tiktok did where kids kindergarteners kindergarteners. What's that age five kindergarten? Yeah? Five six first grade yeah Sent home with a masturbation assignment What the masturbation assignment was defined a private place in your home where you can touch yourself with a Disurbed is that real real? Real fucking I might have retweeted that and I'm saying what Masturbation assignment in the gardeners. I mean this kind of stuff It's like shocked but not because I did read this one thing where they were talking about kids that were pre-teens and they were Describing like different ways that people have sex and I'm like I just don't necessarily think that's your place And yeah, I don't it's a complex thing that I don't necessarily want taught by someone who I don't even know I don't know what you're like. I don't know what how do you gonna say this? Are you gonna say this in a way that's promoting a certain thing? I mean what are you gonna do because children are very malleable and most people want to be the ones other than the You know the world itself But in terms of like authority figures they're explaining things you don't want someone explaining things to your kid that you absolutely Don't agree with right or that you don't die I know what you put yes, right and you don't want that on your timing You wanted to be look I've had some great teachers But I also had some fucking dummies some real dummies that said some stupid shit to me You know yeah, I remember I mean Teacher kicking me out of room telling the class don't laugh because he's never gonna mount anything Oh, wow like Mr. Rogan's never gonna mount anything and I remember like why would you say that to a fucking eight year old Now did you internalize that is all of this is this every your total trajectory now in your career is to definitely remember Stick it to that teacher. I'm like, huh, but it was me cracking the joke class but the the whole point is like you shouldn't say that kids You're a fucking teacher you didn't shouldn't say to a kid you're never gonna amount to anything That's a crazy thing to say to a place that's messed up not a thing about a thing else 14 But it's not a thing that you should say to a kid It's it's a rude shitty thing and if you're an adult and they just that's what they're gonna get from you You know, that's crazy. That's crazy talk and that is a problem with expressing any complex ideas that may have a very nuanced that there's there's new wants to all of those conversations and You you might not want this person who's not that bright not that good at expressing themselves and very biased To explain something to your kid that's gonna cause an argument at home Because then the kids gonna bring something up and you're like, where did you hear this from or to tell your kid that? You know what you don't have to confide in your parents about that don't tell your parents about this come to me about these issues That's what it gets crazy that is grooming behavior and you can't even call it that anymore But it is I mean that's that follows right in the definition of it your most certainly certainly tutoring someone towards your perspective Yeah, you're most certainly on your position yourself as a mentor and confidant Right, you know somebody that they can trust more than their own parents. Yes, and maybe their parents are dicks, right? So maybe you can get a leg up on the parents. They like you even more than the parents. It's just it's a weird thing because children are so Influenced they're so easily influenced by their environment. Children are so malleable right dependent upon the area they grow up in they'll have different personalities or different Accents rather they'll have different things that they gravitate towards different sports because of the community enjoys them That's kids are so goddamn malleable with almost everything They're all not I think I think this transgender craze and it is a craze. It's legitimately a craze The numbers are off the charts with all these young people that are now identifying as either Non-binary or some other gender. That's Abigail Shryers and it's just gone off the charts and Bill Maher was talking about this actually recently He's like what are all these we're all these kids all of a sudden they're born in the wrong body Right, you know is it really that we're just more accepting now? And that's why that or are we actually influencing kids in this direction? Well the idea that we're not influencing kids is ridiculous because we influence them with everything You know, I mean this is one of the arguments about violent movies, right? Or violent video games where influencing kids violence songs don't play Aussie Osborn backwards remember all that shit You're you the whole reason for like a parental guidance warning on a rap album from like the 1980s when Tipper Gore was promoting that shit the whole reason is you're influencing kids That's the whole reason the whole reason is like if you're an adult You can go to the R movie, but I don't want a 17 year old seeing it because it's a lympholence the kid It'll fuck with you even go to arm movies at 17. Oh, is it 16 you can't do it Well, and 17 fact check something in the NC 17 right NC 17 you have to be over 17 to go Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's the whole thing is You know the it's just no one wants to look at both sides of it No one wants to look at both sides of it Everyone wants to think that you have to like buy wholesale All the ideas of either the left or the right depending upon which group you align with Which group do you decide you align with? That's where it gets weird with people because if you're like a Progressive open-minded compassionate person and then you watch Two professors having a conversation about kids under 13 should be forced to have sex Because we force them to do a lot of other things we force them to clean the room They do a lot of things. They don't do what what should we force them to have sex like that's a real conversation I saw on the one that's fucking wild that they're trying to make an intellectual Argument right about whether or not children should be forced to have sex right and about how they've been That way throughout human history. Yeah, like this arbitrary age that we put on people I think it should concern us more than anything else this effort to stamp out Not just the descent not just the different opinions But the jokes it's the jokes. You know like the fact that we can't joke about this stuff Is really disconcerting and I know you can't I mean you know your show Israel is you know It's the censorship from these platforms that are hosting your content that you put them on to and the control that they're exerting over these conversations I think the our our ability to be able to laugh at these things that deserve to be laughed at it's so It's so vitally important for the health of society that we not stop that and shut that down. I agree I think it's super important. I couldn't agree more It's it's very important whether you agree with those people or not Got it. You got to have discussions. Oh, I mean both sides deserve more mockery than they're currently receiving Yes, both sides of the storm up. We need more battle on bees We need more of them You know, there should be more more entering the space and feeling free to say what they want to say rather than Everyone learning that oh if you follow in the battle on bees put steps You're gonna get shut up and I'm glad you guys mocked Trump because if you didn't mock Trump I mean if you didn't mock some of the more more ridiculous shit that guy says You know, it's like we mock everybody. I mean he's well open for it just as Biden is well open for it You can if you stop people from mocking Biden being old as being ages. You're your fucking mind Right, he's the leader of the goddamn free world and he's shaking hands with ghosts right like this is wild Wild shit. We're seeing in real time. Yeah, and if you you tell me that's off the table. You're out of your mind You're out of your mind. Oh, you're a maggus supporter if you talk about those things Oh, really? How about you just see in reality? This is fucking crazy Have you see one of them Kamala Harris beaches which is like time is the passage of time based on seconds and then minutes The significance of passage of significance and wonder it like you if you don't mock that you're not paying attention Her comments you just made about this tell it the space telescope that we put out there She was like I had a very intellectual response to these images when I first saw them and it was wow An intellectual response she had and it was I think she's broken. No, no, no, she was dead serious She was dead serious That was well she went on about how space spaces, you know It's we've we've accomplished this We've done something and now we need to continue doing something because space we were there We we accomplished it and now we need to also continue to accomplish what do you say? Well, I'm not have a script that she can follow can someone not write a speech out for her that she can just read well people keep Quitting how does she have like a shit ton of people quit yeah, yeah, it's like a nutty number. Yeah, right? I'm just gonna quit. I don't know. I've seen articles about staffers just you know dropping like fly I know how many staffers and maybe they just let her make her own speeches like you go go ahead Do your own thing. She's got a teleprompter all these advantages and wants to eat it Maybe she wants a free ball. Maybe she's working on her act It's awesome though. Well, what it is is it shows you Whether or not a person's real Because a real person has real ideas Like if a person is actually just trying to be themselves and tell you this is my take on things Yeah, you'll get that from their words right when they just say nonsense nonsense There's nothing there at all uh staff Exodus continues as top advisor speech writer. There you go. She lost her speech writer That's recently so how many people have left? That's the answer. Is it say Speech writer was also departing after fewer than four months on a job camp imagine You write this fucking groovy speech make her look like a wizard and she goes over the time That we're enjoying is different than the time of other times when people were not enjoying their time There is 13 significant 13 key staffers have left the VP's team in as many months including chief of staff chief spokesperson deputy press secretary deputy chief of staff Communications director director of digital strategies director of advanced director of what is that advanced director of advanced oh director of advanced deputy director of advanced director of press operations deputy director of public engagement speech writing director Oh my god national security advisor Everybody's like fuck this out of here Now is that when it says they left does that mean that they mean they they resigned all of them they got what are they like or where some of them let go That's a good question. No, no. Yeah, I think when they say left they may not quit It's other sounds a bit fired. Yeah, she's like female Trump. Is that a Jetson right? The whole thing is wild man because it's like that is a type of person that can't speak They can't just speak about their position on ideas They got a kind of dance around with bullshit because they're bullshitting you right like if that was Tulsi Gabbard and you asked her to give her opinion She'd be a thoughtful a very thoughtful response very well-phased response about any particular Important issue because she actually thinks about them and she formulates her own independence Impression she's very impressive. Yeah, she formulates her own independent opinion of those things And that's what's terrifying to her well about her rather that's what's terrifying about her to the government Like you can't control her right you can't just tell her to play ball She actually has ethics right she actually has like a very clear opinion on things and she's not willing to go long with the hive mind I got to tell you another joke that came true. It was up. It was about how Kamala staff Was hiring Hillary Clinton staff as consultants to try to make Kamala more likable like The last person in the world to go to for like ability so we clean and then it came true They actually a month later a month later Herst it where report came out that her staff had reached out to Hillary Clinton staff to try to figure out how they could make Kamala Hair more likable So month later well imagine though why Hillary Clinton who goes to Hillary Clinton for like ability lessons? This is why you don't go to Hillary Clinton you go to the people who've made Hillary Clinton so likable that she could run for President because imagine you just let her go on her own. Oh, yeah. I mean if you just if she didn't get any public feedback You just get a honest opinions about things. Oh my god. It'll be a bloodbath. Oh, she just she just still tell you whatever the polls say She should say Probably but then there's moments we catch her like you remember that moment when she was being interviewed and it was right after Libya Could killed the rebels kill Gaddafi. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, we can't we we came we saw he died She laughed she had that comment about Benghazi what possible difference doesn't make or something what difference does it make Yeah, she's the basket of deplorables. Yeah, something or redeemables or whatever isn't it wasn't her? Purple yeah, that's yeah, absolutely. That's not that bad. That's just you know stupid politically because you're you're mocking literally like half Right the people in the country, but the things about like mocking this guy who we kept in power Being like ruthlessly murdered by those rebels like you can watch it Like you can watch the video where this guy shoves a knife up and off his ass You can see his face Well, this guy runs up behind him with this knife and shoves it up his ass And he's in full shock. Mm-hmm. He can't believe they have him He can't believe he's captured and he barely reacts with this guy shoves a knife up his ass Mm-hmm. I mean you can see that you can see his dead body in the rebels like anybody that would think that's funny That scares me that that person would be in any sort of position of power right because the things that a person There's something. Yeah, that's to see it Look if you're if you're happy that that person's gone and you want to express that in a sober way Right, you want to see the world's better off without Mo Mark Adoffi running Libya right, okay That's different, but if you're laughing laughing about a person who got a bayonet up his asshole Mm-hmm. I mean it was like you seen it right I mean it's a big ass knife. Mm-hmm. It looks like one of those knives is on the end of arrival And he just shoves it up his ass like that's not something that anybody should ever laugh at even if it's to the worst person The worst person dying like that Like that's not funny I mean maybe it'll make you happy if that person's a killer and they've killed a bunch of people and someone runs up behind them and shoves a knife up They're asked. I'm glad that guy did that fuck. Yeah. Yeah, okay, but laughing. Yeah, he's a crazy way to react Is weird reaction to someone to get someone getting brutally murdered not very likable doesn't make you very likable I feel like Kamala Harris response to everything is laughter. She throws her head back in tackles Well, she doesn't do that anymore. You notice that she's better about it. She's not how bad it was how bad a look It was it was constant it was it would be a serious topic She'd be challenged on her initial response was to laugh nervously before she would reply well She's mocking things right and she's mocking things know that knowing that she's got this army of supporters That's the thought process behind it like mocking it. Yeah, like that look like Tucker Carlson throwing his head back and laughing and something less Groot like his is less gross. Yeah, the way she does it is like it's fake It's always fake like there's no reason to be laughing in that moment You know, it's just like this strategy that she has to just to mock ideas that don't align with the ideas that she has It's just not good and then it's also to just like portray this this sort of Persona of being a very happy Fun person is laughing a lot. That's good too. Yeah, right. So there's that But it's fake. It's just a weird. It's a it's a act that a person could put on. Yeah And she doesn't do it as much anymore. It shows you that's fake Yeah, she's been reigned in. Yeah, well, she's been exposed. Maybe it was Hillary staffers. Yeah, maybe they said listen We told Hillary you got a stop laughing about murder What is this what's in this coffee you want some coffee sure? Yeah Black chang it up. All right. Thank you sir my pleasure Yeah, I don't understand Why we can't get more really good candidates? People that whether it's congressmen's good senators. It's good solid stuff, right? Yeah But it is it's just hard to It's hard to find people who want that job You know, I mean who the fuck wants to have your life pick to part like that? Who the fuck wants to be the target of at least half the country hating you a lot of people who want power Yeah, I think to put themselves through that for the power That's the problem, right? And that's something we don't want to acknowledge the type of people that want those jobs and not really the type of people We want to have those jobs. Yeah Yeah, I remember in a gladiator when a Marcus Aurelius is gonna make Maximus the his successor. He goes I want you not my son to be my successor He goes with all my heart. No, and he's like Maximus. That's why it must be you Because you don't want it. Yeah Yeah What do you think is gonna happen with Trump? What do you know about the the raid the FBI raid? I have no inside knowledge I don't know. I mean, I think I think he did retweet us a couple times Um, he retweeted me a couple times, too hilarious He I was slapping my ass up. I was like the fucking president retweeted me I think that the people who are arguing that that he's been given a ton of fuel and like they just poured rocket fuel in his engine I think it's absolutely true. I mean if you just look at the fundraising he's done off the back of this already right But what did that absolutely? Yeah, but I don't mean in terms of politically I mean like legally like what did they find? Oh and is he actually is he actually in trouble? Because I think the goal was to try to knock him out of the 2024 elections, right? But you're big matching him for crimes What did you do? I don't know I don't know what they were jamming. Is it been absolutely released what they caught? I don't know that yet, but it Holding on to Boxes of is it really about what life to have confidential information that he shouldn't have had in his home like that was so important They couldn't just ask for it. They had to go in there and get it Well, I think the part the problem is having it right because if you have it in an Unsecure location meaning unsecure in terms of the government's protection It's not it's not locked up in archives. It's not in a place that's very difficult to access You have control personally over the access to something that's top secret if that's the case Then that's a problem because that safe could be open people can get in there people can get the code They can copy it they could send it to China Yeah, but do you think that's a genuine concern or is it with a want to find something anything that they can use to prevent him from running again? I think both things are valid I think if they're just doing that and they're using the FBI in a way that they would never use it against Hillary Clinton And they're going after him in a way they would never go after Galen Maxwell's client list Oh my god. Then I think was going to show that right then we have a real conversation But it doesn't mean that there shouldn't be a real conversation about should someone have access? No I don't know what the files were I have zero idea whether that they were okay for him to have or declassify I don't know but but I think the argument would be if you're not supposed if there's a fucking a whole chain of command About classified documents and this is the law on classified documents and you decide to violate that law because You think you can't right I just want to keep them and you just keep them in your safe I don't know if this that's what happened But if that is what happened that someone needs to be held accountable for that You're not supposed to do that right right right you're not above the law and you can't decide that you're not going to follow the law because you know better Right and I think I think where people lose where they stop where they don't care about that It's because they're like okay You know if you're gonna be selectively enforcing laws like that and just trying to blind eye to Hillary deleting emails that have been subpoenaed and all of that in In a blind eye to Hunter Biden trying to act like this is not a story until you're forced to admit that it is It's the double standard that makes everybody say this is persecution for sure and so even if it's just even if there was something That was done that was wrong They're still choosing to be selective about going after him in a way that comes across as Their after him doing what they wouldn't normally do to someone on their own side if it was Hillary Clinton's home They'd have no interest in what's in our safe. Good should kill them. Yeah jokes Yeah, I see what you're saying. I see both sides though I see the side that if you're an anti-Trump person and you find out that he's doing something that's against the law You'd want to prosecute it for it. Yeah. I see both sides. Yeah. I really do I don't know the specifics of the Hillary Clinton email thing in terms of like what those files were but if they're the same classification of files as like he had you could make the argument They were more vulnerable because they were on a regular laptop. Well, and it's still destroyed after subpoena Appina after a subpoena. I mean imagine imagine if Trump was subpoenaed for this information instead of handing it over He burned it right that is where shit gets really squirrely. Yeah, it gets really squirrely and it's like what what punishments are there for that? Is it zero? There's nothing nothing not a fucking thing and everybody's just like you know what it didn't she had She has a hat for sale to his but her emails about her emails. She's she's capitalizing good for her I wonder if like amongst people that are on the right now a black hat with white letters get your ass kicked You know like the mega hat. Yeah, you could have a mega hat that said anything Like I saw lady get maced in the face because she had a hat on that said it was a red hat with white letters It said make Bitcoin great again And she was at one of those protesters of video over the mega hat. Yeah, and some got some guy maced her in the face He pepper sprayer in the face because she had a red hat with white letters about Bitcoin. That's assault by the way It is assault. Well that happened a lot of those fucking anti Trump protests. Yeah, it's it's just The problem is that he was such a divisive character that he became a great enemy for the other side He wasn't like a statesman who like you know you could criticize his policies and his positions You could say he's heartless all you want, but he represents the United States in a state's been leeway and like no Trump's you know, he's he's a wild guy that like encourages people to hate him Do you think DeSantis would demand or command more respect from the left And the left still hates him, but they don't hate him in the same way they hated Trump They try to but he's more reasonable. He's very like level in the way he talks about things He's firm though. I mean, yes, he's yes, but you know, I'm saying like he's he doesn't He's not he's not an insulting like Character like Trump's a character right like part of what he's doing is like doing comedy So he's doing stand-up when he's up there. I mean when he makes fun of Biden and makes fun of other people like he's doing fucking stand-up He really is and he kills It's he's got this thing You know and that thing is like everybody's with him is fucking really with him and everybody's against him is really really against him And he like encourages it, you know, he that is what I think is not good That part of it like you're I get where he comes from because like that's what made him's fighting against the haters You know, but That that that part of it like you're I get where he comes from because like that's what made him So fighting against the haters, you know, but when you're a president like that's a different role That's a different role than being the fucking host of the apprentice right and a lot of people hope that when he got in there He's gonna band in that and just be like common sense get shit done. No, he's on Twitter calling his ex-girlfriend horse Right Standabout Kim John on call on little rocket man. He's fucking why I said he said about Rosie O'Donnell. Oh, yeah Do you call her fat pig something like that? Yeah, exactly what he said, but it was nasty. It was horrible shit. He calls her a loser all the time Yeah, but I'm being people think it's hysterical They do and they do have something like a button, you know the but her emails thing but his mean tweets, you know like he could sell shirts and stuff about that because it's like, you know, yeah Well, yeah, a lot of people will say yeah, I don't approve of his tweets and all these tweets no Lot of people would say that a lot of people on the right will say that yeah a lot of people on the right This is what I think they have hope in DeSantis that he wouldn't do the same kind of things He would never tweet things like that. He would never call Kim Jung own little rock man Although shit was hilarious funny. He would never call his ex-girlfriend horse face like that kind of stuff is You know in many people's eyes and a lot of Conservatives eyes it's unbecoming of the commander in the office. Yeah, yeah That's that's the argument against it You know the argument for him was his economic policies that people think were better and if we didn't have COVID didn't hit We would have been in a better place financially and the argument is as the economy grows It gives more opportunities for everybody and everybody sort of does better because the economy's doing better And this is like in the anti-Marxist anti-socialist argument is that a strong economy where these businesses are killing it is Better for everybody because then there's more jobs. There's more opportunity. There's more and then other people say well No, because he's it's a small percentage of people that are getting the most benefit and right Yeah, it's hard to get there like it's they're playing a game and this is the game the game is it's like It's like a giant game of monopoly like you're trying to get the most amount of resources But that's what they're doing. Yeah, and if you want to cap that you're not gonna get people's playing the same game with the same I'm not saying they should be able to steal but I'm saying like competition like if you want to be a Rupert Murdoch If you want to be some maybe that's a bad example if you want to be someone who's like some Head of some gigantic industry that's worth billions and billions of dollars in your butt like Jeff Bezos buying the biggest yachts and fucking flying around the biggest jets like That guy played a game and he got to the highest level of the game and it's the same game that most people are playing that game is do Do the best for yourself financially now you can say that he did it at the expense of you and you can make all these arguments That I would probably agree with you could say he did it in a way that undercut family businesses Go ahead, maybe maybe yeah, it's good argument But at the end of the day he's playing a game It's a legal game and he got way ahead of that game and you can say well now He's at the head of the game. He's got too much influence over the other players of the game. Yeah That's that's how the game works It's a fucked up game, right, but it's way better than communism. It's fucking way better A lot of people then the Soviet Union. It's way better than what's going on in China It's fucking way better than what's going on in North Korea. It's way better this way Well, think about how convenient is there anybody can order anything they want from Amazon at any time You know have delivered straight to house. Yes. I'm a fan. Yeah. Yeah, and I'm I'm not in any way shape or form an anti-bassos guy I'm or anti-industry guy. I There's a way to have ethical capitalism. It's totally possible. It can be done You know, and it can be done by regulating things correctly. It can be done by You know, whatever whether it's tax structure or whatever it is it can be done It can be done. It's just like you're playing a very specific game and that very specific game is always going to encourage people to win And they're gonna try to make more money every month They're gonna try to make their fucking stock the biggest thing so they can get that bonus And that's what they're doing they have an obligation to that if you want to say that game sucks You want to say you don't want to play in that game That's fine, but that is the game that this country runs on and to just throw the fucking board up in the air I don't think is the solution Yeah, well, and I mean usually the people who are saying that are people who aren't very good at playing the game Or they're early on in the game Yeah, maybe they're just out of college which makes sense if you're just out of college and you're making 24,000 dollars a year and you're looking at people that are worth billions and then you see in homeless people and you're a kind Compassionate young person and you're these professors are you know teaching about Leninism and Marxism and you start to spouse these ideas like I get it I get all of it. I understand how I just don't get how I don't get how I don't get how is a young person You look at someone like a Jeff Bezos and all the success he's had and you're not inspired to go out there and work your butt off to like get to that level versus feeling envious or resentful and saying oh, that's not fair that he did that's natural Congratulations. I always looked at successful people and I'm like, you know Like what was what did they how did they operate? How do they think? I don't know that that was you know my parents my parents didn't still let me you know a Business mindset, you know my dad is a pastor. I grew up in a church Most of what she said to me was values um most of what they instilled it was it was had to do with values and and faith um And doing the right thing not you know getting ahead in the business world They were never like oh, we want our son to go to the finest business school and become successful They they judge success in much different terms in terms of you know how big your bank account is which is great and important But and when I as a as a young person when I was in college or before Looking at people who are successful. I never I never and we weren't successful My dad's a pastor's don't make a lot of money unless you're the pastor with big megaturfs It's telling people to be healthy and wealthy if they just give you more money Um, you know my dad didn't pastor church like that. So he had a very meager salary and we had a very you know middle-class lower middle-class upbringing and so I don't know I always but I always looked at wealthy successful business people entrepreneurs with like I had a huge Admuration for like what they were able to accomplish how brilliant they are how hard working they are what they put into that It's kind of interesting because we celebrate that and a lot of other areas we celebrate that in sports We celebrate that in art. We celebrate the the overachievers The problem is that comes in a lot of people's eyes with victims right like the overachieving capitalist comes with victims Victims the environment is a victim the people are the victim You know the lower classes of victim the mom There's like a lot of bodies along the way and their eyes and also We're talking about how malleable people are I mean they're if you're in the university system of 2022 You're 100% at least being exposed to a lot of these socialist ideas and Marxist ideas and very progressive left-wing ideas and they're more They're more popular than conservative ideas. Yeah, you're gonna have a lot more victims if you get rid of that system and do it a different way But but you're doing it by a large margin though the university systems are leaning towards the left right And so these people they're looking at this they're they're just left their parents house Maybe they disagree with the parents member the dads and as well And now they're at this university and this professor who's so eloquent and so interesting It's a well read and well traveled and they're saying these things that are so opposed to the way they grew up But makes so much sense like oh I'm gonna do the right thing now and I'm gonna fight for this right. Oh, yeah It's tapping into people's sense of right and wrong. Yes, and yeah And trying to say look you don't want to you don't want to leave a bunch of trail of victims in your wake trying to climb to the top or whatever Right you can't get rich in business the way that Bezos did without offering something of value and employing a ton of people Which is a tremendous good and it's just like anything like when you look at You know, there's trade-offs to everything free will has trade-offs the fact that you have freedom to do whatever you want means that you can be Loving good kind and charitable. Yeah, I guess what it also means it means you can take a the wrong turn become a criminal take advantage of people Yes, come back mistreat people be cruel to people mean to people that's the downside of free will but the upside The upside more than makes up for that the fact that any of this good stuff is possible makes up for the fact that the bad surface possible You're never gonna have any any system that you can possibly think of that doesn't have those that doesn't have downsides that are offsetting to the positives Yeah, or worth having. Yeah. No, I think I think you're correct, and I think that Looking at it The way you're looking at it like to say that you grew up the way you grew up is very interesting because I think Having a firm set of ethics and morals when you grow up is very advantageous Because you realize like later in life if you do the right thing you'll feel better Regardless of the result You do the wrong thing, but you benefit you feel guilty Bad for people like if you're a person that is made Institution where you're working at it You're working at some sort of a corporation and you poison the environment in order to succeed and make more profit But you hit your goal But then you realize that there's a dead lake in Ecuador now and all these people are suffering and getting cancer That's happened before right? That's that's the bad side of it and you need to become a calia calisocial path Or you got to find another line of work because a lot of people just become calis Social pass and they continue that behavior so the The way you grew up is so beneficial because having a strong form of foundation of ethics and morals is what we should all strive for It doesn't mean you can't succeed It just means you shouldn't succeed at the expense of things that you know or evil And that is a problem with unchecked capitalism That's the problem when they're allowed to go to third world countries where there's no regulations do wild shit and pollute rivers and Fuck up the environment. They do that and they do that because it's profitable That's that's our problem is that What you are saying and what a lot of Christians are saying what they grew up in this way is more important to do the right thing That's the most important thing. I think we should all agree on that I think we should you know and it's gonna benefit you in business too to some extent I mean well you will you necessarily be as successful as somebody who's like cutthroat and Doesn't care if their employees are underpaid or not well well treated or you're taking advantage of somebody in a process or ripping somebody off I mean you're not gonna be as maybe Successful is them, but you bring values. You're you honor your word You know you make good on your promises You do those types of things and that reciprocates in ways that are valuable in business And that comes back to help you I mean if you leave enemies in your wake all over the place like you cut off you damage and destroy relationships because you're dishonest and business You take advantage of people or you poach from them in nasty and unethical ways like I mean you're gonna You're gonna create more problems for yourself than you solve Yeah, we'll stop you get ahead in the same thing as to ahead of that. Yeah, a good It might be not the best example, but if you have a really good product you can stick by your your ideas is Chick-fil-A. Now a lot of people oppose Chick-fil-A for their anti-LGBTQ ideas and you know game-arriage and stuff But they don't open on Sunday They leave in billions of dollars on the table and they'll like Sundays to Lord's Day Like which is crazy for a fast food place To have that take with me while they're everywhere. Yeah, they're fucking killing it every time I go by chick-fil-A Is a giant always free chick-fil-A on a Sunday. I it's like the only time I think I want chick-fil-A. It's Sunday and I'm like I can't go it's closed. Nope Jesus said don't eat I don't know what you can have I don't know why it's bad You can still go to church and still work Still still possible to keep chick-fil-A open, but they don't want it. So look it's not It's not that I align myself with chick-fil-A's values, but I'm saying like if you have a great product You can stick by your thoughts even if they're not the best thoughts Yeah, you can stick by your ethics and your morals and you can still be successful if you have a great product product So that's where the idea of like ethical capitalism could come in you know like moral ethical capitalism like it's still Okay to compete in the marketplace, but it's not okay to lie. It's not okay to pollute environments It's not okay to do some of the shit that we know the corporations have done lie about studies and do different things where they Try to proclaim their innocence It's not okay to pretend that you're a free speech platform and then moderate political viewpoints that you don't like how about that one Agreed, but that one on the list agreed. Yeah. That's and that is A lot of people think it's less consequential than corporations doing evil things But it's still bad. It's not the optimal way to do things and but the I think part of the problem is what I'm gonna keep Come back to this, but I think part of the problem is the format itself the way people communicate In that text format is just shitty It's just a shitty way to get thoughts across to people where you're going back and forth with them It just leaves too much to the imagination It's too many it's too any openings to be an asshole It's just it's not a good way for human beings who are designed to communicate looking each other in the eye reading emotional cues reading tone and you know and the context of the conversation That's how people were supposed to talk and any other ways. I don't think it's good for you It's the reality of the world. We live in though It's just like with your kids and social media. It's like you can't there's never gonna be a physical town square anymore Where you go and have like a debate about the issues of the day like with your neighbors, but you should at least Encourage people to not engage with people like that I think that idea needs to get out there in a way that More people resonate that it's not good for them either. It's not good for anybody Like when you when I know I have friends who do that Twitter beef back and forth share with people and when they do it They have anxiety all day You know, I was talking about one friend. He's like I couldn't walk down the street 10 feet without checking my phone See who replied some walking around like almost bumping into people right just freaking out Yeah, you know because he's in some sort of a weird Twitter conflict Yeah, and there he's gonna raise your blood pressure to get all anxious You know you can sleep you said you couldn't sleep snap at people. I've had that happen where I like I Engage in some Twitter spat with somebody and my kid comes up to me My son will come up to me and ask me for something and I'm like not now and just missing him You know, it's like yeah, what I just do, you know I just I just treated this Twitter spat with more respect than my own son. Yeah. That's not healthy It's bad for you. Yeah, it's bad for you And I understand if you have a point if someone's saying something that's not true and you want to correct it or you want to argue against it Or you want to say something about them like this is so hypocritical because of this I get it I get it. I just I just think it's a shit way to communicate That's why I don't do it It definitely detracts from our ability to see other people as ends in themselves and not as means to ends or as You know an object to dunk on so that we can score some kind of points Yeah, and generate more followers or likes You know people don't exist for that purpose. No shouldn't be abused for that purpose You know, we I don't know That's that's that's one of the areas where I think A faith like the Christian faith comes into play and seeing people as more than just simply Organism conscious organisms, but like you're may every everybody's made in the image of God and that we all have an inherent intrinsic value And we shouldn't be disrespected for that reason I Don't know I think I think instilling values like that is gonna be a lot more beneficial in those kinds of arenas then Trying to tell people what they can I can't say right no, I think so too. I just don't know how the two of them find common ground right now Because right now the ideological battleground is so fucking rigid Just trenches dug in the center and everybody's got guns pointed the other side It's like how do we make that thing where the Germans and the Europeans played soccer Was it World War one? They broke the trench and they they? During Christmas yeah, they played soccer and hung out it was a big deal because um You know they they had a truce in a cease fire And I think it lasted a few days and they went back to shoot at each other Wow, I'll find out that story It's a crazy story. I believe it's World War one That's kind of profound Awesome well It's most people don't want to be engaged in a fucking gun fight with people They don't even know right they're not even sure why they're doing this and they're doing this because they're leaders have told them to do it Like there's times where that's noble to do like Nazi Germany's sweeping across Europe. Yes 100% I'm not I'm not opposed to that But I'm saying most of those people did not want to be there Most of those people did not want to shoot at some person They don't even know and most of those people don't even agree with the thing They're being forced to enforce because they're fucking peasants They're they're they're just some guy got pulled out of the fields And they put him in a uniform and gave him a rifle and they're sending him to the front line That's the reality of war to those people so when they got together and Hung out for a couple days. They became him. He must have been so fucked when they started shooting at each other. Yeah. Yeah See do you find it yet? The first story I found was about like myths on it So it's trying to make sure some stuff was real by just I think there's photographs of it. Yeah, it happened There was just there's some stories that have been like Glad you're right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So pull the story up though because we got it in soon Let's see what we got here Soccer in the trenches remembering the World War one Christmas truce. So it's real so Due to do German return in the first war. It disappeared forever in the Soviet Union in the second in 1999 his son Rudolph found his dad's diary in the attic This is what Zemich senior recorded for Christmas day 1914 a couple of Britons brought a ball along from their trenches and a lively game began how fantastically wonderful and strange the English officers experienced it like that too That thanks to soccer and Christmas the feast of love deadly enemies briefly came together as friends It was one of several impromptu soccer matches played between British and German soldiers in no man's land that Christmas For one day and in some sectors of the line for several days the enemies made a spontaneous piece a century on these games transfix Europeans in quotes We all grew up at the story of soldiers from both sides putting down their arms front on Christmas day Says Prince William president of the English football Association no wonder because his extraordinary story suggests an alternative history of the 20th century Many people including some veterans of the war have doubted that these games were ever played The story seems too good to be true indeed Jeff Dyer in his 1994 book the missing of the Som Dismisses it as myth some historians believe the truth is somewhere in between others contend that the impact of the games Has been overstated as we witnessed the premier league of a fey and other organization commemorate the moment So it happened seems like it happened and that is a good story It's a horrible ending, but it's a good moment in a terrible story Yeah, I mean it's a great ending I guess in terms of the result of the war But it's a horrible ending for those people that had to go back to shoot at each other when they realized they had common ground They could just hang out together. So you think the liberals and the conservatives can have a day of peace and come together on Twitter and No Put down lay down their arms. I would hope they could do it individually one on one in real life. Yeah I'd like to see more that people would learn how to do that, but I think it's a learned skill. Yeah, I mean I think if A lot of people have a conversation about something that they disagree with even in real life They're so used to communicating in this Kind of shitty way that I think they would just engage in the standard and screaming each other I mean those caring videos that you see people yell at each other about wearing a mask or yelling each other about You know, you support Hitler. Whatever it is. But those crazy conflicts that people have in real life. That's not the way to do it either it's just human beings are in this weird stage of information over exposure and social media and just an incredibly volatile world right now. I mean there's so much uncertainty and there's so much anxiety that people have about international conflicts for the first time in a long time People are genuinely worried about our relationships with China and Russia. It's scary shit So people are just ramped up with anxiety already and then you know even if you get them together in public they might scream at each other But I think that If people could learn how to not do that you're learning to just communicate I think we could get along a lot better and we could find common ground. I think that's what we all want I don't think we're ever going to come to a time in this world where they're not conservative people and liberal people I like what you said earlier about steel manning your opponents instead of straw manning, you know Like actually giving them the benefit of the doubt that maybe they're actually a rational thinking person who's considered You know the evidence or whatever and has reached conclusions in good faith and Respect that and even if it's different than what you believe like respect that and be willing to have a dialogue with them about it Without without the assumption that they came by their views in bad faith or that they're stupid Right, they're ignorant. They haven't you know They just haven't done enough research and just belittle them, you know like you're never gonna get anywhere with that with anybody agreed agreed Listen man. I appreciate you coming by here. It was really fun to talk to you I appreciate your website you guys make hilarious memes. Thanks man. Really funny shit. Thanks and I'm glad you're Out there and I wish you'd get back on Twitter. I really hope they let you back on You know that was hoping that when Elon if he bought it and maybe he still will maybe they'll force him to buy it if he You know opens that up a lot more and let's a lot more freedom of expression on both sides Yeah, we'll see. I hope that I hope that that happens or if that doesn't happen There's got to be some other solution because I think Elon is absolutely right This is the town square and if it is the town square then we do have to have some consideration for first amendment Right because otherwise we don't have free speech privileges in the town square Do you think there's any potential for real third party site a second site like something that is that mimics what Twitter does but has a better like Sort of Open-minded approach that doesn't just get dominated by right-wing people Dominated by left-wing people. I mean there's been attempts A parlor was a great attempt initially and then look what happened with a get you know Amazon and Apple would happen they got they got de-platformed because they were blamed for January 6 It was this whole thing. It's like oh the all this hatred and all this planning was happening here They're not on the app store anymore. They got back. They got back, but you know people it's it People moved on and went to other things whatever. You know like parlor still there parlor still but the problem is this and this is what I say Over and over and over again when people ask me about alternative platforms There's a place for these platforms. I think they should exist and I think they should offer They should try to honor the free speech principle. The problem is the left doesn't want free speech They don't have a I say this all the time. They don't have a problem with hate speech. They just hate speech They can when they say misinformation they mean like opinions. They don't like when they say hate speech They mean opinions. They don't like they mean pew bigotry bigots are people. They don't like to have opinions They don't like yeah, so they're not gonna want to be on a platform that honors free speech You have to force it on them essentially. It has to be by the law. It can't just be oh, here's a free speech platform Let's all go there. Yeah. That's not gonna happen. I wonder you know, I wonder But I think one of the ways that that could happen and one of the only ways In terms of having a platform is if Elon buys Twitter Because if you really did open it up I think most of the people that are addicted to Twitter the progressives left-wing people does they're gonna stay on it They're not censored. You're gonna stay on I think they'll stay well And if they can go a little environments where they can block everybody they don't like and you know and limit comments to people follow them They could still sort of regulate their own feed Legulate with the locker they want you have if you have eight million followers on Twitter where you're gonna go I mean you're gonna leave Twitter to go to some other start your own platform right That's the problem that conservatives have it's like it's hard to build a platform. Yeah, especially if it's gonna be just for your own Like they're not gonna have eight million followers if it's just for leftists Right they're gonna have a lot less than that they've got followers from all sides Right that's what that's the value of Twitter right and that's what something like parlors because the right-wing people go over They're when they get kicked off Twitter and they don't think Twitter supportive of it and then it becomes so right-leaning The left-wing people don't want to go over there right and the left one and this is the thing I think that you know There should be like we're talking about we're very idealistic in this conversation talk about how people should behave and how they should Treat each other and it's you know, is that is this really gonna happen? I would love to see more people I love when I hear people like when people ask me who my favorite comedians are my favorite Comedians are anybody who's like willing to make the joke You're not supposed to make and speak the truth and stand up for free speech and this nonsense cancel culture stuff pushing back on that When Bill Maher is talking about you know the importance of free speech, you know, he's very hard on Twitter He talks about how they do need a new sheriff like it's been run poorly Someone like Bill Maher would be happy I think I don't know I don't even know if he knows what parlor is But he'd be happy to join a place like parlor and bring other people from the left with him because they could actually Benefit that discussion they could provide a counter to those other arguments more people from the left should be willing to jump in the pool and swim with others Not the men and the women's pool by the way, but you know the ideal Yeah, I do last I see what you're saying. I mean I you thanks. Thanks for the laugh. I don't know where this is gonna go But I hope it goes in a good direction. Yeah, I think I think like all things This is very disruptive technology and it's shaking up the world and I think we'll hopefully Cooler heads will prevail you find a rational solution, but I think a lot of it depends on these kind of conversations. Yep Absolutely, so thank you very much The website is Babylon B or the Babylon B dot com Babylon B dot com Babylon B dot com Subscribing support us. I mean we have you know we we're getting deep. I'm right podcast as well right We got a podcast YouTube channel. I love video content. Thank you very much. Thank you You