the Gero gun experience. I think we talked about this before in relation to the Communist era in Eastern Europe. That sort of part of the point that the humiliation of going along with things you know aren't true. And ends up having an effect down the road because you just not anything along. Yeah, I have a friend who grew up Mormon and one of the things she said to me once was really interesting. Because she left the church and she said I'm really susceptible to bullshit. It's a real problem. Wow. And so she started like she had gotten mixed up with some like yogi type people and guru type people. Right. People that were running like these weird little sort of like self-help things that were very cult like. And she goes, I have a real problem. Wow. I'm very susceptible. I grew up agreeing to things that are nonsensical. And because of that, because I had just like given all of my you know what when you when you just like all of your opinions are decided by a church and the church written by a 14 year old boy in 1820. Yeah. It's kind of nuts. Yeah. And that you've already had a conviction for fraud. Yeah. He's already full of shit at 14. And I was like giveaway. Yeah. Well, it's I mean, just if you read the tenants of the religion. First of all, they're wonderful people. Mormons are so nice. I don't like beating up a woman's because they're so nice. Yeah. Actually, if they were more woman's it wouldn't be so bad. If you just take out the crazy. Yeah. You got a good religion. Yeah. Wow. How much crazy. But that's sort of the same principle sort of applies to when people just accept you know like with what? You know like with wokism, you set except these ideological givens that aren't logical. They don't make any sense. I wonder if it's the same with societies. You know, I think that it's the thing that like post religious peoples just because you've lost the religion doesn't mean you've lost the religious instinct. Right. You're still looking for it. It seems like that's an inherent part of being a person. I agree. And I don't think I don't say it's bad. It's just it is part of what we are. And it seems to me very clear that for instance, you know you take Christianity out and other things will be put in. And they don't even need to be identifiable religions. Right. I mean our own age has decided in much of the West that there's this sort of form of watered down spillover of Christianity which will become the sort of religion. Which is the kind of diversity inclusion equity world where you constantly struggle for greater justice. All of which is a sort of very watered down version of a little bit of Christianity. There's a clear genesis of that too. And the the woke world there was a group at a certain point in time. Do you remember when the atheist movement had hit this atheist plus movement? Do you remember atheism plus? What was that? It was weird. And it was a bunch of these weird virtue signaling male feminist types that were adding with atheism adding a group of core values. Oh wow. About you know being anti discrimination, anti sexist, anti racist. They're own Ten Commandments. And so they they call it atheism plus. And I remember watching this guy give this speech, this fucking boring speech on this sort of establishing this this idea that because you don't have a religion. So we're going to be atheists. But with plus we can establish sort of a moral framework. Well, it's totally understandable. And I just asked that of course. And most even if the ideas are good. It's like you're putting it in an ideology. You're creating a dog. You're creating a all those new atheists who sort of started on the 2000 I got friend Sam Harris and others. They in my experience they all got a little bit nervous about what was on their shoulders. Christopher Hitchin certainly did. He started I think that latte in his life to get a little bit nervous about what was happening. I remember once asking him what what about he said people were starting to ask him to officiate their weddings. Yeah. And that was like he didn't say anything of what he said was wrong. He still obviously believed everything you believe. But like that's just slightly troubling place to be in because you start to sense people wanting you to replace the vicar, the priest. And that's and that's not the point. Then you in life of Brian to it tree aren't you? It's like you know I want you know you should all think for yourselves. Yes we all think for ourselves. It's it was always a problem of atheism. It was like it was an invitation to not do one thing. But it didn't but nothing follows from it as to how you should live your life. And it's the start of something. It's not by any means at the beginning of a policy. Do you think that's just an inherent thing about being a tribal primate that we have this desire to have someone wiser, a leader, and then even better if you can have like a godlike figure who gives you a set of rules that you have to follow or their horrendous consequences and it keeps everyone in line. Yeah absolutely. I always in the 2000s that I started to think if somebody came along and declared profit hood at the moment. Well they could do quite well. I mean think of those those hucksters on US television who still still take money from people. Saying that they can only build the church and have their helicopter refuse and in your dollars. You know those people still exist. There's a guy who's still selling his like silver water that he blesses. And the river Jordan not selling it comes out some hose with garden and it really is. And there are people who have been busted repeatedly and they're still they're still selling their wares. I always thought yeah if somebody actually made the profit claim in our era. I think people would be surprised how many people would go along with it. It's what is the late George Steiner described the phrase I love he nostalgia for the absolute. I love that phrase a nostalgia for the absolute. I think I think a lot of people have it. I have it we all have it to some extent. And the question is whether you can avoid it taking you to places that would demoralize you and lead you to a bad place. Yeah it's I think if someone came along and had a really good cult like a real solid cult like really welled out well laid out be rational. Think for yourself be kind, examine all evidence like people would join it in that and then it would always ends up with massive orgy doesn't it. They've got to give me all your money. Yeah fucking exactly like wild wild countries. Like always all of that piece and there's like nah you get a school of women. Wild wild countries amazing. I love that documentary so good. I love that. That got oh show had some really interesting. You still see his books in some places. In the Netherlands. In the while ago they had his books still in the book shop. So you buy them on Apple on Apple bookstore. I've read a couple of I do like that bit where he says he says in one of his speeches. Yeah the people are retarded by the people for the people of the people. But the problem is the people are retarded. It should be by the retarded for the retarded. It's like oh my god. The guru is saying that. And it's something about the fact that he's dead now and then he said it decades ago. But we are searching for things. Yeah and it seems very obvious to me. I mean obviously you know what plenty of people have called them. Things like the religion of anti racism and the religion of social justice or stuff. They are all something to do. You know some very very deep level. You've had your purpose today. You've had your five fruit and veg. You've had your meaning. Yeah you've had your meaning.