All right, James. Thank you for coming on the show, man. It's great to be here. You've written a mountain of books. Yes, we've written a few books. Yeah. How many terrorists have you interrogated in your career? Probably 110, I'd say 110. And is that what led to you sort of discovering this new found, this new found love of writing and reading? And yes, and no, I kind of stumbled into the writing to be asked of you. I was getting a little bit closer. I kind of stumbled into the writing. It wasn't the first, wasn't what I got into school for and originally got into it originally is PTSD therapy, to be honest. And my jobs always had me write a lot in interrogations. You're get the right to what went on in the interrogation and he kind of Intel reports. He got rid of those and he got a lot of research on the person you're talking to and your geographic area you cover. And so how are the skills necessary to be a writer? I just hadn't actually gone that path. And when I was talking with some of the VA about, you know, how do you make that adjustment from military to civilian? One of them had suggested looking at writing therapy and just writing out the some of the areas and things you kind of struggled with. It's good sometimes to put it on paper. Even sometimes when you write out that event that happens and just write it down and then throw it away and burn it, just kind of get it off your chest and get rid of it. It can be quite helpful. But it's kind of a point where it's like, okay, I've done that. This seems to be helping but what do I do next? And that's when this person I was saying and said, well, I want to just write a book. And they're thinking, hey, I'm just assigning them busy work. You know? And so I started doing that and he said, well, I'll write what I want to read that I don't see being written. And it just kind of took off from there. So it's not typical for Air Force folks to be interrogators. It's always not. It is not our main job at all. Yeah. How can you explain to me the beginning of your whole journey into joining the Air Force and eventually going to Iraq and interrogating all these guys? So I originally joined the Wisconsin Army National Guard back in 1996. I was young 18 year olds, 18 years didn't know what I was doing and what I wanted to do in life. My uncle had been in the guard for 20 some odd years, but he was active duty. He worked there full time. And he encouraged me to just go check out the guard, get my college degree, paid for through them. And then if I really want to make the military a full time career, I just crossed over and do that. And that made sense to me at the time. So that's how I started in the military is going that particular path. I was in a self-propelled a paladin artillery unit, spent six years doing that. And then I live and happened. At the time, I was a student doing my a fall semester for my senior year in Munich, Germany when I live and happened. And at that point, I decided that I wanted to go full time military. And when I decided to just finish school. And then beside how many of this full time, I want to go into the Air Force ranks. And it took a little while to actually cross over because it's not common to change branches. So it took me about a year and a half to make that that switch. And then I moved in. And then with the interrogation stuff, this is not a normal job for the Air Force. It's a special duty assignment for one. So it's typically if the volunteer to go into a special duty assignment, build it for that. But what happened is when Abu Ghraib broke all that unfolded. When what unfolded? He Abu Ghraib scandals at the prison there. We had the military guards were appeasing the prisoners and the photos and all that stuff kind of leaked down to the internet and caused me to go big problem there. I think it was in 2004 and five when that kind of really is that is that when the enhanced interrogation. No, no, no, I was totally separate. But this you had those images of the prison. Yeah, the prison guards were having these the prisoners, the prisoners in different positions they shouldn't have been in and just they were not doing what they should have been doing. And it would create a big scandal and a problem for the army. And what happened is they lost most of that mission and it got put on the shoulders of the Air Force. And this is not a normal Air Force job. So the Air Force put out a request of volunteers to join. I joined in the second wave. So I went in the second round of it because we had to provide people for two years to help augment the army and help a system in that. Yeah. Okay. Yes. Again, this was soldiers being left to their own devices and not being properly supervised and doing what they're supposed to be. And where was this prison at? So Abu Ghraib is the west of Baghdad area west of Pakistan. From the airport. Okay. Yeah. I remember seeing these photos. Yeah. Yeah. For some reason though, I thought I always thought that they were from Guantanamo. Yes. It's on Iraq. And unfortunately, it's really was kind of a spark that really ignited that a lot of the insurgency to because it just fed the narrative of, you know, the big bad evil Americans coming here to subjugate them. So to speak. Yes. And it just it really harmed us a lot. Those images. But this was a big mission and the army needed help to manage that. And so the Air Force was asked to provide, you know, interrogators for a couple of years. And I saw the call and I read the description thought, well, that sounds pretty neat. Let me go volunteer and go do that. And actually, you know, you're signed up for this 556 day deployment more or less. And it was kind of like a great long trip. I think I was, I guess, someone was life being 26 to 28 days out of that period. So it was long haul. Now why wouldn't we want FBI or CIA to be interrogating people like this? Definitely. Typically what they do, right? Like FBI are like the number one interrogators. Different. So the difference between like civilian interrogation versus military, right? So civilians, they're trying to interrogate people for collecting evidence that can be used by a prosecutor for case, right? A military interrogators, that's not a primary goal. Our primary goal is to acquire information so we can action it, whether it's where's a weapon cash? Where are they smuggling weapons across the border? Who is the leader for this organization or group? And then where are they staying at? Where are they building 90 days? Since like that, we're looking for intelligence and locations to go action something. And it's usually to, in our missions, our capture kill. That's what we want is I prefer the capture part because I need fresh people to talk to, to continue working up the chain. Some of the shooters prefer the other method either way, you're removing the threat from the population. But again, it's very different mission sets from a law enforcement because they're again looking for evidence, confessions, things like that to prosecute. Whereas on the military side, we don't really care about the prosecution sign. We care about intelligence to go, you know, capture kill bad guys. Okay. That makes sense. Yeah. Where are we? Yeah. So you got deployed. Yeah. We deployed out of so we went to for which you got for your, your train with the army. So us Air Force guys went embedded with the army for the training here and doing that. Having spent, you know, I went to basically training for the, with the army and spent six, six years with the garden, doing different training iterations with, with that side of the house. So I was already used to being with the army and working with the army. So for me, it was kind of felt more comfortable because I just felt like an oddball being in the Air Force having come from a different service because I didn't start in that service. It was kind of different. But as soon as we went through the training there, then we all deployed as a group over to Iraq. And we were at Camp Cropper. That's where the main prison facilities at right next to the airport there. And you're basically broke down into geographical regions. So you have groups that cover the south, the west, the north, and then inside the north, they'll break it down further into different regions. So the region I covered was the Dioloprovins, just just north of Baghdad, Spakubah, and Carlos Mottadia. And what year, what year was this? So we got there in the middle of October, 06. Oh six. And then we were there through October, 07. So we were there pre-surge and then we were there for the whole search. And that was a big difference, big, optimal difference. It was big change in work. We were there when it was the worst of the war. And then kind of got to see a little bit of that transition into where actually we started to win, started to win the peace, so to speak, towards the end. And then when I got out, we went back home. I left the Air Force maybe like six months after our deployment. Time I was interviewing one of the other agencies, then that one. Didn't work out there, which thank God, it didn't. What are you going to see? One of the other three layer agency groups, because when you do interrogation type work, you work with somebody's groups. And so they're always looking to try to find people who can look good at it and move them into their spot. I'm glad that didn't work out that particular way, because it would put me on a different career trajectory and path than what I ultimately did. But I still went back to Iraq for a couple more years with a couple of of contracting companies, with dying corn, with triple canopy. So I can't remember, I can't recall on top of my head, but 2006 was that after John Keriyaku went on ABC and talked about enhanced interrogation? It might have been. And was there any sort of talks in your groups, people that you were there with about that kind of stuff? Because I know that was kind of like, well, yeah, the TV series 24 with Jack Bauer, right? So everyone thinks that that's what interrogations like you just, hooking up a little lecturers and shocking people. And do all those kinds of physical things to people. It's really not that. It's interrogations is much more about conversations. It's about a lot of wordsmithing. And on the military side, we were really constrained by the rules and regulations that we had to operate under. So you guys weren't allowed to water board? Yeah. Okay. That would have, that would that would have led to you in a world of troubles. Really in the rest. Oh, hands down hands down. Yeah. No, because you guys, you guys weren't on one of the CIA black sites. That's why. Yeah. Well, and if you're at a CIA black site got healthy if you're still considered accurate military doing that because you're under different rules and regulations what they are. You know, they have different set of rules that they can play by them. We're under U.C. and J. And so we have, we have to abide by what our, our box, our box of tools are. And then it's constricting. I mean, give you an example, someone gets captured and we bring them in. Ideally, you want to put them in separations so that way they can't be coached by the other people in the prison on what they're saying, how to evade us. Yes. But to put them in separation, I got to have a a a 0.6, a colonel sign off to put them in separation just for, I think, it was 72 hours. And then if I want to put them in separation for up to a month, now I'm going to have my task force commander, which is a two, a two star general sign off on that just to have a nice for 30 days. And if I want to extend that for an additional 30 days, then I would have to have our, our theater commander. So in my case, I'd have to have General Petraeus sign off on that. And I did. I hit him sign off on two of them because I do guys. We kept in separation for 60 days. But that just shows you some of the red tape we had to deal with because that's quite constrained. You would think that should be a common sensing because in the US, we can put people in isolation. People in isolation in prison for years. But in or it's considered, you know, inhumane treatment or prisoner or something like that, but it's not in America. I mean, FBI can do this. Prison system can do this, but you can't do that in a war. It's quite quite interesting in the rules you had to deal with. It'd be very careful with, like, perceived threats or direct threats to people. You know, you can't directly threaten him. Like, you don't talk to me then, you know, we're going to harm your family. That's a direct threat. That would lend you in a lot of trouble. You know, you're probably going to get relieved and maybe pay some use to MJ charges. So you had to learn how to be very good with your words and to say, looks, I can't make you cooperate. You don't want to talk to me. That's fine. I get it. But if you're of no intelligence value to us, and I'm going to have to, where does it work on handing you over to the rocket to the administrative justice and the rocket, please. Well, if he's a soonie terrorist, he's being handed over to the administrative justice and the police who are predominantly running by Shia, why is it not going to go very well for him? So I didn't threaten him, but I let him make the connected dots for himself. Yeah. Yeah. And now he's got to prove why he should stay with me and why he's valuable enough to be kept. Because if he's not, well, we'll send him down to Camp Buka and this in the south. That's long term detainment. And you'll just have to wait your turns. You process through the criminal system. And maybe he'll be acquitted because they don't have any good evidence. But that might take you two years or three years for that to happen. So before you got to have sent over to Iraq, I'm sure you didn't have, did you have any sort of special interest in interrogation or psychology to begin with? And what sort of training did you have to go through to learn these tactics? Yeah. So I didn't have any, I didn't have any previous experience in that or that's a desire. I would say it was a job I didn't know about. And it's a job that most people don't know about or think about. It's not a very big profession in the military to begin with. And it tends to be a profession you only really need during a war. Outside of war, it's kind of challenging to do that. You end up working on the other side of the schoolhouse, which is the source operations where you're developing sources, recruiting and assessing people who can be informed when you sort of speak. And you would do that outside of military bases overseas to make sure you're assessing for threats against the facility or against soldiers operating off the base, things like that. So that's what you would tend to do more on the peacetime side. As far as the train, we all went through the same training that they have out at Fort Wachica, the 97 Echo Corps. So I think it's probably changed to the molasses at this point. But it's about a four and a half months course. And then they have a second course, an enhanced interrogation analysis training. And that's where you kind of repaired up more of tire teams where it's you and an analyst working together as a team enhanced interrogation. What was it? Enhanced interrogation analysis. Analysis. Yeah. So in this case, what you know is you have an analyst that's working with you. And that's what we did. We had, there was us as the integrity, then we had an Air Force analyst working with us or a contract analyst and then our linguist that formed your tiger team. And the analyst was really helpful because they could do a lot of the research that you, you couldn't always do. I mean, you're going into the booth, you're entering into the subject, you're talking with them. But the analyst is sometimes vetting what they're telling you on the spot real time. Yeah. Or they're doing research of the prisoners that are coming in. So my house, Jeremy, he was phenomenal. And what would happen is when a bunch of new prisoners will come in, he looked at the incoming sheet and see who's coming in and where they were captured. And we only dealt with prisoners that were coming in from the D'Alder province. We knew our area, our province really well. And if we had new prisoners coming in from a particular village, then he would look and say, okay, what do we know about this village from the previous guys we've interrogated? And what do we need to know to further our mission in this area to go after these other cells? And that would help help me know specifically what questions to go after or maybe ask them, do you know this other prisoner and get them to tell me a bit more about this prisoner? And I can kind of vet some of what he's already told me with this other guy. Maybe it's true. But now I can also let this other guy know that, hey, I know a hell of a lot about your area. And I know a lot about you, you know, you're here because someone knocked. So, was, you know, let's talk. And that was really, really helpful because, again, it's just another resource to help you track down information, know where to steer you, where to point. So, let's speak. And what did they teach you about breaking down the human mind and sort of like getting into the deep dark secrets? Yeah, the best thing I learned was from one of our instructors at the advanced school. He was a retired Special Forces warrant officer and been an interrogator for a long time. And a couple tours on her as belt before he retired and went to school. I was teaching us. And one of the things he told me is he says, he's like, all right, it's kind of like knocking at someone's door when you start the interrogation. You get them to open the door. What you want to do is you want them to invite you in and start talking. And then once they've invited you in, you want them to kind of give you a tour of the house, tour of the rooms and see everything in there. So, to put it in like a conversation, when we start talking, I could either go at you and say, where is this, where are the weapons that your organization is using? Where are you hiding in where you're storing them and how are you acquiring them? Chances are you're not going to talk to me about that. But I can spend all day grilling you about this, berating you, trying out kind of different tactics. But likely is it's not going to work. Or I can take a different tack and just try to be more of a conversation with you and just try to accept that, you know, we are adversaries obviously, but you're still a human being. So you still have human desires and wants and needs and things like that. So let me play to those. So kind of talk with them and ask them, just like I had one guy, he was real big, big guy with the Anzor al-Suna organization. And one of the things I talked with him was, why did you get into this? Like, what did you do before the war? So get him to talk about that. And he owned a business, he got his masters in economics. He actually had a good life before the war. And when I talked to him about that, I was like, so why are you doing this? And his basic response as well, when you guys came here, I lost everything, I lost my stature and position in the community because I was, you know, a Sunni, I was with the Bath Party. And I have no future employment opportunities and ability here. So why would I, why would I not fight you? Right. You know, and that when I kind of got to that point there and we start talking, right? I'm not accusing him of anything. I'm asking him why he feels this way and why he's doing that. He starts to open up war. And I say, all right, you're here now. It's not what we can do about that. So let's make the best situation. Who are some of the other organizations in your area where you live that are causing problems? Because I'll kind of interact and then I'll just soon on different splinter groups. They're not always working together. And sometimes they do, sometimes they work against each other. But it's also ideological. So there's going to be like Shia organizations that are fighting against the Sunni ones because it was kind of almost like a civil war going. And the Sunni guys, you know, kind of guys will, they will get diarrhea of the mouth about the Shia militias and insurgent groups and tell you everything you want to know about them. Well, we have a collection requirements to go after that too. It's not just the al-Qaeda ones. We want to know who the other guys are that causing the problems as well and where they're smuggling their stuff in because all their stuff comes in from Iran. So if you're not going to talk with me about his organization, at least not right away, then let me get them talking about the other one. And as we start sharing more and we start developing that bit of rapport, now I can start whittling and get a little bit more information from him about his. And in his case, it was more about how have you been able to have smartest all this time? And he was kind of arrogant, but he liked to brag about how smart ineffective his group was and how they had out-thocks us for so many years and how smart it is. So I played that. I was like, okay, well, how? Tell me about this. And then just kind of like, oh man, that's so clever. You guys did that. I can't believe we were too stupid to figure this out and just kind of play along with that. And that led to him telling a lot more than he probably wanted to. And you just kind of let them talk and let them talk and just poke and prod. It's conversational. And another really big thing to do, and it's all cult, it depends on the culture you're dealing with in the Middle East and in Arab cultures, it's very common to sit and break bread and have a meal. When you have meals with you, don't look like that. You can't really not really adversaries, so to speak, in their culture. And so it's not uncommon. You see this with Afghanistan in some of the tribal relationships in the way they interact. They can be sitting, have dinner together in in conversorantly. And then the next day they're fighting you to other right. Us in the West, it doesn't compete like why would you do that? But that's their culture. And so when you kind of understand their culture a little bit, you start, you know, just play along with it. So for me, we would sit and have, you know, have a meal dinner with terrorists. So you're letting these guys, these guys obviously aren't constrained. They aren't handcuffs. They're, you know, I've got an MP outside. And if you sit out there with a taser and a German shepherd, you're ready to go. So I mean, if they want to get feisty, I mean, this guy can just take grab his fork or his knife and just like leap across the table. Good. Maybe if you want to grab a classic fork, it's like, it's like a surreal one. Yeah. I mean, sure, they can do something to the chance of them telling you pretty slim. Maybe you like it punch the face, you get hurt, but yeah, the guards are going to be on them pretty quick. I mean, and hopefully you're to have a little bit of your own wits about you to be able to, you know, define your own self too a little bit. But we never had it incident like that. We didn't have any incidents like that. Anyway, that's kind of surprised. But when you get there and you kind of see it, I mean, they're in this, they're not getting out of this prison. And so, you know, they're, I don't want to say they're broken, but they kind of accepted that they're here. That makes sense. What sort of hope do they have like by answering your questions and cooperating with you, do you give them any sort of hope of being free or what do you make them any promises? Yes, you can do all of those things. Whether you have a lot of influence and getting them out, that's kind of questionable sometimes. If the subject you're talking with, if the prison you're talking with is a, a good, a high enough asset, like they say they've got really good placement in an access in their organization. And there's potential that they could be recruited as a source to work for you. Maybe you can have them working doing collections for you inside the camp and again, to their prisoners. Or they may be able to get recruited by one of the other agencies to go work outside the camp. That did happen. That's not very frequent, but it would, there was one of cases where that kind of stuff would happen. Generally speaking, your objective is to get the intel. So if you have to lie to these guys, make up, work with the, the jag, the milsaille lawyers who cracked up these cleverly worded, you know, amnesty things, hey, confess to all these different things or tell us about all this, your sins will be forgiven so to speak. You could come up with a lot of those things in, is bruises and use those. And I mean, you're getting your job to collect intel. You're out there, you're out there front, you're not there to get them out of the prison. You're there to get intel. So if it works and gets you intel great and once you've gotten everything you need, it sounds callous, but when you've got everything you need, typically they're just transferred down to long-term detainment. That's down south of the other camp. And I mean, you can write up, you know, a letter and you just explain, like, I've been Terry this guy now for excellent work times. There's many hours. We've talked about these different things here. Is my belief and based on the information intelligence we collect at this point, he's not involved in this or this is not true or this is he's not involved with these different things. And the person has provided substantial information to help coalition forces and help the government of Iraq and they'll list out the looking at things they've done. And you can do those kinds of things to put that in their file for them. And then when they, their files reviewed, eventually by the Ministry of Justice, you know, the prosecutor is, there was a lot of times where that holds a whole lot of weight and usually ends up, you know, absolving them from whatever the charge was because it couldn't be backed up. You got the integrity and the intel I was saying the same thing. Those guys usually get to walk. And so I mean, you can do things like that. But, you know, again, when I first got there, we had two to 400 new prisoners coming in a week. There were no new captures filtered down to our camp. And there's only about like 50, 48 to 60 lost not a lot. That's a lot of new people coming in that have to be screened and interrogated. And you already got 5000 in the camp too. So you've got guys you're already talking to, you got two to 400 new ones coming in. Now when the surge happened, we suddenly had 30,000, about 30,000 extra troops. We had 30,000 extra infantry troops guys to go kick down doors. Big difference in like support guys. They were just capture kill people left and right. I mean, it was just heyday. And that caught went from two to 400 a week to six to 800 weeks sometimes. That's a lot of people coming in. And our interrogation numbers didn't go up like we didn't get more interrogated to offset that workload. We just had to work more hours in handle that. So there'd be times where you've got 16 cases. You're already handling 16 guys you're handling and you're such a chief coming going, sorry man, but here's five more new ones. And you're like, so how do you figure how do you get through it all? And I'd have clever different ways of just line up and have like six guys, eight guys in an interrogate in one night and just kind of make them really quick assessments more or less for me. It's not a straight up interrogation at that point. It's giving me an assessment. Okay. Who's gonna be reasonably cooperative that I can talk with? And he has intelligence that's worth my time to exploit. And who's just who's not? Because I don't have time to spend days or weeks trying to break someone down. Unless there are really high value, we're just not going to necessarily put that kind of effort into it. Because again, I got 600 new ones showing up every week. That's insane. And I still need to get actionable intelligence on the ones I have. So you really got to balance your time. Did you speak Arabic? You speak Arabic? No, I do not. And you wouldn't have been allowed to interrogate in Arabic even if you did speak it. Pardon this brief interruption, but I want to take a second to talk about our sponsor, Verso. Now, you've heard this podcast before. Chances are you already know how obsessed I am with health on longevity, which is why one of my favorite guests to have on the show is nutritional scientist and neuroscientist, Dr. Dom Dagostino, who actually introduced me to this stuff. Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold a potential to increase longevity. The problem with aging is we accumulate these zombie cells or old damage cells that linger beyond their useful life. These zombie cells infect other healthy cells, speeding up the aging process, causing things like hair loss, wrinkles, arthritis, cancer, dementia, and everything in the realm of aging. What scientists have realized is that we can manually induce autophagy, meaning the cleanup process of the old zombie cells and replacing them with new ones. Verso's new clean being, which I take every night, is a powerful blend of synolytic molecules that help promote the body's natural cleanup processes like autophagy and apoptosis, promoting better cellular health, supporting lower inflammation and natural cardioprotective functions, while boosting protection against age-related diseases. The three main ingredients in clean being are spermidine, lutolan, and a hydrocorsatin, which play key roles in the control of gene expression and are essential for cell growth and proliferation, specifically when it comes to cardiobascular and cognitive function, skin health, vision, and the immune system. Head on over to vr.so and use the coupon code concrete at checkout to save 15% on your order. I linked it all below, now back to the show. Based on the rules and everything else in place there, we had to work through a an interpreter. All of our interpreters were US citizens, usually they had secret or top-secret clearances, but your question had to be asked in English, the interpreter would interpret it in the Arabic, and then they would interpret it back and then back to you. That's how it had to be done, because all of our interrogations were better recorded and monitored. Other agencies could pop into just checking to make sure you're abiding by the rules and regulations. That's how it had to be done because all of our interrogations were bit of recorded and monitored. So other agencies could pop in to just check and make sure you're abiding by the rules and regulations and do spot checks. And they have to hear that you are asking the question in English because they may not speak Arabic. And if you do speak Arabic and you could be asking, you could be asking questions and all of that, making threats, making, you know, in situations that you're not allowed to insinuate or do. And languages mean different things in English versus Arabic. And so it's going to be very clear what it is you meant to say. Okay. Yeah. Very rule. It's very quite rule based. So it's after that, 2005, a detailed treatment act that a center of fine golden center of a cane kind of shackled us with. They really put the chains on us. Interesting. Yeah. Not fans of the guys. Now what did what did you learn from say your first interrogation you ever did over there until like your hundredth interrogation? Yeah. So what did you learn personally about these people? Yeah. And what did you learn? Did you learn anything about yourself and the human mind? Like how did you evolve? So I'm talking probably about 110 or so maybe people may be a little warming be a little less, but probably in total about 550 interrogations I think over maybe about 2100 hours give or take in that year. So it's a lot of time to spend with these guys. My first interrogation, what I learned is these guys will lie through their teeth to get out of what they're what they got apprehended for as they're just going to lie, you know, incessantly. And it's kind of your job to figure out, okay, well, what is it that what are they lying about? How can I turn this line to something that I can work with? And a lot of it goes back to trying to recognize that we are adversaries, but they're still a person. And if they're a person, they've got needs, wants, and desires. So how do you work those needs, wants, and desires to your advantage to get what you need? Because again, it's different than a criminal. I'm not trying to prosecute the guy. I don't care if he's guilty. I care if he has intel that we can that leads to the capture kill of his comrades and to, you know, remove these violent extremists from the community. We can't we can't end the violence in the cities and in the villages. If we don't remove these people from the streets. And that's just the number one goals. Get them out of there. Figure out where the weapons are coming in from, who's financially supporting them. And it comes up finances. My god, are they clever? They are so clever with the finances. You know, one of the guys I talk about in my book, the book I wrote about my experiences on there. Which book was that? That was an interview with the terrorists. I didn't bring no one here with here. But that one, so I think I who got upper hand used, lived in Germany for about six years is from Bukuba. And he was coming back to pick up his wife and then smuggle her back out of Iraq back to to Germany. And he got caught on a random checkpoint that special forces threw up. And his name and information was on a on a beyond the lookout list of bold list. And that's how you got caught just randomly like that. But how he acquired this dude's information was wild. So what happens is when they need to get money into Iraq to funnel and support these guys, different charitable organizations in Europe and elsewhere what they'll do is take the money to that people are donating for the cause, whatever. They buy really expensive vehicles, high-end BMWs and Mercedes. It's caught in your 100 plus thousand dollar vehicles. They ship them into Kuwait. And then someone on the other end receives they take them and drives them up to Baghdad. And then they use for one or two purposes. Either they're sold. And then that money that they make from the sale of the vehicle is now used to pay the salaries of the fighters for the different organizations or used to buy weapons, things like that. It's a way of smuggling in money without doing through normal banking systems that go all in that work. Yeah. And then the other thing they would use it for is car so when you see a BMW 7 series driving up near Conroy or heading towards towards a gate, one of the military gates to come on the base, you're not really going to think that this BMW 7 series, brain spanking new is a car bomb. You're thinking that beat up jalapia over there that's riding a little low on its suspension is the car bomb. And you'd be right that usually is the car bomb. So those high end vehicles had a much better luck at getting really close to the gates before they would set up their bombs. And when you set up 1,000, 2,000 pounds car, riding a gate like that, you're going to cost them a major damage. So what happened is when one of those incidents happen, we look at all the evidence that's left behind, right, the vehicle. So you find the bin numbers for the vehicles, you put it all down there, you keep track of the bins. And then when they did a raid on someone they thought was tied to this whole network, they discovered all the paperwork for the vehicles that were coming in and they traced one of those vehicles to one of the car bombs, one of the car bombs to this manifest. And then from that shipping manifest, they had the end destination in Germany who shipped it. So we put that guy's name on a bullo. So when that guy got caught in a kuba with my prisoner, man, the whole thing, the whole thing together. So now he's in here and he had no idea how we found out about him. But that's how we get. And that's just one method that they use for smuggling in money. Right. And they've got way more clever now. I mean, obviously when you know it's about crypto, there's other ways where they use SIM cards because you can load money on SIM cards and your phones and things like that. So you can do that and move that because it's very easy to take people SIM cards, dump thousands of dollars on these things. And then you SIM cards around and hand them out and then they can go change the money into what they want. And it's all done under the radar without the banking system knowing about it. And it's very, very hard to track. Was there one interrogation that you did that sort of led to some sort of big win for you or like a big victory for your team? Is there one that sticks out in your mind? Yeah, I mean, we had a couple of them like that. So my guy that we caught in in Jeremy was was a really big one because as we unraveled that case, we started to we had had ideas on who else was involved in Europe in other countries and in other regions of the world. And so we started filtering in these names. Like I would just say, well, why would this, you know, why did this person here talk about or mention mentioned X, Y, or Z? And he, my prisoner, we respond back, well, he doesn't know about this or he's not involved with that. Well, my guy just inadvertently acknowledged he knows this guy. And this guy is involved in the organization. So where we thought we weren't sure if he was involved, now we know he's involved because our guy who isn't involved confirmed it. And they don't realize that that's what's happening. Right. And so that was a big win for us because it wasn't, it wasn't like the sexy weapon cash or you captured someone here in Iraq. What it was though, was it was a big win for uncovering a massive web of financing that was happening, financing the organizations and the money flowing in. And that was really big because if you can dry that up, it makes it a lot harder for them to pay their fighters and continue to acquire weapons and do things and ride people. So it was a big deal to kind of bust that. But it wasn't directly addressing things inside of Iraq. Like I guess like we would think or want some times, but it had a big impact in the overall mission though, because you're drying up the money and where I identified a bunch of things in Europe, we didn't previously know about, right. I was a really big deal. But my focus is kind of on Iraq, not what's going on in Europe. Right. That makes a lot of sense. Was there any specific interrogation that fucked with you psychologically? That kind of like gave you, I mean, you mentioned now that you obviously have figured out a way to combat your PTSD with writing and different kinds of therapies. But is there what part of your job over there was the most disturbing? So the most disturbing is just seeing when you get these guys, you have the you have the capture package, you got the intel package, what we have on the suspect, right? What we have on the guy. It's pretty disturbing stuff. You know, these are not nice people. It's not like this is some drug dealer or some gang member. These are really hard and terrorists. I had one guy, he got his organization, he kidnapped a son for a tribal shake, one of the local tribal shakes, and they were trying to hold him. They wanted to basically ransom the kid. And they got the father to pay up the money. I think it was like a hundred thousand US dollars or something. And so they got the money. And they said, okay, well, your sons in the trunk of this car in this location here, the drops and maids, they got the money. Here's the location of the vehicle and your sons in the trunk. And some wasn't the trunk. Problem was the sons in the trunk and like a bunch of different pieces. And this was how they think and operate like this. And now I have to, you know, interrogate this guy. Obviously, you'd like to, you know, be a little physical with someone like that, but you can't. You got to divorce yourself from that and try to figure out how do I be buddy buddy, friends with this guy to get in for information to go kill and capture his buddies. That's kind of hard to accept and deal with. But you have lots of situations like that. You know, there's that one. There's just another one. We had it. We had those a bunch of some Iraqi cops were working for one of the units that we worked with a lot as sources provide them in talent and what was going on the village and stuff. Well, they got out it somehow. The, you know, the kind of guys in that village discovered who was who was knocking on them, who was feeding them information on information on them to the Americans. And so when they figured that out, you know, they, they captured the four guys, but, you know, they do their little videos. They always love their videos. So, you know, here's the video of them getting their heads, you know, kind of, you know, sought off with these knives. And then they're just kicking their heads around like soccer balls. They're animals. And, you know, now we've got the guy that was responsible for it. And we have to interrogate this guy and try to get him to go up to goods on where they were like keeping these videos. A lot of times they would post at the time. A lot of this stuff is getting posted up to YouTube, you know, before YouTube, YouTube is really coming out. So, there's there, there's other kind of websites that they would post these things on and share these things about. And it's just, it's a terror weapon because what they're trying to do by doing a horrific act like that is demonstrate to local population that this is the price for cooperating with the Americans. Co- he cooperate with close resources. This is what happens. And it's a chilling effect because nobody wants to work with you. And when you say, well, we can protect you, we will help you. They're just going to say, well, you can help me to help me over there. Yeah, you couldn't help these cops. Right. Right. How do you know how it does? And so nobody starts talking to you. Mm-hmm. And so we, uh, to eliminate those guys. And that's why they do a lot of those, those horrific things. But, you know, you have to see a lot of this. You have to be involved a lot of this in questioning and talking with these guys. And if you fail to ask the right question, you know, people can get killed. You know, we had one operation. I mentioned in area of comment stories where we got actual intel on where a very large weapon cash was going to be located at for one cell that we were targeting. And this new unit had just been in country a couple of weeks of the U.S., um, up out of, uh, Bukuba. And we told them this particular route is got IEDs and car bombs on it. It, that says they want you to go through this route because this is where they're going to hit you. And the guy on these ambushes laid out for you. This is what this guy was telling you. Yeah. This is what our prisoner told us. He's like, don't go to this route. You know, he's actually a very cooperative guy. He's getting us good intel on. He's past poly graphic. Uh, you know, we'll polygraph prisoners. He's past all that stuff. So we reasonably think he's telling us truth. So he tells us don't, you know, here's where the stuff's going to happen and to take this other path. So we passed it on to the union that was going to action it. And this new unit, like I said, he just got in there, they're there to, you know, slave bodies and take names. They just want to fight. So they want to get engaged. Um, so we told them all that and they're like, well, hey, if this is where the fight's at, we're going to go to, we're in advance of contact and engage. We'd rather be a not because they'd rather you go this way or other route here and not get ambushed and actually get the weapon sighted in, you know, seize the weapons and the explosives because that's more important than your firefight. Um, but that's not the path they chose. So they went, they went the other way. And, uh, you know, they got involved in a couple of fights and, you know, they got ambushed twice and we all six guys a day, you know, and that sucks because it was, it didn't have to happen that way. And the fight lasts long enough to move the damn weapons. Why didn't they listen to you guys? They don't believe the prisoner. They don't, you know, they're like, well, we don't, we don't say believe that he's telling us the truth or whatever it was. And so they just kind of want to do their own thing. It kind of frustrating because it is a prison. You're having to base, you have to trust that this prisoner who's in an old kind of operative is giving you the truth. It has kind of hard to accept sometimes. The kind of like just defeats the purpose of your job, though. You would think, yeah, because in this case, we proved out that, yeah, our guy was actually right. Um, it helped validate his future stuff because now everyone believed him a whole lot more than they did before. Um, I mean, he passed the polygraph twice. That wasn't enough for some people. But when the car bomb and ID went off in the exact freaking locations he said they would, well, now they kind of believed him a little bit more. And his, his subsequent information was treated a lot with a lot more credibility, so to speak. You know, and other times, just forget to ask a question, right? I think I mentioned this in the other interview was I had a 15 year old kid that we were interrogating. We don't usually interrogate kids, but this kid got caught placing an ID on the side of the road. Uh, one of the units on patrol sawts in the napdom and hell was he 15. And so we can't, we can't, we can't hold him very long. We only can hold him for three days or seven days or something like that. And we got a little back out to their family, right? And so, um, I have the guy, you know, we're doing different tactics of trying to, you know, scare him into cooperating and talking and, um, you know, the target was his father and three brothers. They ran this big ID cell up in northern Baghdad area. And that's what we were trying to go after as to get these guys. How'd you figure that out? Just because we had a lot of intel on this on this family, this area, this feels just at the edge of the D.O.A. province and Baghdad proper. So that region up there was just a lot of ID's and car bombs going off. And we kind of knew who was doing it. And we know that from different signals intelligence and intercepts, things like that. So we kind of, we had an idea who they were and when we captured the kid and have his ID, we're like, oh, okay, now we know, this is their, their son. So we want to know where they are at. And his concern was he didn't want to give us a location because he's concerned that, you know, if we go, you know, we go to where they're at, that we're going to kill him as his father and his brother. Like, look, dude, I can't talk to dead people. I want to talk to a lot of people. So tell me where they're at. Tell me how I can capture them. Well, conversation. And we go through and get a location, any points out where it's at. So tell me about the details of it. And, you know, you just, you just forget sometimes to make sure you get everything. So like when a door opens, is it open in or out? And does it have a lock on the top and on the floor and then center? You need those kind of details. Those are those little pieces of information. Same with windows. The windows have, your bars on the bars on the outside on the inside are they built into the, into the wall. You got to know all those little nuance questions and things to ask. You know, it's a whole litany of things you need to make sure you kind of go through when they start cooperating and start giving you information. Because if the doors, if you don't get that information right, when the unit goes to action, they may try to bust the doors in and because they see the doors going to go in. And so they use the RAM and they say, oh, we'll just ram it and go in. But if there's locks on the tops and the bottom, they're not going to know to have a shotgun day with the slug to bust it open. Right. So when they start ramming this thing, it's going to take them a couple of hits. And those couple of hits are going to delay your entry by seconds. Those few seconds are typically all they need to wake up, grab their weapons, and start engaging. So you want to go in with lightning speed and do that. And, you know, in our case, you know, me and my answer, we just missed it, you know, missed one of the questions on on the on a lock and the unit got in the house. It's coming like next to three to five seconds to get in. That was all the time they needed though to grab their guns. The guns and start shooting. And next thing, you know, we're there to firefight. So one of our guys gets, uh, he got his arm shot off. I know he got shot in the chest blades. He survived. Um, but after the gunfight was going on, the, you know, you can't handle the grounds like, you know, screw this. We've already got two guys injured. Just, you know, we've got a gun chip overhead. Just have them level it. And so, you know, only hit with a missile and you flatten the building, you know, problem solved, right? So an airplane dropped a ball on. No, no helicopter. Yeah. So, um, the, the substance we were after the, you know, the father and the three sons that are building all those IDs and stuff like that, they're dead. They're just taking off the chess board. So good there. The problem is we also, we also nailed his grandmother and his mother and his five brothers and sisters in the house too. Um, all the panel damage. They're just, they were there to fight. And so, uh, after that, you know, you got it. The unit takes all of the pictures. Uh, for everyone, you need to go back to this 15 year old, it was all these pictures of the town P. I. D. is family. You know, that sucks. Cause I got to go in having P. I. D. is dad and his brother and make sure that they are who, you know, we actually got the right guys. Um, but here you promised him if he gives you the information on where they're at, you're not going to kill him. When I, you broke that promise. Um, and now you break the promise, you also wiped out his entire family. So kind of like the burning hatred and that kid's eyes, yeah, it's like, yeah, we just made a terrorist right there. Uh, hands down. And you don't, you don't think about it at that moment at that time because as soon as I'm done talking with him and confirm that we got the guys, I'm already on to the next interrogation and then the next one, I have like three or four or five of these a day. And it's just a repetitive cycle over and over and over and before you know, entire years gone by, um, imagine him becoming numb to this stuff. You do. You do. And you don't really even think about a lot of it. It's not until you come home and things start to slow down. I just start to have some more of these problems. And for me, I didn't encounter a lot of those kinds of problems until probably like 2014, 2015's one things really start to get bad because at that point, I've no, um, out of my rack, I'm out of the intel stuff. I'm not working in Europe doing that anymore. I'm back home and completely out. And when I'm completely out and have that time to think, that's when it starts to hit you. And so you start processing all that stuff and you go, wow, I can't believe we did all this stuff. You know, you just explained the hit on that kid's family who was making the IEDs and dropping the bomb on the house and leveling them. How often would mistakes happen where you would kill a family that was innocent and or bust have some guys bust into somebody's door and you get the wrong guys kill the wrong people. That's hard to know. I don't know. I mean, I suspect it happens probably more often than you'd want to admit. Um, I mean, so when US forces going to do these things, we're not just like going up to a house and just pulling a pin throwing in the room and just letting the granny go off and clear. I'm sure that's probably why a lot of the Russians and Ukrainians are doing in their fight. Um, but that's not how we fought. That's not what we were doing. Um, and by and large, our guys are pretty good about identifying who they are when they're entering and going in at nights. You go in at night. They're usually sleep. You can usually intercept the area pretty quickly and to do them. Um, but the, but things happen. You can't always account for that. And one of the things that was hard for me to accept was accepting that part there and just realizing that at the end of the day, the enemy gets a vote just like you do. And their vote is almost always going to go against you. And when that votes cast, it's cast, uh, you know, the fights can happen. And sometimes people are going to get caught in the wrong place, wrong time. You can do everything you can to mitigate that. You can do everything you can to try and avoid that. But the end of the day, the enemy still chose to fight his father and his brothers chose to fight. They chose to participate in this insurgency. They chose to make these IEDs, these car bombs and make themselves a target and attack us and attack the government of Iraq and try to deciivize the region. That was their choice. So unfortunately, their family was present at their, you know, was present during the capture and they chose to fight when their kids were in the room and kids were present. That's out of our control. Um, you know, and that's hard to accept. That's hard to accept that that's what happens. But it took years for me to kind of just get to the point where, you know, you just accept that the enemy gets their own vote to. And it's almost always going to be against you. And so you can't, you can only control your actions. You can't control theirs. Um, but it is what is important. Um, you know, I mean, like the wars, wars, our leads, brutal. It's not something we want to, you know, romanticize or embellish or talk lightly about it should always be, it should be avoided and be a last, last resort. But when it's time to go to war, it's time to put the war face on and go to war and kill the bastards and wipe them out as fast and quickly and efficiently as you can to end it. We shouldn't be train these things out for years and decades like that. It's just, it's not, it doesn't. Nobody wins those kind of wars. What was it like, like you just explained, getting home and having time to think, yeah, and time to reflect on the things that were happening and, and how long did that take for that to sort of kick in and for you to really start to deal with those psychological effects? So the first time I came back to my um, it was weird because, uh, last, my last time at our camp, you know, we were getting rocketed and bombed that that night. So I'm sitting there in my bunk room thinking of myself, man, I'm gonna want to get blown up by the last few hours on this, in this camp. Um, and then, you know, four days later, you're walking around the brandy of mall. How do you equate that? You're sitting here where you got, you know, rockets of mortars hitting your face and the alarms going off, the CRM incoming alarms going off. Um, and then you're walking around the brandy mall and people are sipping on their, uh, on their drinks. You know, and walking around like nothing. It's, and one more too, you had that shared experience, right? Everyone had to ration. There was, you know, everyone was making a sacrifice for the war. Um, you know, racking up gas and nobody's sacrificed anything. They weren't asked to pay extra money in taxes. They weren't asked to, um, ration anything. They weren't being drafted and impacted like that. So society was very divorced from reality of what was happening. Right. And so that was a little hard, but, um, I didn't have as much time to really reflect and think about that until after I, I left the, that whole world behind so to speak. And then you kind of start to realize, wow, these nobody has to have a clue what's going on overseas. You know, they don't realize the threats that we're dealing with that we're fighting constantly handling. They're just ignorant. Um, they're just not aware of it, but you are and now that you've left it, you see how everyone's like, how can they be so divorced from reality? Um, it's a little hard to rationalize and kind of deal with, but you kind of get to a point where it took me years to kind of get there and still start with some of it now. But it's just accepting that, you know, again, the enemy gets their vote on it and that there's a time and a season to kill and a time and a season to heal. And you kind of have to figure out that, like, I think we talked about this on yesterday is that as a society where we're, we're talking that you live a certain way, you act and be a certain way. And then when you go to war, that goes away. Like that's all gone. Now it's this kind of savage nature of, you know, us versus them. Um, and that's not how we're taught a society to act and be like. And so when you come home, you have to put that aside and go back to this normal person that you're supposed to fit into society. Correct. And that can be a little harder of an adjustment to do. And some people do it, but another's, um, and some people just really kind of struggle with that. I don't know if it's situation, um, training what really causes some people to struggle with it more than others. Sometimes it's just like an accumulation of everything you have seen and done. It just can be so overwhelming. Um, you know, I mean, I, I struggle with it a lot. And I think that I think as long as you're willing to constantly talk about it and seek different help and alternatives that can really help you eventually find some peace with it. Because you got to have to make peace with it at some point. You know, if you don't, it's just going to eat you alive or eventually just eat gone. You know, and that's unfortunately what a lot of veterans are doing because they can't make that peace. You know, how long did it take before you started looking into different types of therapies to come back your depression or your PTSD? So originally the VA loves to go to the pharmacology route, right? So that's their first choice. Give you some drugs. Um, but probably a lot of those drugs. All they do is numb the problem. They just put a band date over it. Um, like I remember, when we were in Iraq, you know, dude, we were getting super stressed out with our job just all that crap you're having to see all the time and deal all the time. And then on top of it, you still got these freaking rockets and bombs hitting your base and dealing with that. And then you got issue at home. You got your, um, your, your, your superiors, your management, we like to come. Or maybe they're good. Maybe they're not. It was quite stressful. Um, but they had these comments, stress clinics. You can go to, um, over there. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and I remember going there and, uh, one of the psych, psych, psychologists, psychitis, psychitis, psychitis, uh, he gave me a prescription for a lecture pro. Man, I wish I got in that one. I first got to, to Iraq. That made me like the coldest detached interrogator I could possibly be. What kind of drug is that? So lecture pros and SSR type drugs. So, um, I guess sorry. So, but it basically kind of does is a suppress is, uh, uh, some of your emotions. Um, your dog could die and you just wouldn't care. You could start, you know, you just using care. It's really kind of dead into you a little bit. Um, in our job, that was quite helpful to kind of tendons of that. That way you could just wait through this mountain of shit and kind of get through without losing your mind. Um, you know, but interest, like a paint kind of like a painkiller type drug. You find that. I don't know, but lecture pros, uh, it's it's a pretty common now antidepressant type drug that they use. Um, yeah, it was pretty. Oh, it's an antidepressant. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So you do that, though, um, there's other stuff that I think works better. Uh, because again, the VA is going to go to the pharmacology. I'm going to give you that. Is there anything else you could do to get out of there? Like, can you get out and like go for a run? Can you, can you go to the gym? Can you? Yeah. No. I mean, so yeah, when we're in, um, yes, to talk. And that's it. Okay. Um, so, yeah, when you're at the base, I mean, you got the NWRs. You've got, uh, you got the gym. You can go for a run around the camp if you want different things like that. But at the end of the day, you're kind of trapped in that camp when big tall walls, you ain't get out. I mean, my job's not to leave the wire. I'm the way to valuable to leave the wire because there's only so many freaking interrogators. Right. And they're in a rack and there is just an endless supply of prisoners. So they would love nothing more to keep us strapped to a chair when I be feed bag if possible. Jesus, just to give us a dare game, you know, click on that. What is Luxa Pro do for a person, Austin? Down. Oh, yeah. What's that effect, man? It's used to treat depression and generalizing anxiety disorder. It is an antidepressant that, yeah, the belongs to a group of medicines known as SSRIs. Oh, never heard of it. I mean, it's not the fuck you up. They can't. Yeah. Well, there's those kinds of side effects to those kinds of drugs too. You know, from, you know, just deadening your cognitive ability, you know, your sharpness a little bit, your sexual side effects, you could be there's lots of different issues and problems that with with kind of the drugs. But this is what the VA does because it's what they are allowed to give you and do. They're not able to say, Hey, let's try medical marijuana. Let's try ketamine. Let's try these snow. It can't be in block injections. What's interesting to this? Is that's what they are allowed to give you and do? They're not able to say, hey, let's try medical marijuana. Let's try ketamine. Let's try these snow gangly and block injections. What's interesting too, this is what they find that most of the school shooters and this country are that people that shoot up public shootings, they don't mass shootings. They're on these things. Yeah, because they have they have their work very well. Or they actually will have the opposite effect with like almost like exacerbate these psychotic tendencies. So it's why you got to be under a really good strict care in talking with them and understanding how people respond and develop these things. And the problem with kids, kids' minds are constantly growing and developing. They're not set. Right. So when you introduce drugs, SSR, drugs that mess with the chemical balances and their brains, you're kind of jacking up that development a little bit. Yes. And it's really dangerous. That's why they talk about marijuana, actually on people who are, I think, is under 25 or 23 actually can have really bad problems in the brain. Like actually leads them to develop, you know, schizophrenia or bipolar. Yes, there's there's that's been shown. Yeah, there's lots of psychedelics that are fucked with kids that have done it too much or abused it at a young age. Yep. And it damages them because I think it's cool and fun and want to continue to do that. And we as a side, you know, like, oh, whatever. Just marijuana that can get addictive. What knows not about getting addicted. It's about altering their psychology. Right. If they're developing and getting older, this is something I talk about all the time too, because if you look at, I don't know how big the percentage is, but it's got to be more than 80% of kids in America that are like in their teens are prescribed at a role. You know why? Here's the problem. We don't let kids be kids. We want to have, all right, let's boys are, they're noisy, they're loud, they're energetic, they're physical, they like to, that's what, that's how they are geared, right? But we've stopped having kids have recess and play and, and just be boys and just be kids. We want them to all be like these neutered little saints that just sit there and look nice and just yes, ma'am, no, ma'am and do school. But that's not how their brains are wired. Right. It's just not how psychologically they're built. and we're not letting them do that and you know how you combat that, that you know, come and follow that or all in as their eyes. And then you screw them up mentally because they don't know how to, they become teenagers and adults, young adults and they don't know how to interact with other people and talk normally and say, hey, you and I, we could be politically opposite or totally disagree, but we can still be friends and go have a weird, like that's okay. because we, you're a dolphin fan and I'm a box fan doesn't mean we have to kill each other. Right. That's, you know, that's what we have to get back to that kind of mentality. It can be, it's okay to disagree. Right. You know, yeah, it's scary to think about what kind of effect that's having on people that combined with the, you know, social media and people just communicating through phones and through text messaging and, you know, watching videos like even with war today, like people now just, you watch what happens and I don't know if this is the first war or this Ukraine war, the first one that we've had just a front row seat view. Oh, it's been brutal. Absolutely. Real seeing all that stuff going on there and I see what's happening and I see that so many people are just getting maimed from, you know, from the artillery of the shaft and things like that. And you're talking about holes in society that's just going to have all these people who just maimed and injured and you're just watching on the front row and it's brutal, I'll see these pictures of a, like a copter drone dropping, you know, a hang grenade on a couple of soldiers, unsuspectingly in a trench and go off and, you know, you can read the comments and just see everyone is just cheering it on and what I'd say, those are two people down there. Okay. Those guys just got maimed and injured from that hang grenade. They may be any, but you know, well, it's not celebrate their deaths. You know, right. And we're desensitizing ourselves to the point where it's we're not seeing our fellow humans as humans and it's this like video game mantra. It's like, okay, well, Ukraine war is just a giant video game, right? Just video game it. And it's like, no, it's not a video game. It's real people on the other end getting killed. And they have families, they have, you know, they have mothers and wives and kids. And I don't, you know, it's just, it's just strange seeing how our societies evolve using social media to just cheer this kind of stuff on. Cheers, the killing of other people on. It's like, it's almost like a, like a Roman gladiator time where everyone would cheer people getting killed in the gladiatorial arena. And it's kind of like, well, Twitter is our gladiatorial arena. It's jump on here and see on the Russian or Ukraine side and you watched these people getting killed like that and cheered on. It's really quite detached and strange. Yeah. The thing that really gets to me is that none of these people that argue about Ukraine and Russia and all the wars that are going on now, most of them have no experience of war. You know what I mean? A lot of it. All of the knowledge they have. I'm on, they're going over there either. Right. But they can. They have no experience of anything real. Anything like they have no actual firsthand experience of anything. All they can do is just read articles, watch videos depending on who they follow or who they listen to. And it's so, that makes it so bizarre to me that they're willing to fight to the death on this digital platform about something they read or some video they watched. And they just decide to adopt this idea and they're going to die on that hill because of that video they watched because they trust that person. Yeah. I hope that at the end of the stuff that, you know, there's some good efforts put forward to try and help these guys mentally and psychologically recover from this stuff. You know, because we did not do a good job of that exiting Iraq and Afghanistan, helping vets just de-transition from that into something new. Right. And helping people full of SSRIs and antidepressants isn't the way to go either because you just don't want, you need them to be productive members of society. So how do you help them heal and get better? You know, I will explain to you, I saw the 60 minutes episode that Dakota Myers did. It was that Marina Medal of Honor recipient. He did a 60 minute episode on that, uh, Stellit gangly and block injections, SGB injections is basically a nerve in the neck here that they do a nerve block on. And so when someone gets triggered, right, the brain sends that fighter flight signal down to your down to your, your, your, your heart and your, uh, dumps adrenaline gets you kind of riled up and going. Well, when they, um, numb that nerve when they do that, that block, when that fighter flight happened, it hits, it goes down and hits the block and bounces back. And it's almost like resets you a little bit. It gives you that it kind of quiets things down. So to speak, I guess like, uh, what you explain is when you're, you're in that moment, you feel like everything's kind of closing in like you just have the anxiousness, that jitteriness, um, the SGB and I do that injection. It just kind of like calms things and how I'll sort of describe it. It's kind of more of like a calming allows you to not be as, um, jumping and jittery and just, you know, fuse, right? Just what is your injection? What, what are they injecting? Oh, so they're just, they're injecting, you know, like a, it's like a nerve block, um, as they do on the act as two nerves on either side of the deal, we only do them one at a time because it's sometimes, um, it can leave part of your face like a little, little numb, numb, their droop for an hour or two and it goes away. Um, and sometimes they, you only need one injection and it can last you, you know, a year, two years, sometimes you may need three or four. just depends on how your body responds to it and kind of the severity of the trauma too, because the brain has gone through a lot. Yeah. It has, it snaps us are very wired for certain things that triggered all the time. You have to kind of redo that now. So the SGB is really good for helping to block, uh, those triggers, like give you that extra fuse, so to speak and help quiet it down a little bit. But you can still have to do the rewiring of the brain and that's where, um, you've seen some guys using, um, uh, some of the different psychedelic drugs. Yeah. Um, over, you know, you could have Mexico and do them and we're not. And that helps with that a lot of that kind of mean actually is a really good one. Yeah. Kind of mean. And I've also heard of, um, what is it? It's like, it's like, it's like the mushrooms. They do not mushrooms. Let's take the dose. MDMA. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Was it, uh, yeah. I haven't done the MD and A1. I've done the, uh, I've done the, the academy one. I think that works really good, but, you know, there's different ways of doing the kind of mean there's oral and there's an IV. Um, those guy here in Tampa who does them, um, yeah, you said that you were one of the first people to try some sort of special therapy in Tampa. Yeah. The, the, uh, ketamine doing the ketamine. That was the ketamine. Yeah. The way he does it's really great. So, uh, when you go on a psychedelic trip, right, and you do that, you're one, you're out cold. Okay. You're, you're out. But you can, like, you're gonna, I mean, you're, you're gonna, you're gonna fall sleeping into this thing. You're not like cognitively. I couldn't hear it. Carrot conversation with you when you're down with a ketamine trip like that. But it can be good or it can be very bad. And so one of the things he does to help ensure that you have the, that it worked out good for you because I've had the bad ones do. Right. Well, that's true. I want to do the oral ones on those network. Well, but the, um, what he does, he puts a benzodiazepine and a happy drug. Um, you know, I always used to joke and say with interrogations, that's how we get interrogations, pharmaceutical interrogations, because there's no torture. There's no physical harm to him. You're just giving a happy drug and those are still eating. Right. And then give a mix to see anyone. The drug wears off. They don't even realize what they get, what they did. No, you know, hard to follow those. Yeah. They just want to run around and give everyone hugs. So yeah, that should be the future of interrogation personally. But, um, so he gets, he gets put over to that and before you do the ketamine, you can. And then when I be ketamine, when he would do that, I'm out 15 to 25 minutes, usually before I kind of wake up from it. Um, man, I'll tell you that as though crazy is tripped in the world. It literally like being in the movie inception in the matrix. It's same time crazy. So when you're, um, what kind of a drug is going into, you're like, you're falling into like a dream and then a dream and a dream. Right. And I swear to God, I could be down for 15, 20 minutes. And I feel like I've been gone for years sometimes. Like whatever is just, it's insane. What exactly does ketamine do to you? How does it work? What is the mechanism of action? Yeah. So basically a lot of this stuff kind of helps to, uh, helps, helps the brain to kind of rewire itself a little bit. So when you're, how about trauma like say, for instance, for me, one of my big triggers is smell because I worked in the camp. Yeah. 5500 sweaty, dirty, smelling people. And that's a lot of feces and food and just nasty crap, right? So a trigger for me was dirty diapers, believe it or not. Um, as soon as I would smell dirty diapers from our, from one of our kids, it would just, you know, put me right back in the camp. Or if I'm walking, um, like when I was working in Chicago and I walked on a, on a sidewalks and walk past an alleyway and I'd smell some of that, some of the, the trash from there just instantly you're back and you feel it, that trigger right there because that for me, that, that was my trigger. Yeah. It's how three wires some of that. They say scent is the strongest sense tied to memory. Yeah. I believe it would for me, that was the big one for me. It was sent. It was almost always sent. I'd smell certain sense. And that for me, what I was kind of transport me there. And there was this other song I swear, this is a crazy song. So this Gwen Stefani song, sweet escape, right? I would get on the, the, the bus to go from, we lived on camp, striker, and we worked on camp, proper about a mile and a half apart. So we little bus that would take you over back and forth, to the king, back and forth there. So me, my group would get on the bus to go to our, to the camp for our shift. Every day for our squares, like 12 or 13 straight freaking days, we would hear Gwen Stefani sweet escape. And I'm thinking of myself, wow, I'm listening to this sweet escape song as I'm driving into a freaking camp with 5,000 errors. So now whenever you hear that song, I think about that every time. Yeah. Okay. So it's go down. What is it? A psychedelic? What the fuck is it? Yeah. It's like a, it's a psychedelic. Okay. Yeah. And you can do it orally or you can do it. All right. Right there. There. I mean, right there. There. There. A K hole is when a high dose of ketamine leads to intense feelings of disassociation. This can cause feelings of being disconnected or from unable to control one's own body. Also, sometimes affecting the ability to speak and move around easily. One way to think about a K hole is a state between intoxication and a coma interesting. Yeah. Some people refer to a K hole as an out of body or near death experience. Absolutely. Absolutely. So I never had that when I did the IB one. We're done with Dr. Clava, but I did the, if done a couple more, it's oral. You put the tabs on your tongue led dissolve and get in your body that way. I've had a couple of those with that because it's, it's weird. Um, a couple of times it just really thought it was just dead because you could, it was like normal life like this. And then suddenly it just faded away and it wasn't real. You're like, holy crap. This isn't real. This is all fake. What is real? What's going on? And you just kind of like more from one thing to the next. And you don't really know what's going on. Right. You just know that nothing's real. And that life isn't real and that everything you've imagined has been fake. And it's kind of scary in a way. And then the couple of times that happened to me towards the end, I just kind of like found myself eventually in this black empty space where there's no sound, there's no heat, there's no cold, there's no nothing. Just complete and absolute emptiness is black. And then I would wake up. And that was kind of kind of very disassociating. It's kind of scary in a way because it's little like you died. Like, oh my God, I've dead. And what is this doing? What is this doing to your brain that is rewiring it and getting rid of that hypervigilance? This probably better ways for neurologists to explain it, but I can. I just know that when I have done it, I don't see that nervous. It's crazy jitterness. Like I can do with the PTSD, it's like reset period of time. Sometimes it's months, sometimes it's most of a year. Okay. It just, it's a reset. I don't know how, but it's just like it resets the mind. So it is me. And do you do the nerve injection paired with the ketamine? I've done that personally. I've done that. And I think that works best because it's not enough to just heal. It's not enough to just block the nerve. You got to fix the mind. And it's not enough to fix the mind. You got to also solve the body part. That's where the two have worked really well together. So is it by injecting the nerve? Is that what eliminates the bad trips? Like getting anxiety. Yeah. So what's going to negate the bad trips from the experiences, the benzodiazepine or the benzodiazepine? Okay. And he would do that. You know, when he does the IV ketamine, they'll do that first. And then right after that, he does the ketamine. Oh, okay. It's instantaneous once it hits your bloodstream. You're down. Okay. And so explain to me again how that the nerve injection. Yeah. So what that does is it kind of like, I think Dakota might be probably spending better night is like walking through a city street where it's loud noisy and suddenly it's a quiet forest. It just kind of slows things down kind of just. And it's what it's doing is sort of just inhibiting your fight or flight. Okay. I mean, it won't completely, it doesn't 100% stop it. But what it does is really, really slow this sucker down. Okay. Like really big. And you're like, Hey, that's not so bad. I don't need to be ducking in a ditch or reaching for a gun right now. It's okay. Right. It gives you that moment you need to kind of come to that realization. Yeah. And I think for a long as time we don't allow veterans and people to explore that and look at these other homeopathic ways to treat people or these other ways of looking at that because it's no money in it. Well, no, it's not that there's no money. There's lots of I think there's plenty of money to be made in this stuff. The problem is, it comes back to FDA regulations. So in the 70s, they kind of outlawed a lot of drugs. You know, you had, you had marijuana was illegal. You had LSD and kind of mean different things like that became illegal drugs. And when they were, became illegal, there was no further studies. And so you're missing like 40 years worth of scientific study and research on these drugs to see how they actually do affect the mind and help people. Right. Whereas other countries, they continue to evolve and develop that. And that's why you see veterans and other groups going overseas to get treated for that kind of stuff. Yes. They do use it over there. I worked. Recently, I heard I read something I didn't even, I was completely ignorant to was that overseas and countries in Europe, they use testosterone therapy for depression and anxiety and ADHD. And there's a whole slew of conditions that they can treat with, with hormone therapy, like testosterone or estrogen for women. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you're short, if you're short, I mean, it's kind of caught you problem. And that doesn't, that's unheard of in America. It's unheard of because it's cheap. It's, it's testosterone is is so unbelievably cheap. Yep. Yep. It's like if there's a cure for cancer, we'll never know about it because it's we can wear money involved and treated and curing it. But why does it just try to cure? What if that's, you know, why don't you say, okay, well, the cure for this is half a million box. Did you, did you try LSD or mushrooms? I'm not trying the LSD. I've done the micro dosing on the mushrooms. You know, that's a little hard to figure out your dosing levels. I have it always spend enough time tinkering with it to be honest with you. I mean, you don't need a prescription. It's legal. So do that. I just haven't really tinker with it. I had tried it once. It was fine. Turn to their time. Just kind of left me like I really wasn't able to focus and do what I continue working with. And so I spent a lot of time tinkering with it to be honest with you. I'm too incredibly busy too. Right. It's like a couple, like a day to try something you'd think you're with it. And they're, yeah, well, this didn't work. Let me lose another day while I test this and maybe it'll work. Maybe well, you know, but nothing worked as good as sitting down and writing. Well, yeah, the writing is, I think basically a long-term fix for me. That helps a lot because I feel that you're going to find something that you can still support yourself and your family with, right? You don't want to become dependent on some, you know, disability pension or handouts, things like that. You get to be yourself a productive member of society. And I think for me, writing has been a great therapy. You know, it's continued thing. I mean, sure, I can still do the ketamine and SGB injections here and there. But I still need to support myself. I still need daily things to kind of do. And for me, I found writing as that as that niche. You know, here's a odd question. Do you think there are people out there or have you met people out there that can go through countries in Iraq and Afghanistan and you know problems, kill people, slaughter people, do the things you did, interrogate people and then just come here. Like nothing happened. Yeah. Just completely flip the switch, not through any sort of therapy or anything like that. I think there's jar definitely people like that. And sometimes people like that. It's like, God, a people man is sometimes you just get some psycho class out there or people are just borderline. And other times, other times do you have people like that and they have no problems. And then all of a sudden they'll have a problem. You know, down the road, say a family member dies and suddenly it hits them or an incident happens that hits them and it just broke. They just broke down or the straw that broke the camel's backs, those people were just one too many things that it just snapped. And that does happen. I don't, I think it's kind of hard personally for to imagine that people can go through and do all these things and not be somewhat damaged or compromised a little bit. But a lot of it comes down to how well you can cope with it and deal with it and process it and how much you've been involved in all that, how long you've been kind of doing that kind of stuff. I think a lot of people who have been involved in, we got special forces guys and the military guys who've done five, six, seven deployments and they've spent five or seven or eight years in war. I don't know that a lot of those people survive 10, 20, 30 years into the future. I think you see a lot of people suicide taking place somewhere along the path. Yes. One of my friends had committed suicide not last, it was December of 2021. Yeah, to 2021. So, you know, he was one of my Oxford classmates. He was a smart guy. So you just got a graduate degree from Oxford. We were in same class. He was a Army Ranger. He did one point as a Ranger and then he went to work for Blackwater and Triple Canopy into the PMC world for seven or eight years. But he's involved in a handful of shootings and incidents and things like that, too. Everything seemed fine on the outside. You know, he's got a nice wife, a nice house, got three kids. Are he seems fine here? He's got a good job, he's making you know, and two, 300,000 year job. So he's making good money or all the right connections. But deep down inside, you know, he struggled with some of those things. And I didn't personally know that he was starting with all the six. He never talked about all those things. And he wouldn't talk about all those things. But then the year prior to, his year, two years before his suicide, human his wife, we're, you know, got divorced and separated. And then things kind of went down a little bit from there. And then, you know, as he was right, right before Christmas or after Christmas, you know, when you do that. And it just, but you wouldn't have thought that from him, you know, he just, I mean, he's, I all outward appearances. He has it together. Right. You know, I mean, he's a smart guy. He's got a graduate degree from Oxford. He's not an idiot. He's not guys that are just, right. I just decided to really smart and touch with people. Yeah. You know, who understand suicide or understand what's going on, but reaching point in their life in that moment, where they just, they can't take anymore, which is done. I mean, I've kind of got, I've hit those points too. But I've just never acted on it. But I feel and have seen myself get to those levels to those points. And just you just want to punch out. You're just kind of done. No, you're tired of trying. You're tired of just going through this grind and not seeing anything improving or anything better. You know, I guess what's the difference between, between me and some of these other guys that experience that is, I bet least, I, when I see that happening, I will usually talk with someone about it. Or I will, you know, take one of one of my other medications that kind of helps me counter that. You kind of medications. So they have a, what's the other ones? You said other benzodiazepine type drugs, like kind of like a, almost like happy drug take kind of like prozac. Like Alproso is in or Lourazapan, things like that to just kind of help you, you know, help improve your mood a little bit. Yeah. They're going to take you from that. I want to just blow my brains out moment to, okay, life's not that bad. You know what I mean? I can get through this. And sometimes that's just what you need is just that. Are those similar to those drugs you were taking overseas? No. No. No. We wouldn't be allowed to take the benzodiazepine over there. Okay. And they want, I mean, you're not always going to be able to, you're not, it doesn't sometimes affect your ability to think straight and clear. But again, this is what killed me about the VA is their farm of college, you approach everything. And it doesn't let you work. You know, like, I mean, again, I got a greater degree from Oxford. I'd like to think I'm a fairly smart person. And the problem is when I'm taking those medications at the VA gives, I don't have that sharp mental acuity that I need. Right. Right. I just don't have it. Um, and that's hard to fight through. And I either take the drugs. And so then I'm a nice, social person to be around and not an asshole. And my wife can bear, she can be around me and coworkers like being around you. But then I'm not, I'm not cognitively as sharp as I have to be for those, you know, senior positions at a corporation. Or I don't take it. And I'm sharp as a tech. I mean, I'm like, really, you know, mercenary mindset at the job, I'm sharp and know what I'm doing and very, very proficient. Good at what I'm doing. But I'm not the nicest person to be around. And you can, that kind of can lead to, um, bad experiences that you drop. It makes me, you're going to get fired, right? Right. Um, when you act like that or do certain things, you just society, this is in town. I'm telling you, they don't take that. So when you started writing all these books, incredible collection of books you ran, what sort of approach did you take? Did you start kind of writing down your own experiences? Thoughts you had memories you had? So the first time, the first book I wrote was, um, interview with the terrorist. That was my experience is working as a charity. For me, that was taking my diary, more or less that kept my journal. Cause I needed to have some way to just get all this crap out of my head at the end of, at the end of my job and then to work, right? Um, and journal every day when I was in Iraq, which is sometimes I just had to do something to just get it out of my head. Um, and I started just expanding on just sharing what was going on because the problem is nobody knows who we, what we did. They don't think of you as these evil monsters. I remember coming back, um, from my, from my, my year, I was gone and being at church and someone at church that I saw, I'll see, we're going to Iraq for a year. Wow. It's crazy. What did you do over there? And you told, I told him, well, I was an interrogator. Like you, like the expression on people's faces says it all, like you have, they have this like, wow, this person is like a monster. I don't want to talk with these people, you know, move away. Really? You know, but that's because they don't know what we do. And the image at that time, I said, it's 2007, the image everyone has of interiors is up a great torturing people. Um, you know, the waterboarding, you know, all the other horrible things. That's not what we did, but that's what they thought we did. And so for me, I wanted to kind of explain that that's not what we did. It was a whole different thing. And our mission was a really important one because how else you could have find, you know, we talk with the enemy. That's our job to talk directly to the enemy every day and find information to try and end this conflict. And I want to kind of humanize that. And from there, I said, all right, well, if I'm going to continue writing, I get to write about something. So I've seen a book is a great way to do it because it's a very long story. You can just create out of your head, just, you know, fiction and make it up. But you got to create something people want to read. So I looked at and said, well, what do I want to read? And what is not being produced? And for me, I like to read books like Tom Clancy's Red Storm Rising. That was one of my favorite books read. The problem is there's not a lot of books like that where you talk about a battalion or a brigade and division level combat and fights. It's just not a, it's not a style of writing a lot of people pursue. I always like to pursue these small, um, unit things, uh, army Rangers, a Navy seal or green brain, it's almost always some, um, rogue this or that, you know, it's just small stuff like that. And it doesn't wrong with that. It doesn't turn it in. You know, Vince Flynn did really well with his mid trap characters and creating that and doing that. Um, but I like the Tom Clancy style where you have this red storm rising, divisions on divisions, you know, with the Soviets going across and NATO having this big o-fight like that. Um, so I started creating those kinds of books and writing and doing that. And my last government job I worked over, um, sort of like fictionalized. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so I worked at a US European command for almost three and a half years. Right. Um, and that's a no, Stuikart Germany. Um, so I worked in the, um, the, uh, intelligence group. Uh, I worked as a identity intelligence operations manager. So, um, most like finding people, you know, hunting, tracking, finding, um, foreign extremists that were coming in out of our AOR basically. But that kind of job, you know, on the Intel staff, you also exposed to our, our, you know, plans, what we're developing to counter, um, you know, say Russians and baited across and they're in a tech NATO and evade across. How would we respond to that? We have worked. you know, plans will work developing to counter, you know, say Russians invaded across and they're going to attack NATO and invade across. How would we respond to that? We have war plans for everything. Everything on the side, we've got war plans or something. And you kind of see a lot of those things. So I think, well, all right, I've been around that. Why don't I write a book on Russia invading, you know, in this case, we did Ukraine or whatever countries and just start creating these different series and creating books about big conflicts that nobody's writing or doing that kind of style like plants he used to do. And so well, let's try to do that ourselves. And so we did. And you know, it's like anything you get better with more practice. So my early early books and stuff were pretty good. I think our stuff now is obviously better, but that's because I've written 30 more books since then. So you're going to get better. Yes. And you start to learn how to craft better characters. And how do create more realistic scenarios? And that's one of the, that's the trick with writing is how do I create a character that's so real that it triggers you like you read this, you go, this is this person's like, you know, total, you know, anti-American, whatever, if they're Russian POV, they need to be a Russian POV. They kind of think like a Russian. Otherwise, you just create a car, a character. If you have a political figure, well, they need to act like the political figure, you're trying to portray them to be. You need to create real those two characters. And so when you have that and then you have these scenarios that are very realistic to what could actually happen and unfold, you start to get a really good book. And then it's just about, you know, continuing to walk through the scenario and say, okay, well, what new technology is going to get incorporated? Let's start writing that stuff in. How would this scenario play out? Do the whole what if how much research do you have to do? Research have to do like to make this stuff real. For example, to find a Russian, a Russians point of view or a politicians point of view. Listen to any of you. It's a great way to do it. So if you want to, you want to know about the Russian POV or their perspective, listen to serial average talk. Like listen to him. Who is who is? So he's a Russian foreign minister. So you listen to him talk at different conferences, events, you and anywhere. Okay. So you spend some time listening to how he talks, how he phrases how he portrays XYZ happening. Listen to how president Putin portrays things. How as they're elected people in their government and military portray things, that's going to give you a good insight into that mindset, that thinking. You can watch Russian Russian TV shows and programs you can watch and kind of see and get some of that insight too. And that helps you better gauge what they how they respond and act. So when you write the scenario, you write the book. Do you understand Russia? No, I don't. I have subtitles and things like that. But I also have a really big reader network at this point too. And so I can throw out different questions that I have different people that I can ping for and get answers from. Wow. And help a lot to you. So you have to go through, you have to understand so many different types of people's perspectives to write these fictional stories and to make it a good. Yes. If you want to do a good, right, but you want to make it as realistic as possible, the technology is actually much harder to get than the than the people's perspectives and things like that. The technology can be quite challenging. What do you mean when you say technology? What technology? Okay. So if you're following, you know, first armor brigade commenting you out of third out of the 30 infantry division. So you know what their equipment is. So first, you know what the equipment is kind of rounds with a ranges, effectiveness, different things like that. So you have that down and you start getting that for all of the units in the US that you're going to use an operate, whether it's army, air force, navy, marine, so it's four branches, right? A lot of equipment. Well, now who are you fighting? So now you need to look at that layer of equipment too. Now are you incorporating the allies? Well, what do they use and do they have other people have any allies and all this? So before you know, you've got quite a lot of different types of equipment you're trying to incorporate and use and figure out, well, can this work? Does it work? What is the, what is the range of these air to air missiles that, you know, those Chinese aircraft would use versus what we would use. So because you can't have, if you're going to write different engagements, you need to make sure you're writing them with the weapons that it could actually do that kind of engagement. Right. Otherwise you're going to have inconsistency problems. And that's just the part of the detail of getting this technology right. Has it ever come across to you when you were writing a story or even after you've written a story or a series of stories that holy shit, my stories are coming true. Yeah. This one here. I mean, that'll fill your grain. We wrote that back in 2017 and it's been unfolding and unamindigated nightmare and fully never since. How many books are in that series? Total six books in that series. And what got you started on that series? What made you want to start that? Sure. So I, I needed to come up with a new series. And I said, all right, well, let's look at World War three. What's going to be the next biggest war? How would this shake out? Okay. And I pretty much look and say, well, it's going to be Korea, Taiwan. And you know, Ukraine, Korea, Taiwan is going to be one of those three. Okay. More Taiwan. Yeah. One of those three. And I said, all right, well, what if we had this secret pack between and wait, sorry, what made you think that? Oh, based on my experiences working at US European Command, just the stuff I was around and seeing how everything was playing out and knowing what was going on behind the scenes on me. I mean, when I saw how things were unfolding in Ukraine, when I was there before, that might on. And then just seeing how things unfolded in Iraq and in Libya and in the whole era of springing our reactions to everything, they kind of like, I was the open dries up. You just start seeing our actions from a different perspective. You know, because normal everyday people see the actions taken one way or another. But when you've kind of worked in those secret school realms, you kind of get a better perspective of what's really going on. Why are we doing X, Y, or Z? Why do we suddenly turn on kadafi? Not one thing. There are no reasons to turn on kadafi and look what we have in place of it now. Was this really a good decision? You know, it's still a failed state. Right. Was this really what we wanted? Okay. Bad choice right there. And it also puts it also creates another problem for us too, because kadafi gave up his weapons, his WMD program and stuff he had in exchange for normalized relations with the United States and in Europe. So he did that willingly without having to be invaded. And then what was our response? You know, less than a decade later, we topels regime on them. You know, so you know, it's a jump bolt and we'll say, well, we want to use the Libya model really. Okay. So we want you to give up your weapons of access structure. Then we're just going to destabilize your regime and replace you once you've done this. Okay. What what dick cares going to go along with that? Right. What nation would go along with this? It's just poor phrasing. Right. And at the end of the day, I mean, maybe behind the curtain, Pax American is what we really want to pursue. That's fine. Don't say that out loud and tell people that. And then make sure your economy and your country is positioned to support that. You know, if we always say might, you know, might doesn't make right when we talk about Russia and China interacting with their neighbors, that's that rule applies to them. It does not apply to us might always makes right when it comes to the United States. We, know, we're going to do what we want to do. Right. If we want the resource or you're threatening access to our resource or our allies, we're going to fix the problem. So you came up with this idea to write this book. I mean, were you looking at NATO and seeing what was going on between NATO and Russia and yeah, just look at that and said, all right, well, I see NATO's incredibly weak. It just doesn't have the capability to deploy forces in a reasonable amount of time. We're now discovering NATO's weak in that way. They can't rapidly deploy anything. They don't have forces that are operationally ready to react. So in the US, we have the A second year of war and you can have the most of the division deployed really quickly. They don't have like quick reaction forces like that. A lot of their stuff relies on the US being able to move them and get them to the point A to point B. They don't have large stockpiles of munitions to support a sustained you know, sustained combat. Okay. You know, the British Ministry of Defense was, has recently stayed, was recently saying that if they got to fight right now with Russia, they have weeks worth of munitions and that's it. They're out. And a lot of those supplies probably won't even last weeks now because they've given so much of it to Ukraine. You had the Secretary of John for NATO was saying that almost begging countries to start mass producing munitions because Ukraine is is expanding multiple times what we can generate in, you know, just really rapidly. You know, the US produces just under 100,000 or 155 millimeter artillery shells a year. It's like 86,000 a year. So the Defense Department says the process of scaling it up by five times that number. Problem is you have Ukraine burning through like three to seven thousand rounds a day. So they're cooking through our entire year's production in about 14 to 21 days. whole year production is being blown in 21 days. So the way that's being supplied as the supported right now to continue what they're doing is eating out of our war stocks. So if we started five to six million rounds in the inventory, well, we've already burned a million in the first nine months of the war and we've now located another million more. So we're already dipping really bad into our own stocks so bad now that we are pulling our, our, our reserve inventories we're keeping in South Korea in case that war was kickoff. We're pulling our munitions out of our stockpile out of there. And now we're pulling our stockpile out of Israel to send to Ukraine. Well, the problem is now should things kick off in those other regions. We don't have those inventories there anymore to supply our forces. That's a big problem. And depending on his scaling up the production war production right now, but you're looking at like 12 to 18 months or more just to get up you know, up from you know, 86,000 a year upwards to what to almost half a million. But half a million isn't even enough. That's enough for that's only enough for maybe four or five months worth of fighting. What about the rest of it? So when you started writing bad off field Ukraine, you said you chose those countries. And what was the premise? What was the premise of bad off field Ukraine? Yeah. So the premise was basically is that the Russians and the Chinese have decided, you know what, this is the time to dethrone the West to do to knock America off its pedestal and take charge. And by collaborating working together, they will move to do that. So the first stage was moving forward in Ukraine. It's getting the Russian government to essentially do what they did and recognize these regions and then say of Ukraine say, basically tell them, all right, these are now recognized. We're going to request that NATO move its forces out of Eastern Ukraine. And if they're not moved out of Eastern Ukraine on this set time, then we're implementing a no fly zone and we will forcibly evict them. And the whole book, the war starts when we just kind of laugh it off like whatever, there's much Russians, that kind of is. And we hit that timeline and we hit the no fly zone goes into effect and like whatever. So we have some at 16's fly right through the no fly zone and they get shot down. And then the Russians are like, okay, it's game on and then they just they just unload and they go on it. And the first part of the book is just really reacting to it. It's just trading space for time, you know, to to basically buy time for rest of NATO to react. US forces to get moved over to Europe so you can get them into place and try to stop them at the Negro basically. And so the fight kind of evolves right there. And that's where it starts. But that's not where it ends. So that one kicks off there. If China really wants to grab Taiwan in Southeast Asia, it needs another conflict. So that's when you get the North Koreans to kick up. And now you get that war to really happen. Well, now us has got to respond there in Korea and we're responding with NATO. Now we're really bogged down. Now you're free to for China to go in and grab Taiwan and anything else they want because there's nothing that we have that can stop them. And so the book really follows this whole the first couple of books. The first three books in the series is really just a rolling crescendo of just body blows against the West and just having to react. And then the second half of the series is we finally reacted. We've now caught our breath. We're now rallying the West to unite together to combat and go do it in pushback. And so that's the second half of the series is the pushback and eventually defeated them because they just overstretched. Wow. But the first part of the year, it's like, there's going to be fights. It's going to lose a lot of land in the first part of the year. It's just like World War II. And the first year was really bad. Second year is a little worse and third year was much better. Right. Right. And when you started to see what's going on right now, when you started in whenever February of last year when this whole thing kicked off, or were you thinking how how I mean, obviously it was a little bit different because it was it was kind of like we sort of instigated that. We started just building up tons of weapons, putting a ton of money on the border there of Russia. Well, we didn't have a clear mission in purpose. Like what was what was the mission? What's the purpose? And if this happens, what are we going to do? So Joe Biden was telling them, just closing all the information and saying, Hey, if we do, you're going to attack, you attack, we're new as these sanctions. And then his phrase when he said, well, it depends how much they how much land they take or what they do. Like no, it should never have been how much if you really wanted to deter them. I was the sanctions didn't work because sanctions haven't worked for them for the 2014 when you've been doing them. So if you really wanted to deter them, you should have just told them, say, look, you're not going to invade Ukraine. There's this memorandum that said, them Ukrainians gave up their nuclear weapons that the United States and you would protect their territory integrity. My predecessors did not know that. I will. So if you invade Ukraine, then we are going to war with you and we are going to send us forces in there and we are going to engage you. Well, that would have been the shot across the battle at the Russians. No. Okay, this is what's going to happen if we we cross the border engaged. Now that might have worked. But if it didn't work, then you've got to be willing to back up the threats. Right. And that's the problem is we don't want to make a threat because we don't want to we don't actually have to follow through on it. Yes, what happened was Syria. You know, we know, Bobby should they red line in Syria and then famously didn't follow through. Right. Well, that told the Russians and it told everyone else, hey, they're not going to follow through on this. You know, and then again, that didn't happen. And, you know, so in, in the lead up to Afghanistan, when that was all falling apart, the Taliban had to abide by a series of a, of agreements in order for us forces to leave otherwise we were going to be under 10 years. We would have been there another 10 years at Trump was in there probably would have stayed a lot longer probably to bomb the hell out of them. But when we walked back those, you know, agreements that we were supposed to hold them to and just kind of walked away. They ran over the whole, they ran over the whole system. And you when that happened, everyone looked at that in Europe and said, wow, okay, America literally just pulled up stakes in 10 days was gone. Gone. Wow, 19 freaking years. We've been at 65 million, 65 billion horsepower. The weapons and equipment there. Imagine we had that right now for Ukraine. Well, the difference that would be. But we abandoned that and that said, again, we've sent multiple messages, through multiple generations that we're just not going to honor these red lines. We're not going to defend these things. And so Putin saw that and said, well, whatever, not going to defend it's not going to attack us and not going to stop any roll across. And what do we be doing since then? We'd be doing peace mail supports. We're giving you cranes weapons, but not enough to win, not to lose just to steal me. And they've said the quiet part out loud, Mitch McConnell and once you get out, a bunch of other people have also did quite part out loud. We're not in this to win and help the trains win. We are in this to believe the Russians dry and just believe their military dry. That's what we're doing. That's the strategy. That's what the Senate majority of the Chuck Schuemarry was saying is we're spending a fraction of our GDP on believing the Russians so it's going to keep doing it. But from a Pax Americana strategic perspective, that makes a whole lot of sense. I listened to Dan Krenshaw talk about that and he's like, well, look at what we're spending and what we're getting. It's like, I get that from that perspective. But you're also talking about these human beings. You're using the cranes as a proxy, meat shield, to implement your desired outcome on Russia. Well, what about them? I mean, don't they have a say in this? I mean, you're pushing these guys to continue to fight and trade the politicians are going to go along with them. I mean, they stand to make financially unfortunate. I mean, you can't divorce the fact that Ukraine is the most corrupt country in Europe. Because the Russians evade doesn't mean that went away. Right. They did not go away. There's a party number of people who have already been fired because of that. And like the current defense secretary, he's still there. But he's like at the epicenter a lot of the corruption where, you know, hey, I need to buy these water bottles for my soldiers. So I'm going to buy them from you for $10 a bottle. Right. And then, you know, there's obviously the cheek backs across the board for everyone. Right. I mean, that's just running rampant across that country. And to see recently the Saudi Arabia put like $400, $500 million into Ukraine. That just happened. The Saudi Arabian diplomat was just there meeting with Zelensky. And now that has a, an effect on the rest of the world because China has already basically stated their stance with Russia because they're already doing business with them with oil and what. So whatever. And now Saudi Arabia has lined with the US. But I think China depends on Saudi Arabia. Just playing both sides, man. They're just trying to play the little side. I saw this video. I got to pull up this video. I got to send this video to you Austin. And you got to, you got to play this. This thing is the way this guy on, I think this was Instagram. Yeah. Oh, yeah, there you go. There's the, um, now is a humanitarian. Okay. Yeah. So the difference between humanitarian and military aid and in reconstruction stuff that they're humanitarian aid. Yeah. Because I can get a weapon. They're getting weapons for us. And like, how people don't realize they're talking about the Ukraine and these, these, um, Patriot missiles, right? Patriot missiles cost a lot of money too. Like three million bucks a pop. Um, right. It's not exactly good return on investment to be using the $3 million missile against some of these drones that are, you know, fraction of that price. But the, the other thing is Saudi Arabia has these missiles too. So Saudi has spent the last about three or four years dealing with Houthi rebels being backed by Iran who are using drones too to Saudi Yemen. Yeah. So there's lots of these drones from Yemen across Saudi Arabia and then hitting their refineries and in oil fields with these drones. Well, they're using Patriots to counter a lot of the stuff too. So we have a problem where a lot of people use Patriots and that's great. But we don't have the industrial capability in place to mass produce the missiles to keep those things supply and going. Right. That's the problem. And so we have a lot of users of it. Well, they're also using it right now. Like Saudi is using Patriot missiles, right frequently. And now you're going to have Ukraine who's going to use Patriot missiles at an astronomical rate. We're not going to be able to keep keep up with that. Right. It's just the same problem with artillery rounds. You know, anti tank, you know, missiles, the javelins or n-laws and stingers. We don't have the industrial capability to keep waging that kind of a fight. You know, we, and that's, I mean, that's one thing we do write about in the books a lot is we really kind of reinforce some of that. We talk about that. We integrate that into the struggle. You know, like it's a couple spots you talk about and it goes in the Monroe doctrine series. Do you have the video? You know, like in this series and then in the end when we're, the president is getting a brief. And one of the generals is just telling the president like, sir, you don't understand the gravity situation that artillery around is being, or that the tank ground is because it's being made in this factory here. It is then being loaded onto a plane and flown to this airport here, put on a truck and driven 200 miles towards the front and being shot out the tube of a tank four days later. That's how grave the situation is. It's going from factory to being shot out the tube in a week. Wow. That's not a good system. That's not a lot of inventory. Right. It's called just in time shooting. And that's not that's great for building manufacturing. That's not good for war. And you know, I tried to build that into the into the different series and things. Right. Because that's realistic. That's what they're facing right now where you have these massive short of the ammo. You run out of bullets. It's not like Hollywood where you just have an endless supply of bullets. You shooting. You can only carry so much ammo on you. And when you run out, you've got to have more. Well, someone's got to bring it and get it over there. And that means someone's got to be able to drive the ammo down some road that's hopefully not going to shut up and hit with drones to get these there. Right. And when you have five, six thousand guys in a city like in Bach Mutt, they're true into ammo. You need a lot of supply runs. And meanwhile, you got drones hitting their artillery hit them. I mean, it's kind of a mess. And then the ammo is going to get blown up. I appreciate you're familiar with the War Dogs movie. The two guys out of Miami who basically got that $200 million arms deal to supply. I haven't seen it. But I know what you're talking about. Yeah. Supply the Afghan Army with munitions and they basically got it. They sourced it all from Albania, a factory that that ended up all being Chinese ammunition. So they repackaged it. There was some sort of law that was put in place through Obama where they couldn't buy any sort of there was an embargo on Chinese munitions. But they just repackaged it and got rid of all the Chinese markings and they sold it. And all the all the ammunition was great, by the way, they worked perfectly. Even the the the army guys that basically were there using it and stuff like that. They basically said there was nothing wrong with it. There was no misfires, nothing at all. And the main guy. Anyways, I had that got the podcast fascinating story. This is the video that I was just talking about. Okay. Play that, Austin. This is Prince Fisoud been for one of the top Saudi diplomats meetings of Lensky, Ukraine yesterday right after announcing $400 million in humanitarian aid to Ukraine. The reason that this is such a big deal isn't the size of it. After all, Ukraine has gotten almost $1,000,000 total aid since the invasion. The reason it's such a big deal is because it has put China in a very tricky position. You see, up until now, Saudi Arabia has been mostly neutral so far regarding its stance on the invasion. But with this new $400 million package, it's becoming clear that they're siding with the West. This is very concerning for China who just last week were debating sending suicide drones to Russia as part of an arms deal. Now China is faced with two options and neither are good. Option one, China sends weapons to Russia, but alienate themselves from Saudi Arabia, a country essential to their energy and economic goals. China would also likely be facing more economic sanctions from Western countries and become further isolated, hurting Chinese companies. Or option two, they don't send weapons to Russia and end up burning the bridge one of their oldest allies, which would put even more pressure on Russia and push Putin closer to the talking table. I'll be keeping it close. I am China to see what they do in the coming weeks. So follow for updates and thanks for watching. Skye makes great videos. What's your name of this channel? Or is page quiver something? It's too small. I can't read it. Make sure we shout this guy out. Quiver quantitative. Okay. On Instagram. So interesting. So I see that. I think it's slightly, I have a slightly different taking what he's doing with that. So there's an incentive to keep this war going. Okay. So we thought that we could bleed the Russians dry and kind of implode their economy and collapse them over the course of this first year. That was what we really thought, but it didn't happen. And now we're figuring out that it's actually us who are starting to have a problem because they didn't implode like we thought Russia would. So from the Chinese perspective, if they can keep the war going, the longer they keep the war going, the weaker we become because we're just going to expend more and more munitions that we can't readily replace. And as long as we're doing that, we won't have those munitions available. This is a credible threat. Should they make a move on Taiwan at some point? Right. I think when you hear the guess, wow, back I said something about how his idea, here, his belief was that the Chinese were if they're going to make a move on Taiwan, they probably would look to do it towards really close to the run to the 2024 election cycle problem. Yeah, it was Andrew boost him on. Yeah. That's it. Yeah. I was listening to him last night on that. So probably probably right. But what's really going to when you really see the indication when they're kind of ready to make that move is when a series of these large landing helicopter assault ships are done. So we have these. You're making? No, no, the Chinese are building things. Correct. So they've been working very few years. I'm building, I like the blue water Navy, like in go beyond their coastal areas. Okay. But like we have these, like you can look up like the USS America, the USS Wasp, these are large helicopter assault ships that US Marines use for moving, whether it's helicopters or landing assault vehicles, things like that, it's to take a force and move them to do an amphibious invasion. That's really what the Chinese have lacked for a while. So they have a new type of worship that they've been building for quite some time. They're building a whole string of them. I want to say if I three or four of these landing helicopter assault ships done, and they have I think it's five or six more under construction right now. And then there's a couple other versions of it that are larger as well that they're building. When those ships are done, that's when you're going to, they'll be that's what I think you're going to start to see some some serious movement because that's kind of what they need to to go over to get there because otherwise they have a whole lot of smaller boats that can move across. And I'm not saying they couldn't do it. Probably the way they're going to invade is have a lot of people fly in normally like civilians into China. First, a lot of special forces will go in on destiny like that. They'll wait until the appointed time, then they'll coalesce together, pick up their weapon caches, and go to execute their operations. Meanwhile, I wouldn't be surprised if you end up with a handful of these roll-on roll-off car carriers. And other cargo ships already kind of have been maneuvered into port where they'll just roll vehicles right off into the ports and instantly snag the ports. Then you'll have a lot of helicopters that'll come across the the straits, you know, right on the water to land and try to grab and secure certain position, coastal areas, before you'll actually have an invasion force hit. But what would really help cinch that and make that a lot more likely to succeed is if you had more of those helicopter assault ships completed. Okay. And you get a few more of those done. And then there's a few other vessels they need. They'll be able to kind of ring Taiwan pretty tight. And so there was another Air Force general recently is talking. He was saying his he believed that this would probably kick off sometimes more in like 2025. There's others that believe it's like 2027. I think it's probably going to be probably between the September, October of 2024 and probably before the end of 2025 is probably would if I was guessing a window, that's what I would say. That's going to happen. Yeah. And what are we going to do? What is our reaction going to be? Depends. Nancy Pelosi's already there. Yeah. I do. I suppose it depends like a lot of it depends when it happens on your Biden or does it happen in either his second or second term or someone else's term? That's going to be interesting to see. And it also depends on how things play out in Ukraine between now and that time too. Because if we're still getting blood dry, we're not going to be able to intervene and do much. We can say we are. But unless. in Ukraine between now and that time too. Because if we're still getting blood dry, we're not going to be able to intervene and do much. We can say we are, but unless we want to go to total total of Chinese and use our Navy, really the best weapon we would have would be our subs and our Navy and trying to close the straits and keep them from supplying the Chinese. But there's so many of the weapon systems that are needed to do that are not that the Taiwanese have bought them. They're not being given to them yet because we are either diverting weapons that are completed, supposed to go to Taiwan being diverted to Ukraine, or they're getting put to the back of the queue to be built because we're needing to build stuff for you, creating. And all that's doing is weakening them. You know, like I was talking about giving Ukraine, F-16s, F-16 bipers, the latest model that they have, they're really great aircraft. But these were bought insulated for Taiwan. And there was a lot of effort to try actually to take the Taiwanese, that's the 60s and give them to Ukraine. It's like, hey, we, the way you're going to deter Taiwan from getting an invaders to make Taiwan a porcupine, a really big mean savage porcupine. And if you can make it so costly that they're not that, you know, for them to invade, they won't. But you can only do that if you're willing to give them the anti ship missiles aircraft they need, the air defense they need, the artillery systems like the M1 and I, Paladins, the self-propelled artillery guns that I used to work on when I was in the army side, they need those. And those are being diverted to Ukraine. And so I went to the munitions stockpiles, like going there, we don't, we're not placing them in Taiwan, like we need to be. And so it comes back to priorities. And if this is what we want to do as a country, right or wrong, I mean, I'm not an elected person. That's just how my choice, but if the choice is to intervene and do all this, then we need to scale our industry to meet the requirement. And that's not happening. We need to go to General Motors and Ford and Tesla and say, hey, that's great. All these cool cars, but we need you to shut down half your line and convert to manufacturing artillery shells, missiles, armored vehicles, and equipment because we need these things. You guys are scaling up and we're not retooling the economy to be a wartime economy to support and sustain that. There is the rest of our allies. My biggest gripe with what's happening in Europe is you don't see NATO stepping up to the plate to give like the British are great for this. Load my British friends, but they're great for giving these wonderful tough sounding speeches and then going to have afternoon tea afterwards and feeling they did something. Well, where's where's the action to fall through on that? Like where is the scaling up of your industry to meet the demand for this conflict? Right. I mean, you like the British actually had to shrink the size of their army because they couldn't meet the recruitment goal. That's not a good situation. You're a year into this war and Ukraine and you're shrinking your army. When you should actually be like doubling it, right? You should be scaling up production of munitions and aircraft and weapons, but you're not doing any of that. And you're not even spending more money on defense. In Germany, all the NATO countries are doing this. This is the problem with it. We're year into this into supporting this war in Ukraine and you guys haven't even transitioned to wartime economy. Well, guess who did transition to wartime economy? The Russians a year ago and they have factories running mass producing this stuff 24 seven and they're just continuing to scale and get more and more of their production going that way. And we don't really have a good read on like how effective our sanctions are and things going on inside there either. My friend Jack Murphy was on here a couple of weeks ago. Yeah, he did a report basically on the CIA conducting sabotage inside of Russia and you're not inside of Ukraine, but all inside of Russia. Yeah, going after the specific factor. Going after factories, there's been all these fires, all these railroads, these trains getting derailed, all kinds of crazy things going wrong. Russia has been sort of like brushing them off because they don't want to acknowledge that it's some sort of foreign adversary doing it because they don't want to lose morale for their people and their troops. But it Jack confirmed through a number of vetted CIA sources that it is a NATO country working through the C or the CIA working through a NATO country to do this stuff. So they have some sort of plausible deniability, which is wild wild story. That's what we do though. That's why our country is very good at doing that kind of stuff. You know, we were very good at very depth of waking proxy wars. Yes. I mean, you could start a hat with all the proxy wars is when we were in Iraq, right? So we had Iran, the RGC was supplying weapons to fight us and a lot of our guys got killed with those explicitly foreign penetrators, EFPs. And that was when they were interfering, right? During that war, we did not have Russia or China actively interfering in that war against us. We didn't have Russia providing al-Qaeda to the tune of $100 billion of weapons and munitions and intelligence support and all that kind of stuff. We just didn't. And my concern is when you're waging a proxy war, particularly against another superpower and everyone, I mean, they know we're doing this, what's going to happen in the next time we go to war? So say there's another conflict or war in Africa or in Middle East or somewhere else, right? And the U.S. is involved in that conflict. Well, what's just say that Russia is not going to take their own revenge on us, put out, because when we were in Vietnam, the Russians messed with us for years with that war and cost us a lot of people and supplying the parties being used with weapons and aircraft equipment and technical expertise. And we lost a lot of Americans from that. And when the Russia went into Afghanistan, we returned the favor and hit them hard like that. And that's kind of stopped. But now we have restarted that with that proxy type actions in Ukraine. So you got to expect that they're going to recaliate and hit us with the same kind of thing in another future conflict. Or we say, oh, well, just do sanctions? Things just didn't stop them from a big Ukraine. That didn't work. So the only thing is going to stop them is military force. And we got to step back at some point and just say, this is a nice, beautiful planet. We all don't need to like destroy each other and blow each other up over some of these conflicts. There is easy way for us to negotiate and figure out how we can solve this without trying to kill each other. Well, it's people it's got to want to actually solve it though. There's such a gap in humanity between the people that are doing the fighting and the psychopaths that are running the country, the diplomats and the people that make all these decisions and that are making all this money and trying to advance their political careers by doing X, Y and Z. And yeah, I mean, conservative like Victoria, Newlin and her husband and those people. Newlin. So her husband runs the Institute for the Study Award. You know, that John and Jackine is like one of the chairman on and always talking about a Fox News and they always cite the Institute for the Study Award. Well, her husband is one of the founders of this thing. And they're kind of the architects for this whole, for the surge in Iraq and just the perpetuation of the whole invasion there in doing that. And it's frustrating because it's the same culture of people who are pushing and doing all these things. And it's like your fault, your, your policy was tested and failed. So let's not continue to use the same failed policy. Let's try something different. Let's try a different approach, right? It's like when I'm in Terry and I really tough individual, I can be my heading as well, trying the same approach. All right, you know what this isn't working. Let's try something different. We can still meet our objective, but just try different approach. You know, with with Russia, why we didn't have to pursue this complete adversary relationship with Russia. You know, we keep saying, well, Russia is invading all these foreign, you know, invading their neighbors and new and all this stuff like that. The borders of NATO have not, Russia didn't expand its border with NATO. NATO expanded its border forward. Right, correct. I mean, that's happened. Yes. But it's all defensive, right? It's all, that's what he keeps saying. It's all defensive. Well, here's my question. Why can't Russia be part of NATO? Why not? That's a good question. Why not? Why not? Because if, I mean, and people say, well, the roast me for this, I know that NATO is designed to catch a Russian. Russia, right? By definition, but I can't Russia be part of NATO. Well, you have recent Turkey, those two nations have hated each other for 1000,000 of years. And fought just countless wars against each other. They're also both put in the NATO, jammed in there together, and they can't fight anymore. They can't fight. You're not, they're not, they're not able to fight each other in open conflict because they are part of NATO. They're members now. They have to have a, there's a process for them to have dialogue and disputes and handle these problems and go through things like that. And so when we have this issue with Russia, NATO is around to deal with Russia. And Russia has always had, Russia has become an aggressive and adversarial against, against the US since 2000, the close 2008 when they first intervene in Georgia. And it's been that aggressive like that ever since, but it was aggressive like that because that was, that was up to that point. We were continuing to encroach in advance on their border. And they said, well, if you're going to advance on our border, we need to buffer. If we're not going to be part of this community, we're going to be the booking man. And then the community advance for our, we need a buffer when they invaded Georgia. Yeah. Who would do you remember who wasn't, I'm going to fuck this up, but wasn't the leader of Georgia somebody that we were paying like some incredible salary. I don't remember. I mean, I was in Iraq at the time when that happened. It was kind of funny because the, the, the fob I was working at, I had a whole ton of Georgians stationed at that fob because they were in Iraq with us. Like 3000, I think. And when the war happened, all 3000 of the Georgians within like a day were flown in and brought it into Baghdad and we put them on, see what on the C one thirties and C 17s and flew right back to Georgia. And so they were in Iraq. And then a few days later, they are back in their own country, you know, off to fight the Russians. Yeah. You know, and we'd find intelligence and tell them say, um, those any aircraft, friends, you have, yeah, why don't you move those to this valley over here and move this one to here and just wait and see what happens. Right. And the next, you know, Russian planes are flying through and get zapped. You know, try to tell them where to go. They didn't have that capability. But they also got steamrolled. The Russians just steamrolled right through them and they had to make a, they got a cease fire stuff right on. Believe on the outskirts of the police. I don't know. I'm remembering this right. I don't know if it was Georgia or was a governor of some sort of state in like southern Ukraine. But they found out this guy actually posted on his Facebook page, his salary or what, you know, what he was paid. And America was paying him like $250,000 a year. And he basically he was being paid more than the governor of Massachusetts. It's crazy. What the fuck? You don't know wonder. There's such a, there's such a bad taste in the Russians mouth when we, when we are so balls deep in these places over that are surrounding Russia. Yeah. I look at it this way. The existential threat to the United States, like the next 50 years is not Russia. It is actually China. And that's where the focus needs to be on the Chinese section. It's focusing there. So why couldn't there have been a way for us to find a way to work with Russia to bring them into our sphere of influence are full instead of having them as an adversary, bringing them in with us and get Russia to align with us against China. Because we can't deal with which we can't, we can't be friends with the dictator like Putin. But we're friends with other dictators. That's kills me. You know, we have other dictators that we're friends with. And who are we for our friends with us? That's all across the Middle East, man. What about what about what's his name? BB. Not yet. He elected. He elected. You know, they whether we like him or not, he's elected official. His country has a democratic election, his political party, dominates him to be as a prime minister and puts together coalition and they went. And so that's not a dictatorship. We may not like him or maybe some people do, but that's, he's elected by his people though. You know, you can look at, you know, MBS and Saudi Arabia. I mean, oh, yeah, as you're talking to them. Yeah, all over the Middle East are all dictators. I mean, we have Maduro, doubt in South America in Venezuela. We're wanting to reduce sanctions and move all its stuff away. Why? So we can use their oil. But this is a horrible dictator. And we've isolated them and crippled their economy of sanctions and kind of gotten them down and weakened them. In hopes that he would eventually lose. But now we're going to remove all that. So we can pump up his oil industry so we can, you know, produce more oil. Right. But why don't we just produce oil here? All right. We need to do that for those guys. I make sense. What you're saying makes perfect, makes perfect sense to why there's no reporting on that proxy war in Yemen with Saudi Arabia and Iran. It's been going on for almost a decade now. Maybe you can explain this to me. This was something I was talking to a friend about last night. Why is there a war between Iran and Saudi Arabia happening in Yemen, which is the other way? Because I can't fight each other in that directly at least. The US is actually kind of a shield between them. We have the naval and air bases blocking some of those areas and the red sea there in the Persian Gulf there. So you have a lot of oil traffic moving in and out there with all the in Yemen. No, no, through the straight of Hormuz going into the rainbow map of that whole area. A map of like the Veda Hulay area often. Yeah, you'll see it. There's a whole string of military bases. The US bases on there. And so if the Iranians try to go across there and do that, they're going to run in problems with us. Whereas if they go through US through Horna Africa, they're down in Yemen, the Saudi lower portion of Saudi Arabia there. There's nothing. There's no issues down there. The government toppled that we were backing and now it's just kind of a pre-frawl. Who's these kind of control it? Okay. So they're like coming in the back door. Correct. Because if you look at Abu Dhabi and those in Qatar, we have bases there. We have a whole naval task force. Where's Qatar on this map? Should be a smaller place right above Dubai. That's where the World Cup was. Okay. Okay. I see it. Yeah. Tiny little spec. Yeah. But that whole area is just very militarized. Whereas if you go in from Yemen, there's not a lot of defenses out there. You can do things out there and go through there. What's interesting? So we sold Abrams battle tanks to Saudi Arabia and the Germans have sold leopard tanks to Turkey. So we have actual experience seeing these tanks being used in combat by non-US non-German forces. Right. So if you can YouTube some of the videos of like Saudis using our Abrams battle tanks in the war in Yemen against the Houthis there. Those are not the same kind of tanks that we use. I mean, okay. Shell is sure. Right. But doesn't seem armor mix. So what makes an American Abrams so deadly and formidable is the type of it's a classified material used in making the armor. And we don't give that to anyone like no ally has Australia doesn't have it. They're buying Abrams from us. They're not getting that. No one gets that. That's a special US only thing. And it means it helps our tanks always have a competitive edge. Should we have to fight our own tanks? So when we're giving tanks to Ukraine, we're not giving them the same equivalent that we are going to be giving them this this partner nation version, which doesn't have that same quality armor doesn't have some of the same weapon technology and integrated firing systems that our stuff's going to have because that's what makes our tank special. That's classified material. We're not going to do that because should it's going to get destroyed at some point these things do happen in war. You're going to lose in war. We don't want that fall in Russian hands because they will take that and they will bring that back and they will analyze what it is. And before you know what, I'm going to try and use have it. Right. You know, just like when we lost a self fighter over over Serbia and doing coastal Serbia war in 99. Well parts of that was brought, you know, to the Chinese embassy in coincidentally, we had an Aaron bomb destroyed the Chinese embassy. We didn't want that stuff falling into other people's hands. The technology that because it's the if the shell of it, the coating, what the how they coat the exterior of it, the tanks, different types of material, things like that, we don't want them to reverse engineer that kind of tech. So it's the same thing with the tank technology. And it's just not going to be the savior everyone is thinking. And then you're going to have this logistical nightmare of trying to get parts for these tanks. And you're not talking a lot of tanks either. Not enough to make a difference, which is what kills me about it. And in the same with the Germans, they're not sending in like the top of the line leopards. And the British are sending theirs in, they're sending their tanks in. But again, they're sending 14 like seriously, 14. I mean, it's not even a battalion of tanks. What are you going to do with 14 tanks? And you combine how are me is like under 30 us, a rooms, and you say guys, you're not serious about winning this conflict. If we're going to, I mean, it just kills me with our interventions. If we're going to go to war, then go to war to win. Don't go to war to lose. We haven't won. If you look at it, we haven't won a war since World War two. We win, we win most battles that we fight, but we still lose. But that just sucks. I mean, I spent, like you see, I spent most of my late 20s and early 30s in Iraq. And the three and a half years of time in that country and that mission trying to win this thing and make this thing work. And then to find out years later, everything goes a lie to get us there. And then you guys didn't give us the tools and allow us to win it. Well, it's just a way. It's like, what did we just do? Why did I sacrifice a lot of those years of my life? You know, like, I, you heard about the burn pit issues that a lot of us vets are having to deal with it from that stuff. So when we capture intel, right? So we capture people with these nifty little cell phones, right? And laptops and computers, different things like that, right? That stuff has to get destroyed. So how do we destroy this stuff? You burn this crap. So when you're burning lithium ion batteries, that causes a problem, you know, it creates a fluoride gas and other kinds of toxic materials. And they didn't, they didn't like tell us about this kind of stuff. They didn't give us proper protective materials to when you're having to do this. Right. So, you know, you have to burn these materials. We have, you know, burn classified materials every shift. Um, you're breathing in this kind of stuff all the time and it causes long-term health effects. Um, you know, like, for instance, I was, uh, well, it's like 30, 31 years old and I had to have double hip replacements at age 31 because shortly after I got back from my last time in Iraq, a few months later, you know, I'm asking you to process out of nowhere. What is that? My hips. It's where the blood flow to the bone just stops. Just, it just stops. The bones become brutal and so both of my hip bones just became brutal and broke. And I've had to have them replaced. And really bad part is the, when they did the left hip, they didn't do that one correctly. So I had to have a revision surgery. We had to go do it again. So like three years later, I had to have that thing replaced again. Except when they did the revision, they broke apart of the bone off and then it healed in the wrong spot. And then now it's pushing into a cluster of nerves and then they did they didn't put the proper joint head on their ball head on the rod. And it's too small. So now it kind of like vibrates on the bone. It's just, I don't know. It's freaking painful. And anyway, I can get to see fixes have it done a third time. Hip replacements are pretty painful surgeries to have. And they leave you, you know, it's a week in hospital three weeks and rehab. Um, at least you don't have for a little while during this in the VA. I will do it next time. I did you as the first time, first, the first surgery I had to have was actually done in Germany. I was working on Germany at the time. And then I had the revision done once in Chicago. Um, but you know, I'm gonna have to have this like done a third freaking time. And I, I just sucks because you're, we're stuck dealing with these physical problems and issues now from this war. And this is crap that's going to play us for decades. You know, I just, and I'm not the only one. I just want to tell you guys, like Biden's sudden died from a brain cancer that is completely tied to the burn pit stuff. Really? Yes. Is this done died from the, from the, from the type of cancer that a lot of other vets have died from all the trivia from the burn beds. What is the background of his son? He was a, he was a j, he was a jag. He was a lawyer. So he was, you know, deployed over there. Do I, um, we use lawyers live. I mean, I use him as an interrogator. We had, we had four lawyers assigned to our unit on different shifts. And so we worked with them all the time and aren't we? Okay. And they're always there advising commander, which can't, can't do for laws, marmcom, things like that. Right. You know, is you, are you allowed to do this strike or not? Well, what was the lawyer say? Sucks you got to find a war, right? That a lawyer next to you, but that's where we're at these days. Right. But his son was a lawyer over there. And something he was exposed to, to the same materials I've been exposed to, everyone else. Wow. And so he's, you know, he ain't got that cancer died. This other people we know that have had that cancer. I know, another one of our friends from our church, um, he retired from the military, we're clouded different, um, um, it was a lot of different secret school of crap, but he was over there in Iraq and Afghanistan for a number of years before he retired. And then he ended up getting that, that same type of cancer that Biden, some God that brain cancer. Um, and he hung on for a while. He had a flight four or five years where he died. He died a few years ago from it. You know, but it's just, and this shit's off from the burn pits. Yeah. Yeah. Good. Materials. You know, what's your, you know, your breathing. My stuff's just like in Vietnam, guys, they had that agent orange, they kept, you know, foliage that they were just reigned out on those are out there in patrols. They're just doing patrols. They don't know what's, what's going on. They exposed to it. And that's what it's awesome. Oh, yeah. Oh, all the different types of cancers. Oh my God. Kidney cancer, lymphatic cancer. Yeah. They just passed this new burn pit legislation for, for vets, which was really good because the VA was notorious for like, tonight, everything. Wow. Yeah. It's just, it just, you know, it's weird that's look for us. Like a medical time bond. Right. Explode. Um, you know, but it's it frustrates me because if we are, if we're going to go to war, then give us a clear cut objective. What works to accomplish? And then give us an exit strategy in defying what winning is. We know what the objective is, what we can work towards. Yeah, but it's like his win. Like, is it, it's a check was off. Liz, when is it the case with proxy wars? Like the one in Yemen? Is it the, like, is it true that the dynamic is basically we want to be helpful to our allies, Saudi Arabia because we need them and they need us. We want to maintain the relationship. So we want to basically look like we're doing everything we can to help them, but we don't really have a fuck about helping them. We just want to make it seem like, kind of, so it's more sinister than that even. So, right. That's how you don't give them the best tanks. We give them. We see, well, yeah, but it's even worse than that. Okay. So with Saudi Arabia and Yemen, right, do we really want them to win? Not necessarily because if this long as this fight is happening and Saudi Arabia is having a losing tanks, losing equipment, like MRaps and armored vehicles and, and having to expand missiles, like Patriot missiles and all kinds of things like that, that is a continuous, that that's a continuous source of supply, like a demand. It's kind of like a drug dealer, right? He doesn't want to kill you by giving you too much drugs. He wants you addicted and coming back for more. So if Saudi Arabia is fighting the Houthis, the more they owe us, the more we give them the more they owe us. Well, the more they owe us, but they need, they need replacements. They're losing equipment. They need to buy more from us. It loses out of coming to get keep buying more from us. Well, they're having to buy equipment from us to make sure they don't lose to the Houthis, which Saudi does something we don't like. We now have a little more leverage on them. Well, okay, maybe we are going to put these weapon sales on hold. And that devastates them because they built their army around our equipment. It's only you choked off the supply for parts and servicing and everything else. That means they're going to comply. So there's that piece to it. So if we can it's like with Ukraine, you know, we're getting the Europeans to just expend everything they have and Uncle Sam's going to come around and be the sugar daddy to supply and with everything to replace it. And because they don't have any of their own indigenous equipment, they're dependent on us. We now control your ability to defend your nation by turning the supply spickets on and off if you don't comply. So you want to make sure you own your own defense systems. That's why you see like pulling their bio-level American weapons in artillery and munitions things like that. But they're also partnering with South Korea to buy a lot of their armor vehicles and equipment in their building their own indigenous systems and their own industry to be able to supply and do it themselves because they want to be independent. Right. Pulling has a horrible history of being screwed by its allies. And you know, they want to make sure this doesn't happen again in the future. So have you ever watched Oliver Stone's Putin interviews? Yes. Really interested in what did you think about that? I just really appreciate it. I mean, I think Oliver Stone has his own bent and angled things. But again, I'm not trying to side with Putin or with Russia or anything like it. I just like sending people and I like learning what makes them tick and why why countries and. I'm not going to get this happen. Yeah, it's brilliant. And because as a writer, someone trying to create these books when I want to, you know, create, you know, book book two or book three for the series. I, I used those resources to help me better understand the conflict, better understand the scenario. You know, um, in this particular one, so in Monroe doctrine, one of the things we really exposed and look at is the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative. And this is where they have a Chinese big manufacturing company, country, what they want to do is link their factories with markets around the world. So you have a constant supply of customers and that keeps them gone. So Belt and Road is basically a global infrastructure plan where they will come into say a country, a poor country, you know, central, somewhere on Central America. And they will say, all right, we will build, we will help build and finance a deep water port, which will massively improve your country and economy. But we're going to own 51% of the port. And you get the benefit of it all. And then we will help build from the port, these rail and highway networks, connecting your major cities. All this is being done on the altruistic nature of their hearts. This is being done to ensure they have a, a, a consumer to buy as a products that they're building. Oh, and be charging. Yeah. So they do that. That's why they're spending all this money and Africa. All over the world. Yeah. Yeah. So that's what they're doing with that. But more importantly, they're also at the same time putting you into a debt trap where the interest rates on these things are really low cheap, but they're lots. It's big. And they own 51% of the port or maybe they own 49%, but the clause that if you fail to make your payments, it reverse to their ownership. There's all kinds of little things they do. Now, these nations are poor. They need, they want to develop and grow and in, in move forward. And the Chinese are coming in with essentially endless cash to do all of that. And that's what they're kind of moving forward and accepting and doing that. And the Chinese are all over the place with us. But because they have control of these facilities and the infrastructure, they can manipulate and change the foreign policy of those nations to be how they want it. So in our scenario, we look at it that as one aspect of it. But now we also look at artificial intelligence and machine learning saying, well, where is that going? Because we can use AI to help us understand how, say, the naval commander for a ship is going to react in certain circumstances situations. And how do we do that? Well, understand how, say, the naval commander for a ship is going to react in certain circumstances and situations. And how do we do that? Well, we look at what is this guy, what's this guy's social profile, his online profile. So what I mean by that is we look and say, okay, well, what is he spending his money on? What is he doing on social media? What kind of interactions does he do? What is he watching YouTube? What is he, what kind of books does he read on? Amazon? What is his purchasing behaviors? We look at all the different types of materials that he does. And then we look at not just him, but his immediate orbitness friends. What do they all do? So that helps to shape like the person's opinion, who they are, personalities, all the different social profiles like that. And then they have these awesome games on Facebook that everyone just loves to play. What character are you in, in Lord of Rings or in, what's a game of thrones? What shares? But people click on this yet. And when they do, they go through and they answer all these different questions, right? And those questions give a certain type of social, it's like a social assessment. These are like assessing individuals and people. And then when you're also doing that, there's also a clause that actually grants them access to then see everything you do on the site and from there and into a few more. It's not really able to track a bunch of things. But they're giving you, they're getting you to play this game where you're helping them ability social profile of you willingly and you're giving them access to all of your social media. So when you have machines that can take all the stuff in since the size it create profiles, you can start doing predictive behavioral analysis. So now I can start like conditioning a society to accept something by engineering everything to fit into a certain mold or poke and prod and push people or I can understand how they will respond when an action happens. So like a way to condition people really get of social engineering study, case study. Look at last year when Florida passed as parental rights bill, right? So the parental rights bill, different organizations would not label this thing, don't say gay. And that's what they try to call it. They call this thing is that it's related to that whole suit. These left left wing groups started labeling this thing. That don't say gay bill. Well, it has nothing in the bills as you can't use the word gay. And there's nothing in about about homosexual, at all. All it is simply saying is that kids between the ages of well kindergarten through third grades, so basically five year olds or eight year olds should not be taught sexual content or sexual related materials. Okay. What was the name of that act? Is the parental rights, parental rights act? Okay. And this was a massive thing that they took it and I bill that had nothing to do with, you know, being gay and made it into something that was it and got in renamed the whole thing. And then whipped up everyone into this frenzy over something that was never even mentioned or a part of the bill. I mean, I have yet to find an adult who can explain to me why we need to teach five year olds, you know, sex, sex ed, right? They're five. Why are we telling them they need to start understanding gender pronouns and using gender pronouns? Dude, they don't understand what a noun or a verb is. Like can't you write their names yet? You're making them do this. Why are you doing this to them? You know, let them be kids. Why was that? Do you know why that act was put in place? Because they were doing that because schools in Florida were actually doing that. It permeated through there. They were actually putting this stuff in there. I mean, you can, what schools were doing it? I don't have the list of them off the top of my head. That's the same. That's crazy. And like there's this, there's this one gal on, I don't use TikTok. It's supposed to be up. That's a Chinese spy app. I'm not on that thing. But there's this group called Lips of TikTok. And familiar with it. Yeah. So this woman who runs this thing, she doesn't do anything with it. She's literally taking whatever it is you made on your TikTok thing and just share it. So you made it. Reposing it. You admitted to this. You said, I'm doing X, Y, and Z and I'm proud of it. All she did was just reposted it. You put it out there. And that's how everyone found out about this. Because you have these teachers talking about this, getting their gratification and self, just feeling like importance when I got my group of kindergartners to understand why I go by my pronoun or these different things. Like, it jobs educate kids. Don't just, why is this important? Why is this part of it? And it comes back to our schools are failing to the basics of just making sure that our kids can read, write, and arithmetic, right? They're just not doing this. So if we're not getting those things right, then why are we going to expand into other areas, social areas like this? When we're not even getting the basics right, our emphasis needs to be on why are our kids not being able to meet and exceed their grade levels in their education? We spend more money on education than almost any other developing nation. We do. We spend huge sums of money on education. And we have the worst results from this stuff. How come elementary school teacher makes the same amount of money as a Burger King manager? Well, it's not because we don't spend money on education. The money is there. It's a matter of how the money is allocated, though. How many school administrators and support personnel do you have per teacher? The teachers should be getting paid a lot more money. But if you have a slew of school administrators and other non-teaching jobs that are taking up salaries and oftentimes quite high salaries, that's money you don't have for teachers. It's like the university systems. Well, universities have become very expensive because you have a whole plethora of non-teaching jobs and positions that are not contributing to teaching students, teaching people. It's like a contract having a billable, being able to build a client or not build a client. Right. Also, everyone gets loans to go to college. So they don't have to pay anything out of pocket and they have deals with these financial institutions where they just have these ridiculous loan programs. Think about this, Prok. This is a horrible debt trap we put our own sales in. I mean, I got $6,000 a steal loans myself from Poxero. I mean, I'm in the boat too. I paid off a good chunk of money. But what happened is you have the federal government is going to guarantee X amount of money for tuition. So what will happen is the school bank, okay, well, if we increase tuition by an extra 3% each year, the government is just going to increase the amount of loans available by that same amount. So as long as the government is going to guarantee a certain increase for the students, we'll just continue to increase it. And the student doesn't know any better. They just want to go to college. So they sign up for these things and get it. And then next thing you know, they've got all of the student loan. They've got all these debts. And this is the worst kind of debt because it's not even, they wrote the loss for the student loans in such a manner that you can't even discharge it. Right. That's what's really good. How much interest is on student loans? It depends. If you have a federal loan, it's usually not that bad. I mean, most my federal loans, that's like a three and a quarter. It's not too bad. But personally, I think what if the government is going to do something like that, then maybe you should set the interest rate at maybe like half a percent or 1% it should be just enough to service the loan not to make a profits. Because actually the government actually makes a solid profit on student loan insurance. Right. It's just, it's over $3. They make money on student loans. And like right now, with the budget deficits we're facing, part of the deficit we're actually facing is because we're not collecting the interest payments. We're not collecting payments and student loans. You know, and I know it's kind of a problem. But you know, that's the issue. The schools allowed to keep raising rates without justifying why they're doing that. Because the education hasn't been improving, not teaching anything new and cool. It's worth that job. But we're going to charge all this extra money. I mean, we're not producing hordes of doctors and people in the STEM fields. We're producing tons and tons of people getting degrees in, you know, English, literature, gender studies and history. It's like, well, that's cool knowledge to know. That's why that's why you call them humanities. That should be your major though. If we have a shortage in engineers and scientists and doctors and whatnot, then should the student loans be made available for people who want to go into this field and not for... There shouldn't even be loans. We should just be able to give that. We should be able to pay for that. If we can buy all those tanks and rockets for other countries, we should be able to buy the fucking education for doctors and lawyers and engineers and physicists. So what happens to Jeremy? A lot of people say, well, look at Jeremy and you probably have like free healthcare and they have for education. And technically that's true. But there's catches to all of that, okay? So in the education system, it's free. And when you're in, you could stay and get your PhD. There's nothing pushing off the door to go to work. That's why Jeremy has sold many PhDs. So many people with PhDs because it'll just stay as a permanent student for 12 years. Because the government pays them to do, gives them money to live on and it's free. That's like the rich kids I grew up around. But usually catch, usually catch for it, okay? You have to take a national standardized test. And if you don't get any certain percentile, you don't go to college. You're just done. Right. Now you go to private college and pay for that on your own. Right. You have a chance to longswear. I see it's like a great thing. Don't do it. Well, yes and no. I mean, it isn't. So you have a lot of people who just maybe they don't test well. They suck at taking tests. They're just not a good person to sit there and regurgitate test questions, right? Does that mean that person's not super smart though? And probably would be great in college and great afterwards. No, just because it's not good to take a test. There are a lot of people who are really good at taking tests and they are stupid. Like they really get a regurgitating test, test questions and scoring on there. Right. But they're dumb as a box of rocks. It's not a common sense. But those are the ones who are going to be allowed to get the education then because they want to see the test well. And so it really it blocks people from having that full access. And what happens in their schools is usually in their high school, what they call their their version of high school. You either get identified to either you're going to go academic route like college or you're going to go trade route and you kind of diverge and you split okay in high schools usually usually happens like in middle school and you find like three or four years of college or high school you split. And then you're going down one track or the other. And you're kind of like stuck. Like what if you decided I don't want to be a plumber. I really wanted to go to college and go to engineering. Well that's not an option anymore. I mean you can try to take those standardized tests and hope to get the right score you need. But your all of your all of your high school education until you finish high school didn't prepare you for that. So you're at a huge disadvantage to do that. And so if we had that kind of a system it may be free but just understand very few are actually going to get the benefit from it. It would be another caste system so to speak that we just create. On the medical side so when I was there as contractor I had private health insurance which meant I got seen by a doctor like that. I went to the doctor on Monday and he said oh your hip broke that's why it hurts so much. That's what you showed me MRI. We're going to do surgery on Friday. Okay. It hurts like how so you're going to do surgery right way. Well my roommate you had his hip replaced you. So he was a cop. He's a local cop. And I was talking to him about this and he told me that his hip when his hip broke he waited six weeks for his slot to get his surgery. I mean it's free. His amazing for it but he has to wait in a queue. And your queue as long as there's no one like super severe that gets bumped in front of you is like that's not like a line of cute cases in front of you. You'll eventually get seen relatively quickly but there are other times where you can end up waiting a very long time. And I don't know if you've had anyone who's had a broken hip a little test to this. When that happens you don't want to wait six weeks to get this fixed. It's broke for a reason it hurts. You can still move around sometimes but you're grinding on broken belt and they're quite painful. But it's free. Yeah. I mean there's trade-offs. It's not as green as everything. Yeah I've heard a lot of stories about the VA being really slow and not efficient and poor quality service. Then my dad has been dealing with the VA. He's Air Force veteran and he's just been recently dealing with some stuff having to go there for some checkups and some physicals. He had to get hearing aids, he's losing his hearing and he's had a really positive experience with the VA. He can't be jimpeded with your hat. Yeah great. I've had really great experiences with the VA here. I did not have a good experience with the VA in DC or in Chicago. Right. Just terrible VA's up there. Yeah I had a Kristen Beck. Are you friends with Kristen Beck on here Navy Seal? Her name is Kristen Beck. His name was Chris Beck. He transitioned to being Kristen Beck. Ah, just manufactured the firearms. There's another person that's kind of like the other Navy Seal. There's a fire manufacturer here. There's a book in a documentary made about her and it's called Lady Valor. It was like, I think it was either CNN or HBO documentary made about his story or her story. It was pretty incredible. I forgot where I was going with this. Oh, just talking about the VA. I talked to you a lot of problems with the VA because she dealt with a lot of psychological issues being a seal in Iraq. It's tough. Yeah. You're in combat for a very intense period of time and then you go home and you're back in intense combat. And that's kind of a difference between like the special warfare guys versus like line ants, like grunts. You know, just they're there for a year. Sometimes they see action. Sometimes they don't. Sometimes they, you know, it goes through a whole time without having any issue to problems. Whereas the special warfare guys, they go in and they're there for whether it's, you know, three months or five months, but that period of their it is high intensity for that period and then they go home and high intensity and go home. That's tough on those guys. Yeah. It's tough. Really tough. But it's like future warfare stuff. And that's scary as hell. Yeah. The technology where it's going with the drones and the AI and everything else, like there was a textron has, they have a really interesting remote controlled ground vehicle. Like you can look it up. The army's got these really unique. The future army combat systems, part of it are making these autonomous ground vehicles. So what you'll be able to do is you'll have a different sized like armored fighting vehicles and tanks will have different kinds of weapons on them, different sizes. But these vehicles are, we'll be able to kind of like a UAV, it'll be remotely controlled. So they can go into combat zone area from, well, the guy who's actually operating maybe hundreds of miles away or even on the other side of the world. And the vehicle will go in and be able to conduct its, its operations, its missions. Um, just kind of scary to think about because there's going to kind of a point where like you have a take for instantly tested right, they've got their self driving AI software. And that is getting better every single year because you have hundreds of thousands of people using it recording more data. It was not going to be long before you're going to have that same kind of technology capability that can operate this armored vehicle that will be able to autonomously go into a combat zone where you just say, okay, everyone in like this area here is classified as an enemy combatant. So it's going in and that's it identifies people to start gauging them. And you have that, you know, aircraft helicopters, yeah, soon underwater. So we already have stuff though. It's crazy. But they're all man loop right now. You know, they're being physically operated by someone. We're not far away though where this is going to be a semi autonomous to fully autonomous weapons. And then you're going to have these things just moving across. That's going to scare you. Yeah. What was the story a couple of months ago that San Francisco was going to start? Please, right. Yeah. They were going to have robots kill people. It's like crazy. Like what do you mean? Yeah, but we're about police with basically the authority to murder people. I guess they rolled it back once it started getting a lot of publicity. It's nuts. It's nuts where we're going with some of the technology. But then on the other hand, you know, you think about technology and AI and where we're going. It's spooky where it's going. But then you see this goofy ass balloon spy balloon floating across America. Are you kidding me? Yeah. Are we really like are we really still using balloons in 2022? 2023? I don't know. I don't know. I they say it's a weather balloon gathering. Is there a screen or who knows that I think it was a matter. Maybe it was just like a middle finger that flew across the country and saying, huh, look, we can do we just flew right across the country and you do anything about it and you know, kind of a black eye from there. But as a writer, okay, here's a scenario. Imagine this balloon and you place a nuclear device on top on this balloon, right? And it explodes at those high altitudes. What's it going to create electromagnetic pulse system that would blink in a big chunk of the United States? Fire all our circuitry and take us out. Right. So, you know, the writer in me looks that says, wow, that's a cool scenario. How could that work? You know, and what if they did something like that? What if they wanted to test it and say, hey, can we float up a lunar across the United States without getting seen or anything? And the fear part is had this rancher out there. And was it Wyoming or whatever? Not seen that's in a reported hit. We probably never would have known about it. And it sounds from the reports on the Pentagon. They wouldn't have known about it. Apparently they're trying to say that this has happened in the past and we didn't know about it. Like really, you had balloons the size of, you know, 200 foot tall balloon or 200 foot long balloons, yeah, float across country and know about it. What if someone did put a bomb, like an EMP bomb on there and did that? I mean, I also think too, like, how are there really, is was there really only one or how many of these are really floating across the skies that we know about? And we just wanted to say, you know, create some sort of sigh up to point the America public, make them look at China. Look at China. Look what they're doing to us. Somebody, somebody sitting at CIA right now just laughing there. Oh, you remember what happened like right before this, right? So right before the balloon thing, as when product Veritas had this big sting operation that they had done with one of the Pfizer employees, who kind of talked about how they had, how the vaccines just didn't work and went through that whole process and exposed all of that. And then a couple of days later, oh, we have a balloon up here. I don't remember even seeing what you're talking about. Yeah, look up Project Veritas with that whole thing they had about the Pfizer stuff. It was a big deal. And then magically, you find a magically like less than a week or two later, Pfizer's board ends up, Alstein James of Keith, who is the founder and the president for the company who does this, like that's his gig. And they get rid of him. And now, you know, he's out in the left lap and the way he probably restart his own brand new version of Project Veritas and restart the whole thing. But it's like coincidental timing from them breaking this big story. And it's one of the big stories of the decade to the balloon to then his outster. It's always in weeks. Coincidence. I mean, yeah, that should is scary. That's great. The vaccine stuff is really really scary. That's a very, really scary thing to try and talk to you, James. The reason that stuff scares me is just the level of control that has been put on social media and the internet and communication just based on that. Yeah. That is what scares me. Elon Musk exposed all that. And just was like, wow, I mean, from an Intel perspective, I understand, I know that stuff happens. And just I guess it was surprising how easier the media was to just be lap dogs for all of this and just compliant to it. Yes. Yeah. What happened to investigative journalism? Not investigative journalism journalism period. That goes back to that goes back to a Jack Murphy was talking about when he was putting out his story for the CIA. He was working one to at with one of the top two publications in the country. And when it came down to like the clock is taken to hit the publish button on that article and they had to run it by the CIA's deputy director. They had a conference call, a three way call with his editor at the publication and the CIA's deputy director on the phone off the record. We didn't have an on the record agreement with this guy said completely, vehemently denied everything about those cells being in Russia doing those sabotage campaigns conducting those sabotage campaigns. In fact, he said that it was rogue Ukrainians conducting those campaigns. So after the call, he has a another one on one with his editor saying, okay, what are we going to do? And editor says we have to scrub every single mention of the CIA out of the story. Yeah. Rogan Koreans that are on the CIA payroll, he wanted to completely make it line up with the deputy director's narrative. But they couldn't they couldn't just take the story and say deputy director, the CIA says this at the bottom or something like that. Say they denied it. No, they had to make it jive with his story. That is fucking scary because now now you're not doing journalism. Now you're just a mouthpiece for the state. Yeah. You know, I mean, that's what Jurt that is completely like I understand that this CIA's job is to keep clandestine missions off the front page of the newspaper. I completely understand that. But when you are absolutely tied into the biggest journalistic publications in the country, it is completely undermining what it means to do journalism and to be a journalist. Yeah. It is. It's sad. And that's why I question so much about this Russia thing when we say that Russia is completely completely blinded by propaganda. Everything there is propaganda. Why not? Yeah. That's what's made me see that more than anything. What is this? Oh, if I did Pfizer's boss cast out on his own vaccine, is this the bear toss thing? Yeah, probably so. But they are. Yeah. It's it's the whole story was just when it comes to seeing. Okay. Yeah. Well, James, I've learned a lot from this conversation, man. We just did three hours. Oh, yeah. You come and buy me. And this has been a really fun conversation. We covered everything. Well, you know, people are kind of like, this is how we come up with our material for books, right? Yeah. You ask questions. Okay. Lots and lots of questions. It's not that you take a position on one thing or another. It's just about absorbing the information so you can then create these scenarios because I want to have these scenarios out there. So people can look at that and go, man, what if this happened? What if that happened? Wow. The book about the whole series on that stuff and walk the dog, see what happens. What could happen? And maybe we go down. That is not something we should pursue because here's a somewhat realistic scenario. How could possibly play out? And that's kind of that's it's almost like I would say like warnings and stuff like that, but just trying to put ideas out there. How things could shake out? And I think that's kind of important for people to see and how about that because we sure as I don't know, the media is not going to do that. Right. The reporters aren't doing that. Right. And it's a very, very unique tool and sort of endeavor that you can go down that it's really fascinating how you can predict things that happen in real life when you're just writing fiction and you're trying to cook up scenarios. Yeah. You just look and say, well, it's an exercise that not a lot of people do or maybe they do and I'm just not in the world. Well, you have to be a, you have to think. No, fairs. Right. And take on the nefarious mode of well, how would I do this? If I want to jack up a country's electoral system, how would I do that? Walk through the whole thing and say, okay, now I've got that. Could I do this to United States? Or how would I do this to United States? How would I manipulate to gain control? It's all about control in my control mind. Right. Most of the world's revolves around that. And so you just figure that out and then say, all right, well, it's crazy. Here's on that. It's great because you're in that and walk the dog. Incredible. You know, you start seeing it actually on folder like damn, probably shouldn't have made that. We'll plan on making a blueprint for one. Right. It's really cool too to see someone like yourself go from what you did overseas to actually finding some sort of meaning and life and create a career for yourself and develop some sort of purpose for yourself. That's fine. You know, I've got two other veterans that I've, I've mentored you this whole process who now writing and creating their own books and doing their own things. And they're making money at this. You know, they're making three, four thousand a month and growing with their books sales and building that out. And it's creating alternative works, alternative jobs and careers that help them overcome their, you know, where there's a physical disability or just the psychological, psychological trauma, autistic and things like that. You don't have to be a permanently damaged or injured person. There's ways to overcome this and still be productive. That's important. Powerful stuff, man. Tell people where they're listening and watching where they can buy your books. Look at your website, your social media, all of it. Yeah. So you find all of our books on Amazon.com. We're available in Kindle Unlimited and print and audio books. Oh, you do audio too? All of them. Yeah. Yeah. No, I don't. I have professionals do that because I only got some story creating. Yeah. I already work the 80 hours a week on this stuff. I know somebody with a good voice and yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's why, you know, we create that stuff and it's odd because I've got the thrillers that we really dominated on and we also have you've been sci-fi took us a break because it's something. It's not real. You know, and kind of pushing to do that. But it's been fun. It's been neat to learn and learn like the digital marketing side of it all. And we found out last year with on Amazon, we hit the top 100 most red writers. I was like seven out of the 12 months to their Kindle Unlimited program. We had almost 74 million pages read through their Kindle Unlimited program of the books. It's just, it's insane because we're self published. We just on our own. We have a publisher that works with us. We have an agent, you know, nothing like that. It's 100% on our own. So it's our own ability to create the stories, edit them, get them up there and then figure out how to market them and do that. So yeah, just pla- all the skills they learn from the government and pla- they're marketing and creating books and so it works. Incredible work. Yeah. Well, thanks again for doing this. I really, really appreciate it. Good time again.