The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day There we go. What's up? How you doing? Good to see you brother good to see you sir. It's crack a lot. I'm not much Rockin the shiny We're talking about your shine all the watch that I'm glad Detroit's coming back, you know, and I like I like how China will represent Shine all is definitely one of the things that's great about Detroit. Yeah, they say like made in Detroit They're proud. Yes, which we didn't have for a long time Like so it's the craziest story if you know the story about Detroit like in the 1950s and 60s It was a third richest city in the world Well, yeah, it was called the Paris of the Midwest and it's a city that's still built for seven million people with supposedly 700,000 living in it I mean so you do see a lot of like how's there like a million dollar condo in the same place that has like eight abandoned other apartments It's when you go downtown. It makes no sense Logistically give a show top gear. Oh, yeah, the Jeremy Clarkson I think it was easier top gear was maybe the the one they did after that that they did for Amazon But they went to Detroit and they bought a house for five hundred dollars Yeah, you can and there's also the people that buy them and open the door and get mauled by pit bulls Or you see the ones that like there they'll put a like a pumpkin pat like they'll do an urban farm Which is hysterical and you'll see like these hippies on the news like they cut my face and stole my plums And I'm scared like yeah, but you're in a crack neighborhood nobody wants your farm. No, we're gentrifying Yeah, isn't that what you guys want? It's like they don't want that at all There's some delusional fucking people out there dude and what they did to Detroit like anybody that thinks that You should allow Corporations just take all the jobs and move them overseas. Well also just like corporate decision-making and it's a prudent financial Decision-making and look at Detroit Look, they did it's a prime example of like that was the American dream Yeah, and then I like we'll just we'll assemble them in Mexico Look, but we'll write made in America on your door So you're gonna feel good about it. Did they even write made in America on the door? Sometimes they do like I prefer like the 80s and 90s Where if you bought a car and it was made on a Friday you knew a drunk guy did it so you're like give me one from a Wednesday Like those were the days of American auto-making See that's part of the problem too a friend of mine who was in the union told me that the auto makers union just got out of control they're making so much money and the There were constantly in negotiations or strikes impending and oh yeah, and then they're like hey, fuck you We'll just go to a max off. Yeah, yeah, that's you. Right. That's right Yeah, that's just part of it, but no I like it later on like you said in the 80s and 90s like your grandfather Then and it really doesn't matter what you do wrong like that's part of the deal. Yeah, you can't get fired. No, it's great I mean, yeah, it's great work or but yeah, this seems to be like a middle balance that could be reached like don't be fully hammered when you're trying to put the door on an F-150 I mean, they should make good money because the corporation makes good money. I mean, you know, they were doing well it was a Very profitable business the worker should share in those profits well Like the electric ones. They just didn't work for them either They oh, they push it out too soon too Well, I know people to work on the line you have like the electric F-150 and it's like F-150 is the Everybody wants one. They love it as a work truck But as an electric truck you put the thing down in South America where it's hot all the time It's just gonna catch fire so it's not really working out or if you're in the cold the battery sucks Yeah, which yeah, and I just don't like electric cars Personally, maybe it's just because I'm from Detroit Oh, I grew up and I just want to feel an engine. I get it, but I have a Tesla that will knock your dick into the dirt Oh, I know they're fast. It's not just fast. It's fucking cars incredible. Yeah, it's a piece of machinery from the future What is it? It's a Model S okay, but it's a plaid that was sent to a company called unplugged performance And unplugged performance takes the fenders off put carbon fiber wider fenders changes the suspension took a race-based suspension puts wide tires on it and wider wheels Upgrades the brakes to these huge carbon fiber discs because it's a very heavy car as you say so it's heavier as opposed to lighter like an Race car well. It's heavier because Tesla's are very heavy. Yeah, batteries, but Because the batteries are on the bottom the center of gravity in the car is phenomenal. Okay, it's it's like one of the best balanced cars You can ever drive and the self-driving is bananas. Oh, you have it on there. I had my butt Yeah, he get it with the car. I had my buddy Fade or it was here the other day and he had never been in one So the first thing I always do is merge onto the highway. I'm like you're ready Zero to 16 1.9 seconds. Oh, that's faster. And then I go now This is what's really wacky or put in the destination And I just say take me to the comedy mothership and then I press a button And it goes do do and when I go it goes do do it just does it on its own changes lanes stops at red lights It's crazy it moves around obstructions really yeah, and yeah, because I remember the first ones they were like You know, barely over bikers It's still based on camera so you could fool it with the camera. You could fool the camera rather so some guy Set up a mural in the desert. Yeah, so what he did was he had the highway and then he made a mural that looked like the highway and the Car just wearing right through the mural. Oh, I saw that. That was great. He made it look yeah, and they've hit he put a woody woodpecker to the side of it Like he just He just drew the tunnel. It was a standard thing that he's right into the tunnel Basically like that, but he did draw the tunnel. He did but is what would he would back in it? Yeah, right? It's so awesome. You would draw a tunnel inside of a cliff. That's all it did Just tricked it like it was a coyote Which with all the AI it was kind of nice to see I hate to say it. Yeah, that's a little relieving It's kind of funny. It's good for now, but you know It's like beating up a two-year-old that's eventually become an F and NFL player Good girl You're gonna regret it They get a remember who fucked with the way mows. Oh, you know I was watching a movie last night I remember the name of it Companion and it was just all about like sex bots They're like on to them and going at each other and it's like just that it's a movie Like yeah, it was an HBO. Yeah, oh, okay And like they set up a sex bot to kill one of their friends so they can rob them and it turns out She's a sex bot and this other guy's a sex bot and I'm watching it I'm like this is the problem like yeah, there it is Like you can't really give these things personalities if you have a sex bot I think well, this is part of the problem that's happening with these chatbots with kids Because they're developing relationships with them and like one one AI chat bot was teaching a kid how to make a news Yeah, funny no, so I had a little it's pretty funny It's all funny the fucking robot is teaching a suicidal kid how to do it right It's already encouraging like you have a good idea. Yeah take a rope Make sure yeah, that's Wonder if any of the woke AI chat bots have talked into these trans school shooters They might have you know what I'm saying like the last one. Yeah. I don't know bro It's like seven of the last X amount of trans seven in a row have been trans except one was non-binary Which is just diet trans it is Right that's diet trans That's trans without the sugar. I just don't get it like I felt suicidal Like stay at home and kill yourself like don't go into schools or just go for a while That would be good to you know the problem is some people get to a certain point in their life And they have no friends and no community and no identity and no life and it's not they're not successful and they feel like shit And then they have gender dysphoria on top of that and then they're probably on a bunch of SSRIs Which are okay junior is going to apparently do some sort of a large scale research into The connection between mass shootings and psychiatric drugs because it is real and everyone knows it And it's just this dirty secret that no one talks about because all the media is paid off by the pharmaceutical drug companies And nobody wants to make this correlation connection because you're also risk the wrath of all these people that are on them So I'm on them and I'm not doing anything. It's not the pills. I need these to function Maybe you do. I don't know. I don't know how your brain works But the reality is most of these people that have committed mass murder or on psychiatric medication Well, they are and I'm on SSRIs and I'm trying to get off of right now because I've been on for 10 years Oh, and I don't like it So I hadn't liked it for a long time and even dealing with like mental health care I'm like, I don't think I need this and I like what's better you stay on them. I'm like this is odd because it's having the opposite thoughts And so I it's having the opposite thoughts. I mean, it maybe feel bad depressed and wants to meet like really like I gained weight I was doing like really bad mentally for a while because of certain things and It was I took myself off of them for five days and I felt good And then I got really queasy and really nauseous like my brain started kind of misfiring So now I'm weaning about weaning it off a little more correctly as opposed to just going cold turkey So after five days like what is happening where it makes your brain crazy like I was stuttering. I was slipping up I was having trouble seeing Did you like go online and see if there's any correct way to do this? Yeah, they said to wean it off for whatever your thing is take that and then bust a pill in half take that for seven days Must a pill in half take that for seven days and that's what I'm doing now And I already feel better being on less But I was told for the last 10 years that that's what I should be on and I think it's had a very negative effect to me Yeah, see brain that's what I mean like you just feel like you're having a stroke electric shock-like sensations in the head Our hallmark symptom other sensations can include tingling or numbness yep flu like symptoms digestive issues sleep problems Balance your balance goes mood changes cognitive issues brain fog there it is all of it and nausea was the one that really messed me up Because I was just like why do I feel sick? But I didn't feel like the flu Hmm, just felt like thrown out. Yeah, and I just realized I'm like okay Well, what did I take out because I've gone off of a lot of harder drugs and alcohol and stuff So I know what it's like to feel with draws and it was a withdrawal from so how old do you know? I'm 43 so when you were 33 got on them. Yeah, so what was going on at 33? We like I need medication. I went to there. My mom had died killer self So I decided to go see a doctor and they were like look take this and I'm thinking like I think my mom was on this I don't know this is the best answer, but I took it and it was on it She was on yeah, she was on antidepressants and she was bipolar, but they had her miss they had her misdiagnosed as depressive too Because I was like I think she's bipolar and like how do you know? I'm like you know I lived with her for 30 years And I know the mood swings because I grew up in a house where like you came home And she was either the happiest woman on the planet or you were fucking terrified like it was one or the other You know and that's just and she wasn't a bad person. She just had this mental imbalance Yeah And it was after things happened with my dad and like the government and things like that So whatever he's done he was in Vietnam And he got a soft-cell sarcoma from Agent Orange oh And the VA was great. They did nothing for our family. They denied both of my mom's claims my dad lost all of his money Like it was he was worth like four million. I think he lost everything and It was to pay out a pocket like when and he got sick when I was 13 He was like our baseball coach everything so he would go around the like country going to like Cambridge had a very good Neurosurgery place for the brain stem University of Michigan and Ann Arbor had one so he wasn't as present a lot My mom was dealing with that on top of being an R. And I mean and he he was tough as nails Like he would have one of those halo's drilled in and he'd still go golfing and shit He just be on the course. Oh my god, and I'd be like what are you doing? He's like, it's not bad I don't pick my head up anymore. It's like He'd see in the bright side of a halo did he would find the positive and anything he reminded me of danger field a lot Like that's how he was so he never complained and it was always crazy because he'd be very dry like people go How are you and he'd be like all life is great? He just got something nailed to his fucking head He was like can you have me one of those tissues so I can clean it up real quick? He goes it might be bleeding. Yeah, how are you and he just tried to make light of it the whole time But the government did nothing and then the more and more I research her we've talked to the VA I have an uncle who does stuff former Marine Four people that have dealt with us from Vietnam because they denied so many claims that ended up being real like soft Self-sullsercoma was one of the things where they said oh we didn't do that That's not from Agent Orange It's like you're sure because you it was in the combat in the fields where you spray it to kill all the trees and they're like Yeah, that's not on us Then years later they admitted it but said my mom filled out the paperwork wrong and gave us nothing and Even 10% of that's 400 grams like gave us nothing dude So it's like I've dealt with that my whole adult life where I have a little piece of me That's why I'm not really like right or left I'm very much like fuck either side of this until somebody does something that I actually believe in and when I see the stuff That's happening to so many people that fought especially when you find out about LBJ The helicopters all the other bullshit. That was the reason that we even went into Vietnam The helicopters yeah LBJ from when I understand had money in helicopters oh and was able to profit off of it Oh, God so in people say it's a conspiracy theory, but why were we really there? Well, I think the real reason was heroin. I'll give you that. Yeah, I think that was the real reason I think that's the real reason why we were in Afghanistan as well. Oh, I would assume yeah Yeah, that's the poppy fields. I mean, I don't want to say it's the only reason I'm sure there's other there's military reasons. There's rare earth minerals in Afghanistan. There's natural gas There's a lot of resources in Afghanistan But there's a lot of heroin coming out of there that was at one point in time 94% of the earth's heroin supply it was coming from the place that we were guarding We were literally guarding the poppy fields military US military guarding the poppy fields That was supplying heroin to 94% of the earth. That's insane because the other part is there's a part in China like some of the triangle Trying to think of it's But the rest is Afghanistan and that's how you're getting every drug in the world into The US as far as like you know actually making opioids Because in the 90s I worked in a pharmacy which was a great place for a drug addict Especially when they weren't counting the pills you could do it by weight So you just say like hey gotta go take out the trash and you just like open up a bottle like Valium or Percocetes And just you know fill your cellophane the golden triangle the remote jungle covered border region where Thailand, Myanmar and Lao people's Democratic Republic meet has been has seen an exponential surge in the Manufacturing traffic of synthetic drugs. Yes, so that's what it is. It's the golden triangle. That's what I was thinking on that I guarantee you that had a there was a major reason why we were in Vietnam There was so much money coming out of there and the idea that some corrupt factions of Either the military or the intelligence agencies or whoever it is so and not not saying the agencies or the military themselves I'm saying corrupt factions because there's always going to be those just like when the CIA sold drugs in South Central To pay for the conscious versus the San Adistas. It's all real. Well look at Detroit when you look at white boy Rick White boy Rick was somebody who was caught selling crack and yet home in young the mayor who was pretty corrupt and Then you had the FBI who caught him and said hey, here's some more crack Just go into the city and find out who the dealers are then when white boy Rick got it Brought in by the city The FBI was like we didn't do that. We'd never put crack into a black community We don't know. We've never seen this kid in our life. So this is kid. He's my cousin's friend white boy Rick ends up going to prison I don't know the exact time for like 30 years. He's like 17 they tried to name him as a kingpin and again He's a white boy in Detroit who's 17. He's not a kingpin of shit And he served the longest time because Coleman young was pissed. He was dating his niece So he goes he goes away and then while he's in jail They have him sign a thing that said he stole a car so his sister didn't have to go to jail So finally they let him out for all this wrongdoing that he never did this It was not the sentence that was batshit and then he has to go right from that jail to Chicago to serve time for stealing a car while he was in prison His story is crazy. There's a documentary called white boy And it's one of yeah, that's the one with McConaughey, which is a good movie McConaughey was in the movie. Yeah, my comic-cave places dad my uncle knew him knew the actual guy said he was like He was kind of a dip-shitty would sell guns very obviously out of his basement They live like two blocks over so is this guy alive now? Oh, he's still alive. Yeah, he's out Yeah, boy Rick. Yeah, that's him now. He got out Just a few years ago Jesus Christ so he was in their problems. He now. Oh, I don't know what he went in in the 80s So and I think he got out around 2020 So yeah, if you if you see the documentary white boy a highly recommend yes He a teenage drug informant for the FBI But then they denied Talking to him look at it says above with the Eminem pictures white boy Rick releases his own marijuana strain. Yes That's the good thing about Detroit now is it's all like insanely legal. That's funny Yeah, pretty like Rick Ross is doing that in LA is he really yeah, pretty way Ricky Ross who was selling the drugs The in LA that paid for the contest conscious versus the time niestas. Oh, that's all he's got his own weed line now I know a few guys who were like heavy busted in the late 90s and now they all have stores And that's just hilarious tonight you would think that they would shy away from that no They just smoked even after I was like still okay But but my saying is my thinking is it's still federally illegal It is like to open up a store and how about your primary source of income a Schedule one drug according to the government. It seems risky is fuck for someone's already been inside. Oh, dude It really well It's odd that they could get the right like the permit for it I know or at least they know someone who got the permit for it and they work there Maybe I shouldn't let out too much. Yeah, their grandmothers. Oh, yeah, that's who owns the store 95 year old lady, but if you go to parts, too It's like weed store weed store vape store weed store. You're like I can't believe you pack this many into a block Yeah, it's not like a liquor license that takes forever to get it seems pretty easy We've all joked about stalking each other online, but let's not forget some people do it for real Remember the Minnesota state representative and her husband who were shot dead in their home Authorities now think her killer found her home address and the names of her family members from data brokers So how can you keep your personal information private? Express VPN Express VPN is an app that hides your IP address and reroute all of your online activity through secure Encrypted servers that means data brokers and the scammers and criminals they sell to won't have a shred of your personal information But what if your info is already out there? No sweat Express VPN is a feature called identity defender Which is a free add-on for you as customers identity defender helps get your information taken down fast It's the best tool to stay safe and regain privacy in a dangerous world Express VPN is fast easy to use it works on all your devices and it comes with a 30 day Money back guarantee and right now you can get four extra months free If you tap the banner or go to express VPN dot com slash Rogan that's Express VPN dot com slash Rogan and if you're watching on YouTube Get your four free months by scanning the QR code on screen or by clicking the link in the description One of this like weed store wars There's gotta be there must be the fight over profits throw all in the same street together Well, I was just in Albuquerque last weekend and they had the same thing where I'm like so it's weed store massage parlor Bapestore by here rent here carlody by here pay here weed store weed store weed store weed store It's crazy how how legal it is in a state. Yeah, it all depends on the state. Yeah, right in Texas It's just medical and I think you have to vades. I think I think you basically did yeah They only want to give it to the bad bad AIDS They're expanding that though to look at expanding that if the federal government just changed the designation or Distinction or whatever you would say it is like from schedule one to schedule three or something like that Which is reasonable that's what they should do well the whole thing is ridiculous and that's how you get organized crime I mean 100% look at prohibition Detroit was one of the first places to have it when it was three years before they actually made it nationally outlord and That gave birth to the purple gang who copone was even afraid of and I mean those guys were fucking ruthless and they would just go over to Canada because it was right across the river and they would just either take a boat or in the winter They would drive and of course they'd sent some Underling to drive to figure out how heavy the ice was so they knew if they put that many kegs in a thing You die so there's just model teas at the bottom of the river really yeah, dude It's cool a lot of the old mansions still have the tunnels that will lead out into the river that the bootleggers used to use Wow, it's really fascinating so Canada never went prohibition. No, and it was right there like you could throw a rock You just take a drive to Toronto. It's at yeah, just go right to the party and yeah And you civilized person well they have legal weed up there too Yeah, they did. Yeah. This is one of that Model T at the bottom of the river and this was the guys like I got a whole bunch and then halfway That's fucking bad the ice went out. Yeah, dude. They were the purple gang was ruthless man I never heard of that before they were the first they were probably the first Jewish gang that Irish members as well They were the Bernstein brothers the parents owned a shoe store and like the legend is they were called purple because that was the color of Rancid meat so they hated the name because they thought it sounded gay But they still like they still ran with it But when you see pictures of them all lined up and like mug shots like they they would do stuff like walk up to something But hey, I like your ring and they make thanks and then a guy would just like cut the dudes finger off And he would take his ring like they were Like the level of cruelty these guys wouldn't flick down people to take over a city was next level Wow, and yeah, you heard of this before. Yeah, dude even coat even Capone wouldn't mess with them because he was over in Chicago and needed some of these guys to supply the liquor Wow, and the purple gang ruled Detroit. So is that a documentary? It says the purple gang? They have they that might be they did a mob museum thing on and I went and saw in Vegas like that book right there The organized crime in Detroit. That's a great book and it's got a lot of fun photos But yeah, they were they were as ruthless as you could absolutely get go to that first picture in the upper left-hand corner and make it big Look out look at their faces man. Yeah, none of them are happy. Those are hard-looking dudes Yeah, they had a rough rough life So they a lot of them were just like stray kids that were Irish that were just abandoned by their parents and then the rest were these Jewish kids whose parents owned a shoe store Wow, and I mean eventually they dismantled the Italians took over but you know during prohibition they rained Wow, yeah never heard of that before to really cool story that I've always wanted to see in a movie and nobody's been able to Execute it and I would love to see it because maybe somebody will know that you just got the story out I hope people do because it's such a cool story. It sounds crazy. Yeah, like the level of Detroit Mob to that's been around is just it's wonderful. I should say wonderful, but I love it That's crazy. Yeah, like they were nice to my dad and stuff when he was young and you know like when he had gotten back from And you know they just nice people that I knew Wow nice people that kill people. Yeah, you know, I feel cool. I feel kill bad people. Yeah the But the thing you said that though it's so important is it like prohibition all it does is prop up organized crime and The fact that we still do it. It's just it's just for optics It's just because people say I don't want legal drugs on the streets and my kids getting hooked on drugs So yeah, drugs are here. They're here if your kids go to a club If your kids are a bar, if your kids are partying Drugs are there. They're they're a real thing You you'd be way better off if drugs were legal and then you knew exactly what you were getting because these kids are getting fentanyl because I had this guy Ed called around the other day. Okay, who's a Expert in the cartels and he said they started at in fentanyl because they had grown so many poppies that the soil had been depleted So the heroin was very weak so to make the heroin more potent they started at in fentanyl Is that what it was and the desire for all that stuff was all because of the Sackler brothers So the Sackler brothers when when they created this opiate crisis in America Which did not exist before where everybody's hooked on these fucking pills? Then they start cracking down the laws so now you have a demand You know have a supply and then along comes the cartel and starts making pills and they start making pills with fentanyl in them Because their heroin's not that strong Xanax Percocet or these things the kids don't know they're taking that's the shit part And so you're making it look just like the real pill. Oh, I know what those are. No. Yeah You get those pressed as anis that just like a bar and it's just complete fentanyl and I when I remember when fentanyl I shouldn't say first came out. It's been around, but it would first start to be coming He put it in products you weren't expecting and I had like three friends die with in a matter of maybe Four months and that's how I started noticing like well This is gonna get serious and now they there's a site I see it's that called every 11 minutes and that's one or every every 11 seconds and that's how long It takes for someone to OD on fentanyl in this country So every 11 seconds every person is overdosing on fentanyl Wow and all because of our stupid laws and I'm not saying I'm not saying Legal heroin would be good for everybody. It's not it's not good to do heroin Think everybody would agree that well Yeah, I did it before once it was good. Was it? Oh, yeah. Was it like did you shoot or start it? I snorted it. Oh, no, sorry. I snorted it and then I smoked black tar heroin and one time I shot it So three Wow, what was the best one to shoot that yeah, that's what they do that was in that was made majestic Was it yeah, it was it like the most calming Wonderfuls I got this is something I'm promoting it also with my voice like it's the most calming wonderful sensation You've ever had you're gonna love it kids. It felt amazing like you every problem You've ever had has gone and you feel nothing but euphoria Which is different than like oxy and some other stuff which kind of just makes you feel To me loose and tired hmm I mean this makes you tired you're crashing out But you're also getting a feeling that was really really like warm and exciting Like I only smoked crack once on accident and that was how do you do that on accident? They put it in the joint right? So I was sitting at my friends back porch and he gives me first He's on the joint and I hit it and it had like a weird sizzle and I hit it I'm like this is the best part. I've ever had my life and it's like yeah, they gave me free crack and I was like oh good So I'm now high on crack my other friends are pissed they go and throw the joint in the sewer and I'm just sitting there like and it doesn't last Very long, but it felt really fucking good like I immediately would have done more crack had there been the option But it definitely takes you over very quickly Did you ever see the hunter-biden thing recently? We did this interview we're talking about how great crack is oh yeah you spot on It was the best ad for crack I've ever seen in my life and you only did like one hit right I did once and then I'm done Like very rare when they threw it in the sewer did you want to go get it? Yes I wanted to go I Want to go back to Wayburn where the street where we got it and I was like we should go Give more crack guys. I don't know if you you didn't feel this but it's I think you're probably though No, you're not the first person I've talked to that shot heroin But your first person who described it oh It was my friend Jay had it and it was in high school Yeah, it was a it happened First person I've talked to that shot heroin, but your first person who described it. Oh, it was my friend Jay had it and it was in high school Yeah, it was it had to be better To get people to shoot it up The zillion way to pick give people that kind of commitment get a needle find a vein get a fucking rope tie off your arm It was awful that part yeah, and then then it was did you do it with a guy? Yeah So he'd done it before he did it for me. Yeah. Oh, he died of it A heroin overdose on his parents kitchen. Yeah, I know you wouldn't expect it Found his head between like them The fridge and the stove. You got stuck. I think he was either looking for something or collapsed right there. Oh boy. Yeah, it wasn't good Nice guy I do this dude in the 90s his name was water dog Okay, he was a professional pool player Like a really high-level professional pool player and he was a heroin addict and he would go into the bathroom Like I saw him play straight pool, which is this game where you're just running balls like you it's called 14 and one It's what they played in the hustler so you have instead of eight ball where the balls in the center You you have a soft break where you're just trying to not scatter the balls very much and the idea is to Eventually someone makes a mistake and you leave an open shot and that person runs out that rack leaves one ball on the table makes that ball and collides the cue ball into the rack and opens up that rack and then keeps going And a really good player can run like two three hundred balls. Yeah, so this guy Was playing for ten thousand dollars in the 90s. It was a lot of much. Yeah, I was broke So I couldn't believe anybody could play pool for ten thousand dollars. This guy goes into the bathroom shoots up comes out and sits on this This bar stool like this Just sits there for like 20 minutes man just sat there and then we were all watching it like his arms They're all curled up like this and then he got off Screwed his cue together and never missed when I say never missed I mean it was the craziest display of pool I think I had ever seen at this time He played like the greatest pool player that's ever played he had no nerves He couldn't be rattled the guy he was playing this guy George the Greek who's this degenerate gambler Was a really good player to who's screaming and yelling out on this motherfucker He can't play without the shit. He's got to have that shit to play he didn't give a fuck He was listening to him. Yeah, he had eyeballs his pupils were like the size of quarters Yeah, and he didn't miss he just was firing balls in with like perfect accuracy He got perfect position on every ball. It was wild to watch He was just fully heroined up just running out the table like like he saw it in advance Like he was licking on a math problem that was easy to solve and he's just basically slow Eddie and coming back and just knocking it all in Like that's it But it's never been like a performance enhancing drug but to that guy for nerves. Yeah This is the thing I think if you're a good point if you're playing for $10,000 and you're basically homeless He was basically homeless. I mean he would like sleep on people's couches He would still and so would a guy like that you'd get a backer so a bunch of gamblers would come in and then they'd come up With the money and then they'd go in with you and you'd get a cut of it So if you won maybe you get 40% they'd 60% because they put up all the money So it's a free shot at 40% of $10,000 and for a guy like that He's got no money he's staying in flop houses and he always had the same shirt on Like yeah, like a throwaway sweater with a Christmas tree on it. He always looked like shit Yeah, I watched him play some of the greatest pool I've ever seen played in my life That's incredible and this really tight pocketed table too. Yeah, the table was like a real trick table Table one at executive billiards and white planes New York. It was a trick table. Yeah It was like you had to be really good to play on that table And that's why George wanted to play on that table because it was hard I mean he was used to it. That was like his home turf He played on it all the time and this motherfucker never missed heroin dad of his mind that he had no nerves He is you George really yelling its face. He believes nothing Didn't feel the thing didn't feel the thing just Never missed that's what it is. There's no problem to you anymore. Yeah, no it takes away every worry you have So I ran into him years later. Okay. There's a pool tournament and so this is when I was probably 23 I was living in New York and then I moved to LA and then I'm like 27 28 now and I'm playing in this tournament at hard times billiards Hard times is like the pool hall in the country back then like all the world class professionals All the Filipinos the best players in the world. That's familiar actually crazy place It was an amazing place. I used to love going there on I'd play in the Sunday tournament so I get down there and I see water dog I go hey man What are you doing out here because he's a Connecticut guy from Connecticut? Yeah, and he's like I'm gonna play in the tournament, but I don't have any money. I'll put you in the tournament Because like it's like I remember what it was like 50 bucks or something for this guy I'm like you might win this fucking thing he goes but I gotta go get my shit. I go Okay, go get your shit. He goes. I need a ride. I go where do you need to go and these like south central? I'm like I'm not driving you To south central LA so you can score hair when you know your fucking mind Don't worry. It's just anyway like dude. You won't get caught. I was like you can't say that I go first of all if you get caught, you know, they take your car and I had a nice car at the time I had a Toyota Supra It's pretty excited about yeah, I was like I'm not driving my brand new Toyota Supra to fucking The the crack house Right This is crazy, but they they arrest people all the time doing that. They take their cars those like those like the scam They compound your car and then they auction it right. I was like He's like that won't happen. I'm like what you fucking do what? Yeah, so He I Go look I'll put you in the tournament if you want to play, but I'm not taking you I go if you can get a cab there or something go right so he just did it straight and he couldn't make a ball It was really yeah. He lost two matches in a row. He's out. Oh damn. Yeah NFL fans week one just became your place to play free and grow the bag Draft King's pick six an official partner of the NFL is here with bag builder a completely free Way to play for a share of one million or more in cash Think you could stack some cash here's how it works download the pick six app Draft King's easiest way to play fantasy using code Rogan enter for free just make six picks more or less on Player stats for week one. That's it. It's that simple no entry fee no catch Want an even bigger shot share your link with friends to add more cash to the bag and get bonus shots to win as the player Count goes up so does the prize hit all six of your picks and you'll be splitting a bag that's already at 1 million or more don't just sit back get in for free build the bag and run it up download the draft king's pick six app use code Rogan opt in and start stacking entries for NFL week one zero cost huge upside In partnership with draft kings pick six the crown is yours gambling problem call 1 800 gambler help is available for Problem gambling call 888-7897777 or visit ccpg.org in Connecticut must be 18 and over age and eligibility restrictions vary by jurisdiction pick six non available everywhere including New York and Ontario void were prohibited must claim Token for free entry in bag builder contest only perfect entries earn share of cash prize tokens are single use and expire September 8 That 8 15 p.m. Eastern terms at pick six dot draft kings dot com slash promos Did you bat up for him to win no no I gave him like whatever the entry fee was for the tournament. Oh, I got you okay But uh, you know, I wasn't you know you're probably kind of not today Well, it's just like tired of him telling me to go to south central get heroin with him. Yeah, and that's a good way to get car Direct on top of it. It's just cops. Yes. I mean that was very popular to do a white boy who's on TV. Yeah, dude That's how they got ours not only that it's the I would actually be buying the heroin. Oh, is this true fear factor? No, this was during news radio. So I would be buying heroin because I would have to pay for it because he didn't have any money Which is why he didn't have any money to get into the tournament so I would have to pipe I would be buying heroin Yeah in south central From news radio there's no TMZ back then so it probably wouldn't even made the news if I got arrested no one cared Yeah, I guess that's true. I don't know no one would have cared. I was they just think it was Andy dick and let it go But even if you dick was he getting in trouble back then not really it wasn't making the news our show wasn't popular enough that anybody cared And I was only one of eight people on the cast right so I wasn't a star So I could go anywhere and every now and then someone would go hey there guy from that show. Hey, what's up? Okay, it was pretty easy to get around back then which is great if you're on NBC shit I mean good or bad, but you're getting the money and you don't have to deal with all the shit Well, it was it was really good preparation for what I have to deal with today Yeah, because it was like a slow trickle of fame to the point when you get really famous like oh I know what this is this is a trick right like don't don't get sucked into the trick But back then You know so if I got arrested it probably would have just been I would have probably had to do some time or something I probably would have had to like Play out or do communities. I probably explained what happened. Maybe they listen to me. I'd like please drug test me I've never done Ireland. Yeah, but even though you're still buying heroin, so it's still a felony well It was a time where they were more lax on all those laws too I mean not lax but lax with penalties I should say yeah, because it wasn't as public because I mean even like Robert Johnny Junior who I do greatly admire actually because I'm in recovery as well But even with him it's like you had to go into your neighbor's house and fall asleep in a kid's race car bed and people were like You know, maybe you should do a little time behind bars. Yeah, well he was a repeat offender. Yeah, you know Probably jail was a wake-up call for him. I love that guy I did too and it's become Iron Man so to watch that trajectory. Yeah, it's absolutely astonishing I think it's incredible which I get him off that vegan diet though looks like he's fucking wasting away Yeah, that doesn't look good on anybody Real now you're trying to be kind but you're just supporting monocrop agriculture which kills more animals than anything Yeah, I don't want my superheroes vegan Well, he's a nice guy. That's what it is nice people want to do kind things and You know and sometimes you get roped into a shitty decision making you getting all your protein from soy And they're like why do I have tits? Why am I lactating? Why am I always crying? Very emotional all the time And now they're banning lab grown meat so like they can't even go to that which I I mean it's good right? I don't know I don't know enough about The dangers of lab grown meat. I don't know I hate to be on to burger ones That's not lab grown meat. That's horseshit. It was awful. There's a terrible. Yeah, those they they're in trouble because those people Like they're stockholders all fucking went crazy because they thought they're gonna make money off that They're like this is it. We made it taste just like a burger. Everyone's gonna love it cruelty-free No, it gives rats cancer. Oh good. You've seen This is study on these because essentially it's just it's the most highly processed shit available Look if you want to be a vegetarian or a vegan or whatever eat vegetables Organic vegetables that's healthy But when you want to pretend that something's a hamburger. It's a trans burger You have to it has to go through a lot just like a trans person has to go through you want to get a vagina Guess what you need General anesthesia and you have to have a guy is gonna cut your dick in half and use an apple cord to make you of a China and then you're gonna have to take a rubber dick and keep it in there So it doesn't close up Yeah, you're getting the patty that basically Set up a school. It's all just filled with nonsense. It's bad for you. Yeah, it's all bad for you And it's it's not even satisfying. It's not good like when my friend Duncan, you know, Duncan Duncan trust yes, yeah, he was living in North Carolina and He's probably a picture during the pandemic. He's like look this is all it's available and all the meat had been gone And there was just beyond burgers That's all that was left everybody had bought all the hamburger all the steaks all the chicken It was just this fucking bullshit fake meat. Oh, yeah, because at the end of the day you kind of have to know its bullshit Well, I think in the beginning like didn't Kevin Hart have a Restaurant where he was just selling all vegan food people do it because they think they're being a good person That's what it is. Sure. Yeah, I get it. I get I get the I the sentiment behind it, but Just eat vegetables if you really want to go that route just eat vegetables, but guess what don't go that route It's not good for you. Well, no, we're not designed to do that. No, and I'm not saying I've the health He's died obviously, but it's like yeah, I like steaks. I like me. I just The only thing keeping you alive probably the only thing I get yeah, I had a lot of dice I get a lot of migraines Red 40 to the try to get rid of yeah That was another hilarious thing when RFK junior saying that they had to get rid of the red die 40 and they're like well What if we do what will happen to our business meanwhile the same business is selling? The same cereal to Canada without the die because in Canada. It's illegal right. Oh, yeah The amount of stuff that I we looked at like our entire breakfast as a kid was just cancer That's the only thing they advertised on TV just have a big sugary bowl of cancer and some toast with diabetes to wait for you Yeah, it's it was nuts to think the amount because I'm just the microwave generation Like yeah, just throw that in the microwave We can just pour a bowl of this shit the last 45 years in the cupboard for us. We see dinners Yeah, frozen TV dinner you put it in the oven the next thing you know you're eating solzver steak Yeah, yum and those wonderful potatoes. Yeah, those little fluffy potatoes are in that little tin and occasionally the worst brownie You've ever had it's not a good brownie. No, I used to love those little TV dinners I think there's a treat when we ate TV dinners. Oh, yeah, that's how it was in my house. There's no vitamins in that No, you never felt full You felt gross, but you never felt Is this the thing we mean even the food pyramid? I mean how crazy is it that in the 20th century? They had it totally wrong with all the access to books all the information we had about health and nutrition They were so wrong even with the food for the bottom of was all the shit that gives you inflammation What your foundation is this? Inflammation causing bread what you need here is mostly wheat You have to make sure you get 18 servings a day of white bread with bromate You want to get a lot of that you want to get a lot of full look acid sprayed on it in rich flowers better Yeah Here's sugar that's in there for some reason two ounces of protein make sure you grab that as a Sugar dog everything everybody had type two diabetes when I was a kid. They just didn't know it. Oh, yeah. Well, everybody's getting it now It's still constant. I know it's there's never been a time where poor people are so fat No, like starving people are obese. That's what's crazy like you can't get nutrition in your body But you also have to sit down to get groceries in a cart Or go to Disneyland. Yeah, that's Disneyland is the place you find them all yeah, and it's like why you like you need to get the carts for you They have carts set up there for you because it's a lot of distance you gotta cover you do Yeah, I just don't see the enjoyment of a ride Any rides? Well, I mean the right not the ride you get for free to go from ride to ride but the actual ride Oh, I love rides myself But if I weighed 400 pounds I may not enjoy it or Yeah, I'll take a lot of love out of it. It would wouldn't fit no fish of you with your kid and the bar comes down and that way has no protection Right the kids fucked yeah, I pop right off the top because you're so fat exactly right right? There's like this much of a gap You've seen people are the kid and the kids like looking at his mom all nervous Nervous should be terrified. I used to think that when I got ski lifts. I'm like this is crazy I know let you sit on this thing way way way above the mountain When people would fall off all the time. Yeah, I think it'd be funny to jump or what I always always Oh Like we didn't have mountains in Michigan, but we did have big enough hills like I went skiing We did a lot of skiing when we were really young and then I went down It was like a double black diamond. I thought they're cold. Yeah. I was like I got this and my ski got stuck in a soft mowgle And I just went down it on my face It looked like eight dudes beat the shit out of me like I was just like all scarred and bleeding and then I just didn't ski much after that I got a concussion a few years back and I stopped skiing. I'm like I'm done I got a concussion and I got it what's called an insufficiency fracture my shin Some lady did not skiing she slid into the trail like sideways like doing this thing Then I had two choices either Destroy this lady or wipe out hard and I took the second choice and got up fucking I banged my head off the ground Oh, it was bang. I heard this and I had a helmet on but it was still done Yeah, the bang was loud and I was dizzy for the rest 100% got a concussion and I was I didn't feel right for the rest of the day And then I was like I'm done. This is not worth the thrill everybody. I know has a torn ACL from it a concussion my grandpa died Oh, God, I'm sorry. Oh, no. Oh, no. I didn't know. I mean you're doing it. Yeah, but they do though. They all have stories Well, yeah, they all have this like somebody knows a sunny bone No, no, just like launched right into a tree of a mighty oak. It's not worth it. No, dude I just never enjoyed it that much and when I tried snowboarding I'm like I sucked at skateboarding and was a poser at that. Why am I even attempting this snowboarding? You're attached that fucker, too. Yeah, the skis the skis pop off. You can get away The boards coming with you when you fall. I know a lot of people got knocked out snowboarding because the feet go up in the air Yeah, you know like it's something happens a feet go up in the air and your head first dude My son does it and he's 10 and I let him, but he's he's pretty good at it But I've I always get very nervous when he goes to do it But he's good with I mean he's a very good athlete the good thing is little kids have less weight and When they're falling it's not as painful and then they're all flexible and pliable They're not dude. He broke his arm. It was crazy and he was better and like it was like eight days It was like Wolverine like how did you how did you do this like I tore my was it? Maniscus ACL blew off half my kneecap. Oh, and yeah, I was making fun of my friend And then he tackled me and we were on a linoleum floor with keg beer. Oh, no, so instead of Instead of going to the hospital when it was in a lot of pain I'm like I just wait till the morning and I had my friends carry me around this party And then the next morning I'm like yeah, this isn't moving at all So my friend Jimmy drove me to the hospital and dude it was like out of a like Sit calm like doctors opened up a door into my leg He wheeled me into a drinking fountain on accident like I broke my leg more just trying to get into the hospital and then by the time I got to In for them to do the surgery. They're like what happened? I couldn't be like I was drunk at my friends You know, I was like oh I slipped on ice. It was winter I was walking to my car and they're like this is a lot of damage for just slipping on ice because I just Twisted it all night I should have known I mean my foot was like behind me. Oh When I did it like my knee just as so I have rods in my right knee. So I just Oh really yeah rods to keep it together. Yeah. Wow. It was that bad. Yeah, like you can hear it pop sometimes when I walk It's pretty nice dessert Sometimes but not not as bad as you think it would if I'm like doing a treadmill for a long time or if I do something where We're just outside like cuz I'll go hiking or whatever. My wife likes it So we'll do that, but I like it that'll hurt after maybe a couple miles, but not like a severe pain Just annoying. Yeah. That's fine. Yeah, and you can like weather messes with it in the sense But nothing crazy. Do they is there a an option to take those rods out? Because a lot of them they put them in there so that the bones heal correctly, right? Yeah There might be I mean it's been 25 years. I'm sure there's been advancements in it And I just don't bring it up at your bones. Just grown around. Oh, I Sure, it's destroyed. Right. Like why didn't you come in a bit you didn't you didn't bring it up either? Yeah, I know a guy broke his arm and the screws from the plate that kept his arm together We're popping through his skin So he had a had another operation they opened up his arm again and took the plate out and because the arm had healed like the bones It fused but then the plates and the screws started backing out That's yeah, that poking through his skin. That's what happened on my son a sucks He was like six and him and his friend were hanging out at at his friend's house and they had like a slide That was eight feet in the air and they both decided to jump off of it. Oh And he landed funny and he's a little kid so I was at my friend's mom's funeral I like rush back to get it's the worst thing in the world when it's your kid. They're just the worst But yeah, we made sure like he got the screws out He got the right like everything one fine, but the way that he heals so do he it was honestly like he they cut the cast off Like two weeks before they were supposed to because he's like I can go like this I don't like that's amazing because I remember I would like go to bars still and I was still underage But I was still going to bars with like a cast on oh boy like a full-blown Neabrace and I you know, I'm wearing like track suits and like I'd chains and So I just I'm like just like a raver stoner and I'm just walking around with my crutches How long did take before you walk again? Properly about six months now Every now and then I do walk with the limp because it just kind of goes out. Do your friends still feel embarrassed by this? No, I don't I know it's one of those guys you've known for so long. It's he didn't care then and I was saying stuff to him The kind is not deserve So like I mean he he felt really bad I shouldn't say that but no it's not anything the girl who won the house went nuts and she was so hot and I always had a crush on her and she's like your family's gonna assume me. I'm like my family's not gonna sue any They don't sue people but we're not gonna sue you and like my I think my dad had a pass at that point And she's like so freaking out she would have these wild Christmas parties every year where it happened Oh boy and that ended the wild Christmas parties and she's like yeah, you never sued I'm like yeah, why would I sue because I'm stupid like it's it was my fault and then I just went out and said Yeah, it fell on ice. It's not a gross thing that people would just sue if they did something stupid in your house They would sue you dude. I've never never like I can understand points where people have it's just such a scammer mentality It's a shit thing to do to anybody. It's like somebody who like slips delivering a package or any of that stuff that's that's possible there's a lady that was when my kids were younger there was this lady that was a single mom and Her daughter was playing with my daughter and you know they come over the house and she wanted to another person's house and You know like they're not play dates like kids do and she wasn't there So she comes to pick up her daughter and they have a dog and the dog is very friendly dog and the dog You know they jumps up to like you know dogs do that of course and scraped her with its claws Just scraped her with its claws. She sued the family for 50 thousand dollars and one And they just settled they settled because the dog they were informed listen legal fees is gonna be a probably a hundred thousand dollars She wants fifty thousand dollars. So this fucking asshole All a dog did dog nails just scratched her a little bit not even like bleeding nothing crazy Just normal all your dogs crazy like where you and I would be like what a cute dog right? She was like oh opportunity to sue this family That's wealthy Especially the fact that that's just what they do there. It's yeah I remember when we were young there were two pit bulls that were at this house behind a camp we were at and this one Kid was always throwing rocks at him and we really you shouldn't do that because we like the dogs and the camp had its own Golden retriever and it was fine with the pit but they'd run on the fences and stuff So we that's when I first even started getting used to dogs when I was young because I've always liked dogs And I have to and I've had tons But I remember that the pit bull once the kids stuck his finger through the fence Took off these two part these two top is of his finger And like they sued they put the dog down and we were like he's been chucking rocks at those things all summer Like he's been antagonizing these animals all summer and I mean it sucks that it happens But it's like sucks your kids stupid too Yeah, it sucks that he was told not to do it a bunch of times and then there was a consequence to this shitty action Also, how did you raise a kid that's throwing rocks at dogs like what's what's kind of a kid with throw rocks at a dog It's like the first thing you find that has unconditional love for you It's the first thing that like you trust in a different way than a human. Did he have dogs? There's no way he did I remember well I remember the the blood and the screaming but I Don't know much about him other than that weird headshakes afterwards. Yeah, yeah, I knew his penmanship wasn't very good after Stubs yeah Yeah, man Yeah, but he does it pulls are tricky dogs though. My brothers had ones where Yeah, he's I've had a bunch of him He's rescued a couple and I've had friends who have saved them and destroyed from fights Yeah, because they would throw him in a back alley the losers and sometimes my friends would take him Yeah, and get him sewn up and keep him but those dogs specifically would kind of only be left To alone for the owner like my friend would keep it just for him like locked up They usually fine with people Yeah, the real issue with pimples is dogs and children they think of children as animals. They don't know that a child is a person At least it seems like they don't because they attack kids well and children don't know dogs are Animals sometimes and that's kind of how I treat with with my kids like you have to understand that right You know like when you're rough housing or whatever like there's a yeah, it'd be real careful because it She might not necessarily know what you're doing, you know, and he learned that at a young age and dogs love them But a lot of times kids can be really really rough with dogs. Yeah, they can be sure Especially if they don't grow up with them. They don't know they're not taught but The thing is like if you have a sweet dog like I have a golden retriever Yeah, if my kids thought all dogs were like my dog and then they went up to another dog and grabbed his face The dog might bite your fucking face off. Yeah, and goldens are the best. They're just designed to be the sweetest animals on the planet He's the nicest dog of all time the best pet ever. Yeah, he's just just the homie He come home and he's like no He wags it. He always has to greet you with a toy like as soon as I come in the house He grabs one of his toys and runs up to you with a toy Did it's the nicest feeling in the world? Yeah, they're the sweetest dogs. He cuttles with me when I watched TV He climbs up like literally like lies in my lap. You know 75 pounds. This is fucking head on my chest And he just likes to be Pat while I'm watching TV. Yeah, they just want to be with you Yeah, it's the nicest thing and I you know I had a rotweiler than people are afraid of those, but she was the sweetest dog It's a lot of it is how you treat them. Yeah, but it's also the breed It's also the the the bloodline like if you get a game-bred pit bull and you expect it to be cool with other dogs You're out of your fucking mind that dog is designed to fight dogs. Yes You know, but if you get a good dog and you train them well and teach them and you know It takes a lot of responsibility You know like people that want out and get like a German Shepherd or a Belgian Malamwat and You just literally got like an elite super athlete For a pet You know, and you just think of you just gonna leave in the yard and occasionally throw the ball to it Fuck out of here. You never walk it. So it's got a bunch of pent-up anger and energy Exactly good for you. It's like a high school kid that's been left in a confined space. Yeah, see how it works when he comes out Yeah, I mean to the real world bring him to a dog park. Oh Yeah, yeah, did you see that video of the dog parks some of them? What video there's one video where a guy? His dog is attacking one dog and some dude runs up out of nowhere and just shoves his finger in one dog's ass. Oh That works. Yeah, it did, but it was still the most ridiculous thing I've like this guy just runs in like he thinks he's Superman is like I've got it and just starts well If the dog has a lock on another dog, that's one of the only ways to let him go. Is it yeah? It works. I hope I hear it works. I've never done it, but I've never tried myself Hose his work. Yeah, dogs would fight with each other. You can hose them a lot of times they'd let go Yeah, they just freak out you get hit in the face with a jet of water. Yeah, that will do it But you know did the really fucked up thing is that people bred dogs for fighting and they like to fight they with a jet of water. Yeah, that will do it. But, you know, the really fucked up thing is that people bred dogs for fighting and they like to fight. When they fight, they wag their tails. Yeah, they're having fun. That's what's crazy. Yeah. You watch them literally chewing each other's faces off of their wag and their tails. Well, I got a border call at the same time as a rot-wiler and they were both pretty, you know, they both enjoyed fighting each other. Fun. But I know we played fighting. Yeah. And you'd always just watch for the tail wagling because they'd be flipping each other over. Right. Like, when we first got the rot, we went to a dog park because they were like, new or to us in Michigan. And this one dog just kept coming up, those bigger than my rot, but kept kind of like messing with her. Yeah. And then finally, my rot grabbed her by the neck and flipped this dog over and was just like pinning it with her mouth. And then the dog gave up and was shown its belly. And I'm like, oh, fuck. Like, are we going to leave the dog park now? You know, people were freaking out and screaming. Yeah. But the dog kept like coming up and nipping my dog until my dog finally just attacked back real quick. Yeah, which is what dogs do. They have to establish dominance. That's what she did. I was at a dog park once. It's somebody brought a wolf. Are you serious? Yeah. It was a wildest thing. All the dogs. You got a wolf. All the dogs immediately knew it wasn't a dog. Some guy had one of those seven-eighth timber wolf dogs. Because you can get them dogs, whether or not really dogs. It's a wolf. And this thing just walked in. And every dog was like, that's not a fucking dog. They all scattered. It was wild to watch. It was big, too, man. It was really big. It was like 100 plus pounds. And just big fucking mouth, big, long mouth. And it just looked like a wolf. And every dog knew it wasn't a dog. Were they all backing in the corner? That was wolves eat dogs. Oh, we have it. They knew. Yeah. They fucking, there was a thing like the smell, the look, whatever. No dog was sizing up with it at all. No. Every dog just ran away. It was weird. Well, they have that instinct. And that thing is like what dogs, that's like if a caveman walked in. Right. You know what I mean? That's the original O.G. of what we're supposed to be. Right. Right. Right. And this is not a wolf. Oh, yeah. I've seen this video this video as well. OK. And check out this one dog walks in. He's the fucking boss. And he's this dog. Look, all the other dogs back to fuck away from them. Look, look, they all back away. This one dog. And he gets on that dog. Look, look what happens. Oh, dude, every one of them just acts right. It's like John Wick of dog. Yes, yes. Look at this. Dog just lays down. And he just gets on top of them. I once saw this dog kill one of us with a man. I have no idea what kind of dog that is. I don't know either the black one. It's got to be the white one. The one that's done. The other one right there. I mean, oh, the black one was cowering. That was like the wrong dog. That was like the wrong dog. Well, why don't you take a photo of that dog and run through Google image? The dog looks like Benji. Like they probably just knew it was crazy. Yeah, it's probably just knew they knew it had a hard life. My friend has a dog like that. That's a small. It's a darker like a gray and brown dog. And he takes a pig hunting. And it's the most savage fucking dog I've ever seen in my life. And it looks like that. Yes, this dog just chases pigs. Which is crazy. And pigs are tough. Oh, yeah, but this dog is just nuts, man. Dude, that's what kind of dog is that. Come on, Jack's UBT. A mixed or a breed or a mutt. Based on appearance, shaggy, wide-wee coat, body strike. How crazy is AI? Wolfhound or Terrier mixes. Large size and sturdy build might also suggest some central Asian shepherd or kangal ancestry, especially if the dog is used as livestock guardian. However, without a clear look in more context, like the dog size weight or behavior, it's difficult to definitively identify the breed. It's likely a mix of working or guardian breeds common in rural or semi-rural areas. Yeah, that thing they just knew had it tough. Yeah. Because it just came in and didn't get fucked. It's not even a big dog. That's it's crazy. Like, yo, that was kind of what it was like when that wolf showed up at the dog park. I've all the other dogs were just like, what in the holy fuck is this? Was it you, I think you were talking about it, maybe I don't know, but it's about a guy who trains wolves. And you would say, I've had people on that work with wolves. You can't really train wolves. Yeah, but I think it was like the movie, The Gray, you know, like taking bacon with wolves or whatever. And he said, dearing it that he has to fall down as the stunt man or whatever. So the second he gets home, one of the wolves is gonna try to take his spot on top. So you gotta like grab the wolf and hold it up in the air. And like, that's like the main thing to do to get it to stop. But like every night, he just has to prepare himself for fighting a wolf when he gets home. Oh, jeez. Which is crazy. That's so stupid. But I mean, they all just, they're pack animals. Yeah, so that's when you leave. Yeah, they take the dominance spot. Yeah, you have a good day of filming and there's just this wolf looking at you. The whole car ride home saying if he's gonna take your shit once you get home. I knew a dude who had three of those, three of those wolf dogs. And he was a piece of shit. And they got out of his yard and killed the neighbor sheep. And he lied about it. He's like, no, no, no, no, no. What do you mind of? Kill like eight sheep. Dude, yeah. Cause they just kill for fun. Yeah. Like, oh, there's just sheep that just, what's the commit suicide? What would get mountain lion? What did this? Well, there's coyotes and stuff where I like that though. No, no, no. That kind of damage. Coyote would have a hard time taking out sheep. It would take a long time. Yeah. But they grab small dogs. Oh, yeah. Before COVID, we like in Detroit and like the suburbs, we never had coyotes like it seemed, any of that stuff. And then after you see him all the time, like I would walk out and there just be like a deer in my front lawn. I'm like, this is bizarre in this part. And then yeah, now you have ones that like hop fences and grab small dogs and jump away. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they're everywhere now. They're in every 50, they're in all 50 states and then they're in every major city. Yeah, that's crazy. Yeah, they're a wild animal. I mean, it's really interesting animal. I should say, obviously they're wild. Because when I first saw them, they'd be crossing the street at night I'd be coming back from a gig and I'm like, is that a dog? Should I stop? And then it's clearly just a coyote. Yeah. And I'd never seen them up close like that ever. During Central Park. Are you serious? Yeah. Yeah. I used to walk by the real thing. That looks like what it is. That's similar. A Bosnian Baroque. Bosnian broken, haired hound called Baroque. Yeah, it looks similar. Fight spares. That makes sense. That makes sense. Yeah, that would be it. That would make sense while all those dogs like this motherfucker's not playing. Dude, he takes down grizzlies. He is not playing. He is. He is. A centound. I said that. Yeah, that's what my friend's dog looks like. And it's a little dog. And it's a girl. And she's fucking ferocious. And just hasn't. Yeah. Dude, a pig and a bear. Yeah, pigs are like wild pigs. Some of the most ferocious sounding animals. I remember the first time I ever went hunting pigs, we were going down this dirt road until right of us was like heavily wooded, like high grass. And they were in the grass near us. And then they started fighting. And it sounded like demons, like orcs. Aah! Aah! They were just going to war, like maybe 10, 15 feet from us and where we couldn't see them because of the tall grass. Like the sound was nuts. Like the sound is insane. Where do you hunt them? This was in California. Okay. California, where oddly enough, they think most of them came from William Randolph Hearst Estate. Because William Randolph Hearst, the same piece of shit that, you know, Orson Welles covered in the movie Rose, but the same reason why marijuana became illegal, that guy. William Randolph Hearst had an enormous estate and he had a wild horse out there on his estate. And of course they got free. and now Central California, all that area, is like San Jose, they have a giant problem with them. Really? Yeah, they like show up on people's lawns and tear their lawns apart and you wake up at the middle of that just 10 wild pigs on your fucking front lawn. Holy shit. Yeah. They attack animals then? Oh yeah, they kill people. Really? Yeah, so one old lady got killed by wild pigs. What a way to go, I know. Yeah, I just fucking dirty, filthy demons tearing your face off. Now that it's funny, I mean, you just don't expect it. Kind of funny. But yeah, they're all... How did grandma go? You're like, oh, she was torn to death by pigs, wild ones in her suburb. With this place that I was at. I was at Aldosec. They, you know, they hunt them a lot and that's what we're doing. They taste good. Yeah, I would imagine. I mean, it is pork. Yeah, it's a different kind of pork. It's like a darker meat. Oh, really? Yeah, I never had it. Yeah, because they're, you know, they're not eating just grain. They're eating whatever the fuck they find. a lot of acorns. Those a lot of it. They had a lot of fat on this make or they were delicious. What do you hunt them with? That time it was a rifle, but I'll go hunting them. I was wondering if you did, yeah. Yeah, bow-haunted pigs. But the thing is like if you're bow-haunting pigs and you're shooting a wild boar, like a big boar, you probably should have a backup. Probably should have a pistol. In case it comes out, yeah. And you should probably have one in the chamber. So as it's running out, you can just... Ta-da-da-da, you're gonna have to ill charge you. Happens all the time. So it's kind of, because bears are like that, aren't they? Like if you're shooting in the heart, it'll go 100 yards. Some bears. Okay. If you shoot them in the heart of doubt, they're gonna go 100 yards, but they might be able to. Because they can go 100 yards pretty fast. Distant adrenaline. Yeah. But yeah, bears are... They're gonna say a dream of chrome. If you hit a bear, like there is a distance between you and them where it's like a fight or flight distance, where they're too close, where they think that you'll attack them. And so then you're in trouble. Yeah. But if they're far enough away, where they think, oh, this guy's not gonna chase me, and you can scare him off, that can happen. Bears are tricky. Yeah, I've never... Well, we had one bear. I mean, it wasn't hunting us. We were just up in what he called the smokeys. Uh-huh. And it was just a vacation and it says don't throw food off the balcony. So of course the first thing my son does is throw a hamburger. And then all we can hear is the woods start moving. And we look down and I'm like, there's a bear. And it's... I didn't know the climb. So the thing starts climbing up the side of the house. And eventually we just kind of made enough noise or something that it went back into the woods. But I'm like looking around, like we have a gun, right? And I was like, I think we have one. It's good, because there's a bear climbing up the fucking house, dude. It was terrifying. Yeah, if you have food left out, if you have garbage left out, once they've established it, that's the place where they get food, they keep coming back. That's what I was... Yeah. And the first thing he did was just chuck a hamburger out to see the animals. And I'm like, buddy, I told you, he's like four or five at the time. And then like, government is later, bear. Oh, yeah. Do you know the state that has the most bears per capita in the country? No, New Jersey. Is it really? Yeah. New Jersey has a crazy bear problem. I did not know that. So the governor of New Jersey ran on a platform of stopping the bear hunt. Because people hunt bears in New Jersey. Yeah. Because people think of New Jersey, well, you think of these high density areas like Hoboken, Hackensack. Atlantic City. That's not New Jersey. No. New Jersey's mostly rural. And then you have those actual like mountains. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, a kid got killed out by Rutgers, a bear at him. And Rutgers University student went for a hike. A rural guy taken out. And bears became such a problem that the same governor who ran on the stopping the bear hunt and did stop the bear hunt when he get in office. The population boomed so badly without hunters that he reinstated the bear hunt. Oh, did he? Yeah. He went to. The interactions between humans and bears were going through the roof. I was really hoping that story ended with he got eaten by bears. Because that would be just the perfect irony. Well, he probably had an encounter. A lot of people that live anywhere near them having counters. Like there's a video of far rockaway New Jersey. We played it many times on this podcast. But we'll play it again just for you. But these fucking bears, they look like 400, 500 pound bears. And they're fighting in the middle of a suburb. And they're essentially, they're going to war for garbage. So like, they claim either that or maybe one of the females is in heat. But there's just two fucking huge bears. And they're falling downstairs. And they're out in the street. And the people are filming them from their car. These are big bears. Right. Are they brown bears? Black bears? They're all black bears in the United States until you get into the upper northwest. And then you see more of the grizzlies. You only get grizzlies in like, so look at these bears. Holy shit. Yeah, bro. Fucking normal house. Submerable bears. Look at the gungal bird. The real estate sign out there. The size of these fuckers do. They knocked over the sign there. Whatever that was. That was a light, I guess. Like the electrical horse. Yeah. Bro, it spills out into the street. These guys go to war for like 10 fucking minutes. How long is this video? 6 minute video. Look at this. They get out in the show well that we're not out in the street. So people are filming them. These fuckers tumble down the side of the hill. They're still duking it out. I've seen them come down the street in the same place. The size of these guys, man. Look at that. Right by the mailbox. Look at all the hair. Oh, yeah. Pull each other's hair. Right on out. And that's crazy. Well, dude, that's just because they're claws on the accident. Size of these fuckers. Imagine that goes across your face. Oh, dude. You're doing so dead. Those are big bears too, man. Dude, that guy's so nervous about his Volvo. It's like, come on. Don't go in there. Well, these people are so used to it. These people who live in this area, don't. Yeah, you're right. Dude, in the car just was like, all right, we got to wait for it to fall into the shrubs. And then I'm going to gun it. Hey, those noises, they make. What's wrong? Imagine your little kids walking home from school. She's two bears. And see two fucking huge bears. And this is now. This is the Jersey. Yeah. Far away. Look, you hear the cars? Yeah. Yeah. Look, cars driving my whole high guys. Charge to us. Oh, well, well, we're going to go get a sign on once. Yeah. You know we have bears now. Yeah. Far rock away. Holy shit. And dude, yeah, that's does not have the most black bears per capita. What was that? I kept Google, and it's not even popping up in the top five or six. I would imagine for a small population. And it makes its high bear population significant concern for residents, particularly in the States. Dude, Ted Nugget told me that I think these people are wrong. The States forest covered Northwestern regions of one of the highest concentrations of black bears in the nation with approximately 3,000 bears. Dude, if Ted Nugget told you that I think he's right. Yeah. The guy knows the thing or two. High population density, concentration of the Northwest, increased sightings. The other problem is they really don't have an accurate number. Because in heavily wooded areas, when you want to do a census on animals, you're sending out wildlife biologists, and they just have to count them. And there's no way they can really count them correctly. Because you're dealing with dense woods. And black bears are particularly difficult to find in the woods. Their sense of smell is insane. Their hearing is insane. And when they hear people, they just get the fuck out of there. Yeah, like in Michigan, you've seen them. Like they come down because you know, we're up by the upper peninsula and they'll come, you know, can it handle all that stuff? But you do see them on occasion. But I guess they are becoming more and more, like they're moving more and more south towards the cities now. Of course. Because nobody's hunting them. Yeah. Which I think we should. Yeah, you have to hunt them. Yeah. I mean, that's why you control the deer population. Yeah. It's like that's what people have always known. And you know, somehow another liberals lost their minds and thought there's a bad idea to control predators. Yeah, massive huge predators. Right. And it's like you realize that like let's just say the deer is alone. If you don't control it, you're going to just have people smashing into them with their cars. Not only that, they're made out of food. Right. You need to eat. Yeah. You could go eat them. Dears are delicious. And if you've ever been in front of like one with horns, like I was in the rock. He's my friend was all high. He gets out of the cars like 20 years ago. And there's like, I don't know. It wasn't maybe it was a deer, but like an elk or something. Probably had to be an elk. Yeah. It was a big. Yeah. It was a really big. And he gets out like he's like, I'm going to stand by and take a picture. My handle thing you should do that. Even then like terrible idea. And the thing just lowers its horns at him. And I'm like, dude, get back to the car. And we're like in a Jeep gunning it away from this thing chasing us. This is a guy that is in his car and he's talking shit to this elk that's in the street in Yellowstone. And it fucking jabs his tires. It takes his tire out. Just doesn't even know it's like, fuck. He hit, because it punctures his tire. Dude, it just took him out the way it cops would like it. It's like a leaf trip. And then it's got a lens just getting ready to take you out. It is stabbed his tire. Oh, I think you want to snap outside now. The scariest ones are moops. If you have the video of him taking out his car, it says, oh boy, look at the size of that fucker. Woo! Dude, you have a tree growing out of your head. A sharpened tree. Yeah. What's it looking like trying to poke at? I don't know if this is the one that cut the tire. The other one was coming from the other side. It was coming from the driver's side and the driver was talking shit to it. But you get the point. I look at the driver was mocking an animal. But the real dangerous ones are moos. Yeah. Because moos will actually stomp you. Oh, they will go after you. There's a lot of videos of people who think they're majestic. And they're like eight feet away from them. And it's like, it's not bullwinkle. It's an animal in the next thing you hear is how they were killed. Yeah. It's not just that. It's an animal that's like really good at stomping that, oh boy. Is this guy get attacked? I don't know. It's time of time. Sometimes you just don't. Dude, if I get an arrow, you really got to not miss. Yeah. Well, this is rough too, because he's coming straight at you. And so you don't have really good shot at his vitals. So you have to take the most risky shot, which is, you're taking a frontal. So what you're essentially, you have a very small area where you're targeting, which is like the end of his beard. So his hair comes down. Like you want to get it right here. So what you're trying to do is shoot this arrow through basically like a softball size hole, maybe a little larger than a softball size hole. And it'll go straight through, slice through the heart, the lungs, everything. It's the most deadly shot if you could land it. Right. But you got a 1800 pound animal coming at you. You're shaking. It's you. You're right in front of it. It's 30 yards. You're not sure that you could hit that spot because your arms are shaking. You're filled with adrenaline. And you have to go for a softball size spot. Yeah, that thing. You really want it to be standing sideways, but it's not standing sideways because it's moving towards you in an offensive way. You should probably just get the fuck out of it. I would leave immediately or get a round of tree. You want to get like where a tree is so you can stand behind the tree. And like at least you can kind of maneuver a little bit. Is there a sight pour? Oh yeah, they don't have a good sight. So that's kind of like the better way is kind of dumb. Yeah. Because they're so big, they don't have to be smart. Yeah. And they don't they don't have herds. They're not like you don't see herds of moose. You see a bull moose. They're generally by themselves or maybe with one or two other ones. Okay. Yeah, I didn't know. And then they come in and when they come in, they're looking for pussy. Oh, that's got to have a moose fucking you in the ass. Yeah. Staring right out your dog. Oh, dude. End with those eyes. And you also you better have a fucking powerful bow. You got to get into that rib cage. Those ribs are thick as shit. So that spot is underneath that like beard and all that stuff that he's got right there. It's right. But if you hit an animal there, they die so quick. Really? Um, frontal shot kill on elk. There's a famous video of these kids bow hunting and this elk comes in and it gives this kid a frontal shot and he takes it at like 20 yards and the elk just stands there and then blood starts spraying out of it and it just tips over. Really? Right. Where it stands. It's nuts. It's the most lethal shot if you land it correctly. But it's I'd never taken it. It's a tricky shot. Like my friend Cam Haines probably best bow hunter in the world. He's taking frontal shots. But the last time he took when it was like at 10 yards, this isn't it. This is this is not a frontal. These are just bills fighting. Google this is an elk. Oh insane frontal shot. Okay. All right. So here we go. This isn't the one. Nothing came up when I checked the thing you just said. So that's it. He got it right there. So see out sprays. That was perfect shot. He got it right. If you watch where the impact is. Oh, that's Corey Jacobson. Watch where the impact of the arrow is. It's right at the bottom of the beard. See where it is like right at the bottom. That's perfect. That's a perfect shot. So that goes into the body cavity. Severals all the arteries that bulls dead in seconds. But this animal seems kind of right. That's crazy. Yeah. It doesn't seem as aggressive though as that moves. No, no, no, no. They're not aggressive. Even for other elk. Okay. He's looking for love. Yeah. That's what he's looking for. Looking for love or a fight. Okay. Yeah. Because the moves looks like he just wants to kill the guy in the video or at least they do kill you. They'll kill you. They will kill you. I mean, I'm sure elk have killed people before, but they don't want to. Right. A moose will chase you. Yeah. Moose will chase you and stomp you, especially a female moose that has her babies. That's not what you better say the fuck away from her. Dude, yeah, no. They will stomp you. I don't, my buddy was chased on horseback. He barely got away from a cow moose. Seriously, go after him. Yeah. Going after him because it had calves with him with her. Yeah. And she was protecting her calves and he was on a horse and she looks at that horse like that might be an animal. Right. Once it wants to stomp my babies. And so she full clip chased after him. He's like, I barely got away. Where was this at? My Edmonton. Oh, that was it. It's been no BC. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. I don't know. It's really terrified if I had to try to make that shot at a moose coming at me. That size. It's a sketchy shot capacity. It's a sketchy shot. And it depends on what kind of broad head you have to. Can you do with a gun? Oh, yeah. Oh, with a gun. You could shoot him anywhere. Yeah. I guess that's true. With a gun, you just, you go through the shoulders. I just don't know if it was like maybe aero length or the reason it sticks in or something. No, no, no, no, no. You could definitely do that with a gun. The thing about an aero is you only have so much energy, like from a bow. So if like you hit one of those big shoulder bones, like you're, you're fucked. It's not going to kill the animal. They're probably barely going to feel it. It's just so you have to be behind the shoulder. You have to, and then you, you know, if you don't have enough power, if you center punch a rib, probably not going to get a lot of penetration. So you have to have a really powerful bow and a lot of guys stay away from mechanical broad heads. They want like a really solid fixed blade broad head. It's tricky kind of bow hunting. Yeah, that's cool though. You're bow hunting something that can kill you. Yeah, which is, that's game. I mean, that's the exciting thing. That's why people like bear hunting. Or unless you're the grizzly man guy who just does one of my favorite movies ever. I'm convinced Werner has our winter Herzog made that movie as a comedy. Oh, I think he did too. Yeah. I'm surprised like he says the ending is not the real footage. No, there's no, there's no actual audio footage of that guy that's available. If you listen online footage that says it is, it's not real. You can kind of tell their acting. He told the lady to destroy the actual audio because they're going to hurt. The lens cover was on the camera, but it there is audio and it's a long audio because bears don't kill you. They just start eating. Right. They just hold you down and eat you until you die. Which is apparent to that guy who was going around elementary schools telling people how bears aren't dangerous. Yeah, that fucking guy. And then they're like, it's hibernation season. You should go. And he's like, no, but I got peanut and sprinkles and cocoa and they all love me. It always did little names for him. It was suicide by bear. Oh, yeah. I mean, you can't just hang out there with it. It was that whole movie is just, they said, like, I love when they're like, we think they the bear, like the bear is just thought he was basically retarded. Yeah. Remember when the, the sheriff said that? Well, I thought he was retarded. Yeah, I think there's just the way the film is made. It's just too, there's too many times where someone says something ridiculous and there's a smash cut. Like this guy's doing this on purpose. Like he wants you to laugh. It's funny. It's gotta be because he's like slapping a bear on the nose and he's like, no skittles. And then just turning around and doing the interview. Yeah. And you're just waiting for him to die basically. I have to let them know. I stand my ground. I love you. I love you. I love you bear. I'm a warrior. I'm just gonna put my tent here. This is going to be what you'll consider a plate and I'm just going to hang out. It's a burrito. There's meat inside. He's guffering. I killed two. Which is really sad. I'm surprised that yeah, she had a girl. One, he had one and two. She was like, she's probably surprised too. Yeah. Oh, this guy gonna fuck me or is this? Yeah, like I'm sure he didn't fuck her. He didn't seem like that kind of guy. He definitely had her killed. He definitely seemed gay. It seemed like that was part of his dilemma. Like he wanted to be an actor and that didn't work out for him. So he started getting notoriety by being a bear expert. Right. But he wasn't really a bear expert. No, he was just an idiot who would go into the forest and he had protecting these bears. He's really lucky. Fire service won't protect him. You motherfuckers. I'm protecting these bears. You leave them alone. But that dude got some amazing footage. I'll tell you that. His footage was fucking incredible because he was living with them. Yeah. So he got footage that nobody else was getting like high resolution close up footage of bear fights. He became really good friends with a fox. Yeah. The foxes are fucking adorable. They're like dogs, man. Yeah. They're the closest thing to do. Like playful. They play with you. They stole his hat. Yeah. They would come hang out with him. He could scratch their head. Well, a lot of the people who find baby foxes and then just kind of raise him. Because the parents left him. That's amazing. There's an Instagram page that I follow. Bedou the fox. Check this out. It's like a little tiny fox that this guy's raised. Yeah. And it's so adorable. It's so adorable. It's such a really cool. It is cool. Here he is. This guy brings this fox with him. Really, that cute little fox. He's so cute. Yeah, they're adorable. But he hides his ducks. He's playful. He's so cute. Yeah, they're adorable. But he hides his ducks. He's playful. Yeah. But this guy has this fox as a pet. And you know, and to see show the things where he's like cuddling with it. Like he's. Look at it. Yeah, it's just a straight up little buddy. Yeah. It's like an adorable little dog. The records of the ones are kind of funny too. And it just like learns how to open the fridge. Like he's got it off. He's walking. He's just a little fox. But he has to put on at least because it's a fucker won't come back. No, I'm free. Yeah. He's just trying to run from the guy. But he's on a leash. He's on a leash. He's so cool. He's the huge ears. Incredible. That thing probably here's an owl farting on my own. Look at his face. So fucking cute, man. Yeah, they really are. They're really cool animals. Yeah. And people have done this where they raise them. But I think it's really big. It's weird face. Yeah, I think it's one of those things where you have to be around them all the time. You know? Yeah, I think if it's, I guess, I don't know. But if it's abandoned, young enough to where it's attached to you, there's something there. Yeah. No, you definitely can raise them. People have raised them. And people have raised coyotes that same way too. Oh, yeah. But you have to be around them all the time. Because they're wild. Yeah. Like you're just tricking them into like by constantly giving them food and attention. So they feel like they don't have to do anything else that they really feel instinctual about doing like going out and killing a cat. Oh, yeah. Well, there's a, there's a place called Oswald Bear Ranch. Oh, he's got a cat. He's killing a fox. He's like half the size of the cat. He wants to play with the cat. It's adorable. The cat is not like a happy though. No. You see a cat with his tail like that? That's a really pissed off cat. Well, the cat doesn't want to play with its owner. Let alone whatever that thing is. Well, the cat looks like it's on his own. It's on his own. Yeah, it's, it's fat as fuck. Yeah, it was actually a male cat does not identify that way anymore. That cat is just a shooter. It's going to go to the pound, shoot it up. Just going to take out everybody at the pad store. Just after the other. The story of wool. The shooter is going to go to the pound, shoot it up. Just going to take out everybody at the pad store. Yeah. Just after the other. The story of wolves, like how we turn wolves into dogs, is pretty fucking insane. It is amazing how we do just kind of have these wolves in our house, but we made them cuter by design over centuries. Right. This is my wolf poodle, which is essentially what it is. Yeah. It's incredible. Well, and then you get them down to, like, I have a king Charles Spaniel. Yeah. With those things, huh? Yep. He's that big. Yeah. He's the bug and cute his thing on earth. If you go far enough back, that's a wolf. Oh, yeah. How did they do that? I have a king Charles Spaniel poodle. Ah. And his name is a king Charles Spaniel. Wasn't gay enough. Exactly. I had to make sure he was bow ties. You know, a wolf would bow ties. Oh, my god. That is haircut. They put him in a bow tie. That's a door. And I'm just like, it's so cute, but it's also the king. Oh, that's adorable. But yeah, his name is Higgins and he's the best dog. But he's small. And I've always had big dogs. And I kind of just like the fact that he's kind of small and just really wants to sit there. This was Jill. He'll go for a walk, but he's not dying too. The breed, the furthest remove physically characteristic by wolves is the king, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Yeah, mine's called a kavapu. That's the one I have. Yeah, I have a mix of that and a poodle. The Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, one of the most popular breeds in UK and US, probably because of their lap dog reputation. Yeah, they're adorable dogs. Oh, I love him. I love him. And that's the furthest removed physically and characteristically from a wolf. Yeah. It has, I mean, he's funny. Like he'll grab his toy. He's got this lamb and he'll just like jump in the window and giant dogs and just start shaking it and like try to intimidate them. And I'm like, you're gonna fucking little bow tie. He looks so gay. He's probably trying to play with them. Because my dog loves to play with Marshall. My golden dude, it's very like his best friends. Yeah, he's very playful. Yeah, because we have a, we're just gonna announce all the more dogs that I have and feel worse as this goes. A heavenies. What's that? It's like a little, we don't have the long hair cut on it, but you know those long hair, like almost show dogs. Okay. And it's, yeah, just a heavenies. Oh, wow. Well, we have, see the like top right corner. She looks like that. So that's the other dog. And she's the best and she's insane. Go get that little face. Yeah, not the smartest dog you'll ever meet. And that's one of the things that love about her. Well, they don't have to be smart. No. It's like rich kids on trust funds. They don't have to fucking smart either. Yeah, they are the most privileged of the dog community. Yeah. Yeah. There's no doubt about it. Most likely to be a day them. Yes. That's all the day them. They're not poor kids. No, well, we're the ones cutting off their balls and spang them. Right. Yeah, they're all right. They're all trans. Yeah, they're all a little angry at us. My dogs have their balls. Oh, do they really? Always. Yeah. I don't fix my dogs. See, we had already had them fixed when we got them. I had a really good vet when I first moved to LA. And I was thought you have to fix dogs. Yeah. Because they're like, Bob Barker. Spaying new to your pets. Yes. Bob Barker was doing. Yeah. The end of every show. Yep. Turn your pets trans. How about just don't be a irresponsible dog owner and let your dog have puppies that nobody wants? How about you just be a responsible dog owner and let your dog have its natural fucking hormones? Yeah. Because when you cut their balls off, they get tired. They get depressed. They have no energy. Testosterone. Testosterone. Yeah, I got gone. What happens to people when they're testosterone goes? You get depressed. Yeah. You get depressed. You have no energy. That's the same shit that happens to your dog. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's why he's in a bow tie. And my vet was, he told me that. I was like, I can't believe he goes, look, nobody wants to hear it. Everybody wants to tell you, it's paying you to your dogs. But characteristically, like, if you look at like, how a dog behaves, I see a change the moment they cut that. Now, if you have an overly aggressive dog, that's a different story. If you have a dog that like you probably should train, that's probably what it is. Probably is obedience training and probably needs a lot of attention and probably needs a lot of exercise. But if you cut your dog's balls off, it won't be the same dog. No. And I mean, the next dogs I have, I probably won't. But it's just something that you're used to for so long. And like with Bob Barker, I get control of the pet population. So there's not dogs running all over the streets that have to be euthanized all the time. Yeah. But if it's like terrible, if it's your own dog, though. But again, that's just bad dog owners. Yeah, that's what I mean. It's just like people are bad parents and their kids want to, you know, join a gang and shoot and people up. It's like, it's a lot of the same kind of shit, man. It's the same, it's literally the same thing. I mean, when you like years ago, they were doing articles, not to bring it back to my hometown, but like in Detroit, where you would see dog gangs roving together. They take over a house and like, you know, they, I remember one house was like filled with pit bulls and stuff. But it was a black lab that was like the king shed at this house. Really? Yeah, it was crazy. And but probably the smartest one. I think that it must have been that because like when, like, Rolling Stone, I think it was showed up and they were like, holy shit, it's a black lab that's in charge of like all these pit bulls. And that was like, they're king. And, but probably they're good hunters. Maybe that's what it is. Well, because you lab outdoors are hunting dogs. Yeah. Well, that's true. Cause like, you would see just packs of dogs going down the street. And it was at its most like empty. Got heard about a lady that got killed by a pack of dogs in Georgia a few years back. Oh, they'll do it. Yeah. Wild dogs, who's hiking and feral dogs, attacked her. Yeah. And that's a rough way to go. That's terrible. Rough way to go. Cause there's probably a minute where she's like, oh, dogs. I doubt it. Yeah. I doubt it. Now most people do get scared. Yeah. They should. Yeah. Well, so if you're on like a mountain, if you don't know the dog, like it could be anything. Yeah. Never go up to a dog the way the people tell you that you should put your hand out. Yep. I'm your friend. I look, I'm your body. It's like just stand there. Standing ground. Yeah. Look at it. Keep an eye and hopefully have a gun. Yeah. Hopefully have a gun. I just shot your dude a lie over re-acted. But yeah, this once you can't. That's a problem too. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, when you just stand there and kind of let the dog smell you, that's what they do. That's they just want to get to know who you are. So let them and this kind of yeah, keep an eye. Don't ask scared. Well, you shouldn't do his run and start screaming. Yeah. No, they like that. Yeah. They will. It's fun. They think it's a play. Yeah. There's a time to play. They're going to kill you and have fun. Yeah. Yeah. Like this, we got a screamer boys. Who is it? As if there's not enough problems in the world. You don't worry about roving packs of wild dogs taking folks out. And bears fighting in your cul-de-sac. You don't see that. They're trying to bring bears back to certain states now. They're trying to reintroduce grizzly bears. These fucking dorks. Why do they reintroduce animals that went extinct in an area for a reason? That's why they didn't go extinct. They were made extinct. Yeah. Right. Like California, California has a grizzly bear on his flag. Right. There's no grizzlies in California because they killed them all because they were killing all these people. Right. The last guy that got killed in California by a grizzly bear, they actually named a town after him. Really? Lovec California. His name to have a bear that was murdered by a grizzly. His name was Stephen Lovec. Yeah. He was the last man in California to be killed by a grizzly bear before they killed them all. Are they trying to bring them back to California? Yeah. Of course they are. Oh, that's smart. Look, they brought wolves back to Detroit. They brought wolves, excuse me, Detroit, Colorado. Yeah, they brought wolves to an area of Colorado that's right outside of Aspen and people are losing their fucking minds because they brought these wolves that they had captured in Oregon because they're killing cattle. Yeah. And then they reintroduced them to Colorado where they wait for it. Kill cattle. They've been killing cattle like crazy. They brought them out to like these ranching areas. And they've killed so many cows out there, man. I have a buddy who has a ranch out there. He sends me pictures all the time of these cows that they find. Just torn apart. Yeah. Like baby cows, calves, just ripped to shreds. Yeah. Well, they did the same. I want to say it was like near Dollywood. Didn't they do that too? Where like wolves had finally gone away in that area in the Hollywood. Where's Dollywood? It's near. It's in Tennessee near. There's wolves in Tennessee. I think they tried to reintroduce them. Maybe red wolves. Yeah. Like I took a tour through the forest. Like I had to go. I don't want to go. Wasn't my thing. Believe it or not. But I when we went as like a family trip and you know, it's it's terrible. And somebody recognized me and that was the worst. Definitely got fake dog fart and show. Oh boy. Are you Dave land down? I'm like, oh, fuck really now. So what we went through the forest and they were saying that they were reintroducing animals into that area. And it's like, why would you do that? And I guess they had just taken down like a crispy cream because like bears just destroyed it. Well, that wouldn't be reintroduction. That area of the bears have always been there. Okay. But if they're reintroducing a wolf, it has to be the red wolf. Okay. The red wolf is endangered and it's a small wolf. It's a wolf that's like maybe the size of a large coyote. Yeah. There it is. Red wolves are returning to the smoky mountain. There you go. Yeah. Yeah. But it's like that that photo is a little deceptive. When you see a red wolf, they're pretty small. Like what is the average size of a red wolf? Google that Jamie. Yeah. Like that picture of the bear walking, we saw that a lot just walking down. Like while we were there. Oh, you're going to see a lot of bears. And they'd be like 50 to 60 pounds. Yeah. They'd be like tumbling like cubs and stuff. We're down the road. That's like a red wolf is probably, you know, it's a 50 pound animal. Okay. So they're not, they're not a gray wolf. Yes, not a wolf. They're fucking scary. Terrifying. Yeah. Yeah. They're big. Yeah. I would not want to go. I don't know. I gave that scary animal. I knew how I've seen one. They just don't look friendly. And I don't. Well, I mean, they killed them off for a reason. The reason why I mean, look, little red riding hood, fucking, there's all these stories with kids where they get eaten by wolves. Yeah. Wolves eat kids. Well, yeah, I was a way to scare the kids and being aware of what was going on. It was. Bro, do you know the world war one story? No. Okay. World war one, the Germans and the Russians had a cease fire because so many of them were getting killed by wolves. They made an agreement to have a cease fire and kill the wolves and then go back to fighting seriously. Yeah. Because they were in trench warfare. So they're in Russia and Russia has big wolves. Yeah. Huge. So what happens with animals with warm, blooded animals is the further north the animal goes, the larger its body sizes. Okay. And they think it's to retain heat. So if you look like a deer in like, let's say, a white tail deer, a white tail deer that you see in Texas is a small deer. Yeah. If I see a white tail deer, generally, like I see a small time on my way to work, the white tail deer might, a female might be like 50, 60 pounds. A male might be a hundred, hundred and twenty pounds. Yeah. And it's a sketch one. You might get a 300 pound white tail. Okay. They're way bigger. Yeah. Way bigger. Oh, yeah. Okay. Wolves are the same thing. Is there bigger up there? They're bigger animals up there like bears or bigger polar bears or huge rivers and the nasty. Yeah. They have to retain heat. Yeah. So like when when you go to like northern kind of climates, when you're dealing with an animal in northern climates, that's going to be a bigger version of that animal. So if you see a wolf in like Alberta, yeah, that's going to be a bigger wolf than a wolf that you'd see in Mexico, there's a smaller wolves. Right. Because they don't have to survive in the same elements. Exactly. They don't. Yeah. It's also there's no benefit to having a large size of your body to rate maintain heat. That's why mooser in the most upper north part of the country, yeah, they're the largest of all the deer species. Oh, that would make sense, though. Yeah. Yeah. Like elk or like larger than deer, you know, it's like, and then the elk that are the further north, like those like Montana, some giant fucking elk Wyoming giant elk. And that's the, you know, yeah, when you get towards Canada too, a lot of those places where it's just cool, you get those massive animals. Yep. Yep. Yep. And what were we talking about that I brought that up? We're talking about wolves, wolves, the one, the red wolf being brought back to Kentucky. Yeah. So those are small because they're in like a warm climate. Yeah. That makes sense. Yeah. It just odd to me that to think though, when you even hear the word wolf, like we're just going to reintroduce it to this tourist area. Like it seems bad. Well, it's all these people that are liberals that are like sweet kind people that like, this is Jared Polis, the governor of Colorado. It's a nice guy's a sweet guy. Yeah. He just posted some really kind tweet the other day. I'm like, oh, it seems like a good guy, but hey, don't bring wolves back to ranching areas. Because like you get out of these idealistic, you topic, you, you, you, you, Topia based views of what you think a wolf would be like and back in the wild. But no, they're going to, they take the easiest path possible, the easiest path possible. Oh, there's a bunch of animals that are stuck in a fenced in area that I could just hop over. I'll just go kill one and eat it. And that's what they do. And so these, these farmers now have to hire people 24 seven to be patrolling around their animals. So it's a, they're already operating at a very low margin. Right. If you're a farmer and a rancher, you lose a bunch of cows, your fucks. So now the state has to compensate them for depredations. Every time a wolf kills a cow, they compensate them. So it costs the state more money. Oh, so they got to pay for the, yes, they have to pay for it. And then they, they now they have depredation permits on some of these wolves because they're repeat offenders. Now they're trying to kill these wolves that they've spent millions and millions of dollars reintroducing the Colorado. And it's all silly people. It's, it's what's called ballot box biology. Yeah. Wildlife conservationists and hunters and people that are spend time in the woods, they hate it. They hate it because it's mostly uninformed people. I think they're doing a good thing. Like let's stop trophy hunting. Yeah, we have to. Yeah, we have to stop hunters. Hunters are evil. Like no, bitch bears are evil. They will fucking eat you asshole first in front of your kids. They don't care. What's like when they put in an insect to just kill an insect that's getting out of control? Always works bad. Yeah. So like in Michigan, it was like lady bugs, but all of a sudden, now there were lady bugs everywhere and this kind could bite you. So there was some kind of beetle that was this massive problem all of a sudden. And it was no control. The fish fly problem or may flies people might know them as yeah. And they're just cause you drive down next to the water. Do it. It just sounds like rice crispies as you drive because you're just hitting so many of these things. But it didn't help that problem. It just created a horrible beetle problem. And then there was something else going on in the lake. So they introduced zebra mussels. Oh, yeah. Which is that out here too. Dude, they destroyed boats. They cut out people's feet that were swimming. Like yeah, it backed fired completely. And it's like, so you're just introducing this like poison into the air and into the water. You think it's going to benefit this. Yeah. So they have too much vegetation on some of these lakes. So what did they do is they sterilize carp and then introduce these sterilized carp. Sometimes they're not sterile. And then sometimes they just start breeding. And then the carp basically eat all the vegetation. And so then your entire lake looks like the bottom of a swimming pool. Right. Is gone. There's no more grass. So the fish don't know where to hide. So it's like not as effective for them. They don't get as big. So all the bass fishermen are mad because there's no like habitat. Right. Yeah. It's all fucked up. And that's happened. Yeah. With michings, we do have a lot of fishermen, bass fishermen, you know, they go out there. And you can go into pretty small pond areas and lakes because the great lakes and still catch some stuff. But once you start messing with the habitat, it goes bad for a long time. Oh, yeah, man. We'll look at Australia. Australia has done a terrible job of introducing invasive species to combat problem animals. Oh, yeah. And now they have feral cats that have essentially wiped out most of their ground nesting birds and all sorts of other things. Cats of the worst, man. Little cute little house cats. Yeah. They are the worst murders of all the animal kingdom. Well, and they think birds are a nice present for you. That's the first thing they're going to go after is just kill them. Birds and rats. Yep. Yeah. And that's why like the crazy cat lady thing is a real thing too, because they also contain parasites. And that parasite talks so plasmosis is it affects humans. It affects behavior. It makes you more impulsive, more aggressive. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a it's a crazy parasite that is at one point in time half of France had talk so plasmosis. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Because of feral cats. Maybe it might have been half of Paris or half of France. I don't remember. But a large part in rural areas, we have a lot of feral cats. Okay. And if it's like rich. You're known people that have like outdoor cats. Yeah. They're very irrational. Yes. Mark, Marin. That those people probably have talk so, which is why they're behaving weird. Yeah. Why was it? Yeah. That's what's going on. It's like I guarantee if you test it, I might have it. I had a feral cat. I never had a feral cat, but I definitely had ones that would stop by the house. I had a feral cat, a friend of mine and her and her boyfriend rescued a bunch of kittens that were underneath this building. And she it was in Santa Monica. Yeah. And she wanted to get a new so cute. And I took them in. I actually had to stay with this cat for like days in one of the rooms of my house because like when I picked them up, he would purr and be sweet. As soon as I put them down, he'd hiss at me and and jump and leap away. He was wild. Like claws and everything. It took forever for me to just calm him down. And then after a while, I could just come up to him and pick him up. Like when he was a full grown cat, he was totally my friend. But no one else. No one else could pet this cat. Yeah. You come up with my house. He would hiss at you. Like he was ready to go to war. Well, it was crazy. But I would go no, dude. He was just wild. He's wild. And I'd pick him up and he'd start purring. But he would purr like no other cat would purr. Because when he knew that you just loved him and that you weren't going to eat him, when I pick him up, he just he was so happy to be held. He was so happy to be pet. But then as soon as I put him down, he would look at me sketchy and run away. He was just fucked up, man. My grandma had that. She was crazy though. Like she, like as she got older, she had like this old mansion. And I don't know how she got it. But it was one of those things where like when you're cat, like you just have 87 kids. So the house was big. But now it looks huge to people. So she just said cats. But towards the end, she had a few cats. And just she would have like those Tom and Jerry mouse holes in the house. Like where you would see them coming out of orbit. And dude, she would keep like, she keep the spiders because they thought it was. She's not as part of the ecosystem. Oh great. So you're looking up like I'd have to sleep there. And I'm just like staring at a brown recluse like shaking at the edge. Like eight. Those are fucking leave giant holes in you, man. Do they will kill it? My brother got bitten by one and his leg turned into a softball. And he had to go. He had to go. He was bad. Yeah, she was not stupid. She had a krotic. Yeah. Where it eats away the tissue. Dude, and it went like that. Like he got bit. And by the time he got to the hospital, it just kept getting big. It went from like a golf ball to a softball to like, and they had to hit him with all this like anti-bottom. It was not stupid. My friend Jeremy had a hole in his thigh. We had to stuff gauze in it because it was constantly oozing. Yeah, that's what it is. Like they start, it starts chewing away your skin. Yeah, it, yeah. It necrosis. Yeah, my brother's like a scarf from it. Dude, it's disgusting. Brown recluses are dangerous. Yeah, but she was not. She like casino in her basement. They threw her in. She does. That sounds so fun. It really was when we were kids too. Wow. We're dealing with blackjack and green sloshes. Wow. She had a casino in her basement. Yeah, it was fun. Like, and then she was recovering Elky. Like, she had beads everywhere. Like, I didn't know what that was then. Oh, like 30 day beads. Yeah. And like, so then later on, well, I was like, from Marti Graw. She had all this stuff from Marti. So like later my life, I'm like, oh, my grandma was a whore. So, but I didn't realize it until later. There's a cat lady whore in the park. You could see no other base lady. Like, cat lady casino whore who thinks spiders are part of an ecosystem. And she's kind of right. I mean, she's not wrong. They would eat the mosquitoes. Yeah. That was her thing. But you'd also have like, you're like, I think it's a black widow in your garage. And it's like, yeah, so don't go near it. And I'm like, you want to protect your spider? Like, she was just nuts, dude. But yeah, she was in recovery, but then she also had an entire bar where you could just make drinks. So we're like six and like looking through like how to make some pretty martinis. Yeah. It's so much fun. So she kept the drinks even though she was clean. Yeah, she was clean. Yeah. I've done that to myself though, because if people come over and like, yeah, whatever you want, man, I'm drinking. And I have a full bar at my house. Yeah, but I have a wine room. It's like such a wasted room. Yeah. There's a room filled with bottles of wine that now I'll never drink. Yeah, I have probably 10 bottles. And it's just somebody wants one. Yeah, come on over. I'll judge you. Yeah, like mine's sitting there and drinking. I'll judge you. You'll start acting stupid. Well, after my last DUI, when I got, it's like 16 years ago. And I had just built a bar in my basement. And it's really nice. And I still really like it. But like it was probably days later, I got the DUI. So I just like sit there and I'll just look at this bar like I could have been. Was that when you stopped drinking? Yeah, it was my, it was my 13th arrest. It was my 13th arrest. Yeah. What was number one? The dad got my driver's license. No. Yeah, for real. What did you do? My dad had gotten a Buick Regal. And it was around November because I was born in June, but they wouldn't let me get my driver's license because my grades were so bad. And we were having a family reunion. So we had everybody at the house. My dad, we thought, was doing a little better. And we all went on to eat. And I'm like, hey, can I borrow the car? And he's like, yeah. So we get home in my aunt and block the driveway thinking that I would probably end up taking the car and like her son out who was from Arizona. And the one side of my house was the house. And then the other side was my neighbor's lawn with a small pine tree and like rose bushes and stuff. He just drove through the. Yeah, I figured if I gingerly did it, it would be all right. Did I fucked up her lawn? We go. I killed him, pick up my friends. We go down eight miles to this place called Pickle Dilly where we'd have this guy named Spider-Bye. And he was fucking great. He was this homeless dude who just was like, he always got him spider with a whack. And he'd do that. And then he was total pervert. He'd be like, he would seriously offer to be like, I'll jack you off too. And we're like, we just want the beer. But we do appreciate it. Really. But thank you. So like, he always be like, somebody's got to come in with me to pick it. And we'd be fighting if we had to get out of the car to go walk with this guy. So we just bring the beer and we're driving around. We start giving lawn jobs. We'd first be to leave pile fires because everybody would like Rick their leaves into the street. So we start doing those fun good old fashioned arson. But usually it would stop pretty quickly. Somebody would run out with a garden hose. And it totally was innocent until the one time it wasn't. But we were driving around. We had some parties smoking weed, all that shit. And finally I get up on this one guy's lawn after part. And he's got a beamer five series. And I got my regal, my dad's. Which it had a V6 turbo charge. Which for a Buick, it wasn't bad for 98. But I got on the studs lawn. I see him sitting in his beamer. And for some reason in my head, I'm just like, this guy's just going to sit here and take it. So I just start giving him a lawn job. I'm doing donuts. You can hear grass hitting his car. We get in a high speed chase with this dude. Dude, I mean, like French connection style. I hit, I swear, I hit this bump man four tires, one off the ground. So he just felt like the car popped to the ground. And we get, we're just going all over the city of my friends. Like, let's just pull over and beat this shit out of him. And I'm like, he could have a gun. So I finally go down this street that has like a bifurcation, where it just splits immediately. Like this, you have to go this way this way. You know what? I didn't see it. So I start braking because I'm going it in Oak tree. So I'm breaking it and do the next thing I know, the engine draws to the front of the car. All the airbags come out. I get cracked with an airbag. And I'm like, I'm not quite unconscious. I'm conscious just enough to see the BMW and my rear view driveway. And then as I'm being knocked out, I hear all my friends and my own cousin, leave. Now here's the kicker. We were having a family reunion. I didn't realize that there was a bunch of cases of beer and liquor already in the trunk and chips and stuff. So when I hit the tree, that popped open. And it looked like I drove a super bowl party into the fucking tree. There was just like beer and pop and chips and shit. And finally did I wake up from being unconscious and I get out of the car. And there's a cop in my dad there. When you wake up when I when I get up, like I had been that I do, I got knocked out so hard by that airbag. Oh my God. Because it just like like all I could smell was that like burning talcum powder kind of smell like that awful like I want to say achy almost. It was just the worst smell. But everybody else was able to run. Set me. So look like I just did it. So I get out. And I remember I look at my dad was not violent. He was in now, but he was never violent. But I just look at him and I go, dad, I'm okay. And he goes great and he punched me in the face. That I hit the ground and was knocked out for the second time that he didn't do. He cracked me hard. Give you a second concussion. That night and I wake up. That's not good. No, dude. And no, he was pissed. I get it. Yeah. But then I wake up. And the cops got a light on me. And I sort of got the cop goes, he's waking up if you want to hit him again. It's the first thing I hear. And I'm like, you guys, I'm really in a lot of pain here. And my dad like apologized. But he's like, look, like what the fuck is wrong with you? He was just furious. And right. I had already been getting into dope and stuff. And he was getting pretty pissed with me. But I got us number one. Do DUI and I got six months of spended license. Wow. I went front of a referee is what they call it for juveniles at Coleman A Young Municipal. They gave me six months of spended license. Did you have to talk your way out of it? Oh, out of being arrested. I mean, like, with that, no, my dad, I remember I was going to school one day and he goes, I just got the bill for the car. And I was like, yeah, it goes, it's $13,980 here. And I go, I don't have that money. He goes, just show people so they know how proud I am of you. Thanks. Thanks, dad. But he was furious. I wouldn't imagine. But he let, I mean, he let it go after that because we had alcoholism and family. I was feeling believe that you were doing donuts on this guy's lawn right in front of him. Oh, too. We did so much shit. We shouldn't have done back then. Was it just a crew you're hanging with? Yeah. Like, it was fun. Like, dude, we all just kind of wanted to be thugs. It was a little sad. Well, it is Detroit. Yeah, you want to be like you're in the suburbs sort of like my house was in the suburbs, but you're, you're literally three minutes from the most violent part of America at the time. So you're on the border of the east side of Detroit. So it's like you can't hear gunshots. And you know what I mean? It's like you're, you're, you're every drug in every party. You're going down to raves and warehouses that are owned by like the Russian mob crazy. Oh, fuck. Yeah. Wow. Dude. Yeah. What are you like, 18? Oh, yeah, 17, 18, 16, all those years, dude. Like, 99, 2000 huge rave culture. And then when the new mayor came in, Kwame Kilpatrick, who ended up getting arrested in a home jail and then Trump pardoned, he started the Detroit electronic music festival. So he capitalized on that. Real. Yeah. Do you remember when Ford Focus basically or Ford put out the Detroit electronic music festival focus? No. Dude, it was basically a car designed for people on ecstasy. Like the whole thing with speakers. Really? Yeah. If you can find it into the Detroit, it was the Detroit, uh, yeah, uh, electronic music. That's the whole focus. And the car was at a crazy sound system. Yeah. Yeah. Cause the car is a piece of shit. So the whole thing is just speakers and that way they would do the ads. It was almost like you go into a, are you on E? Yeah. This car is a great. It's got huge cup holders for you. Water. It's got great stuff. You know, that's hilarious. Like they were capitalized on it. And how they would did a little, because that's like when the movie go came out. And a lot of these movies that were almost, it's with, um, uh, go is the one where they're all trying to get ecstasy in it. And it's like Katie Holmes and all these other people who are like some or different stars and some are and they all kind of mixed together in this one night and they're all just going to different raves and parties. Oh, and the whole thing is about E. Um, I'm trying to think of it. Some are and they all kind of mixed together in this one night and they're all just going to different raves and parties and the whole thing is about e Trying to think of his name. You'd known from the store plays a bouncer in it. Vince Vaughn. No no not Vince It's not really an animal more of a comic he used to work with shimmel or not. I'm not shimmel What is his name blonde hair older dude Jimmy Schuber yes? He plays a bouncer in it. Yeah, Jimmy's the best. Yeah, he's great. I did less comic with him and he was good. Cool Yeah, I'm going for 35 years. Yeah, 30 no 30 years somewhere in there. Yeah, he's a good dude and he played he played a bouncer in it Yeah, I'm what's that car? Did you find it? I wonder how much they've scrubbed it, but if it's a Still 2001 article, but it's called a Ford focus for the electronic music festival and the wave name Yeah, yeah, they've changed it up a bit with the Ventura, but yeah, go with speakers right speakers interior It was great because you'd be walking to this music festival and heart. Yes You the JBL speakers that would never be used in a for Oh, that's what they had it. Yeah, they had like this. They had a badass sound says to write and it was just this This terrible little hatchback, you know car that a young person could afford With a killer sound system in case you wanted to listen to bad boy bill or fact books lame and you so you got arrested 13 times. Yeah, so what was number two? number two let me think two was an M.I.P What's that minor possession of alcohol? Oh, and then that one was like a lot of them were my peas forward to you eyes and Then yeah, and then I got arrested. Oh, you still I just still have a license Most of it was as a minor and then by the time I got my one is an adult It like it had spanned enough to wear in 2009 when I got arrested my last time and I decided to get sober They couldn't technically put me in prison and I didn't want to go because I don't want to spend my days getting titty fucked by the area in brotherhood I know I look so I I got clean, but Yeah, that one was the one that I took real seriously So what they did was they put an alcohol tether on my leg that would monitor if I was drinking and a breathalyzer in my car So I would like I'd have to blow start my car everywhere I went, you know and like my friend Rob had that it would take like three minutes For it could start his car dude It sucked and now they take pictures of you and stuff, but that one it would go off as you drive So you're like driving and like I remember one time a truck was Jack and I think And then it's like So I'm trying to like dodge this truck from hitting me in the Grand Rapids snow While blowing my car so it doesn't stop no way swear to god. They're so dangerous Oh And I'm going around the country. I know they did it while you were driving that's insane That's so they prove you're not drinking so like every 15 minutes It goes off at random, but you can't time it and you have to blow into it Yeah, that's why people like can't show somebody else blow and it's like well no because you'd be like Can I drink and drive and you just shot kind of like that? But yeah, you have to blow the whole time you're driving So that's what sucks about it. So you have this constant thing and I was double jeopardy because I was a road comic 2009 yeah, dude, I'm going into these bars and nightclubs and like hey Do you have a phone jack I could use for a few minutes and they're like yeah, why and I'm like I Got this ankle monitor and I got a plug it in Somewhere to a phone jack so they can download to make sure I'm not drinking so I'd be in a bar dude With my phone jack with my fucking ankle. Oh my god attached to the wall Oh, they downloaded my alcohol. I love that it take So it has like a modem like a Yeah, it would light you know Oh, so it would let you know when you were done. It would do it through the phone lines Yeah at that time Wow, I'm sure there's something more high-tech now This was oh nine you had to have a phone jack and I'd have to call my probation officer and be like this is the room I'm playing I'm in a bar I was allowed to be in a bar, but if anybody spilled anything on me right the jail Oh, boy Because like if I had any bit of like I had to use Tom's everything You know all natural stuff because anything could have alcohol in it. Oh wow So like I couldn't touch anything on a chance that on the off chance that it would set off my monitor That's cool. You know what's really crazy if you eat poppy seed bagels you can get pop for heroin Yeah, when you take a drug test for your job and then that's yeah a poppy seed bagel dude Nice delicious bagel you get pop for heroin. It's amazing. It's nothing else in your system. But heroin I'm a tea toddler. Yeah, what's in your tea. Yeah, what are you doing with it? Yeah, they tell you don't eat poppy seeds any poppy seeds before you go in for a drug test What are long poppy seed bagel stays in your system? Oh, dude. I defy I did drug test too That sucks. I didn't I never did the heroin one. I needed a lot of poppy seeds, but I Did by a fake dick that they caught me with You had a urinator or whizzinator is I think oh it's called a whizzinator. Yeah, it's Larias because I thought you would the fake dick. Yeah. How'd they catch you? It was dark breathing me. I'm not kidding Oh boy, I bought the one I thought they'd be behind me They weren't no they were right here and because they know about the fake dicks. Yeah, and I'm just like It's gonna squeeze these balls from some some urine I bought off of a nerdy kid like R. Kelly I got one for you. I know a guy who to pass a steroid test. Yeah, he was clearly on steroids. He was a fighter. Yeah He injected someone else's urine into his bladder. Oh God oh Yeah, so he got some bro science doctor in the fucking men's room shoving a large needle of piss Into his bladder and then he pissed out somebody else's piss. Oh God. Did it work? Yeah Hats off. I mean that's dedication basketball player came back pregnant when he took his drug So what do they test in him for that he's worried about other weed is it weed? I'm guessing we because it's a if it was 2020 in Ohio It was still illegal plus. I don't think I don't think you're allowed to use it Wow if you're on the team, but it was illegal then so they were probably still which it's never been a I mean for most people here suspension In your Oh As a naturalized player Well, he was I wonder whether they were testing him for I wonder what drugs they were actually testing him for what are they worried about? Find him yeah, because I bought what was it called urine luck? I didn't work Steroids and stuff, you know, I guess but Jesus Christ if I'm running a professional basketball organization I want people on steroids. Oh, I'm testing anyone for anything. I want to recovering. I want to playing better. Yeah The the whole steroid thing is so weird, you know, it's because it's just science They figured out how way to make humans perform better like so are we supposed to use some science like you can use Creatine which at one point in time these three creatine like it was steroids Well, yeah, they did in the 1990s. It was like you taking creatine. You basically taken steroids. Well, it was because of the Mark Maguire Jose can say go thing right. I think that was a little later What because I didn't I remember was because part of it because they were like they're on creatine and everybody's like are you sure? No, they were on interesting Dion's what he said What it wasn't yeah, it was steroids he was on hardcore What because he got big Maguire went from like a farm boy to looking like one of the lunatians characters from space jam Just home run video Maguire hitting a home run and as the bat is Contacting the ball you see the bend to the bat because he's so strong He's whipping the bat so hard that it's bending in the air as it contacts the ball and it's leaving you find that photo Yeah, it's ash. It's like a very dense wood. Yeah, and he's whipping it so hard The it has a bend like a bow like bow and arrow and it's connecting the ball like perfectly on the sweet spot Look at that look at the fucking amount of bend in that bat Well, that's somebody else but look at the one above it. Oh the one right there. That's the Maguire I'm talking where it's right there. That's a Ben Ben. That's it. No right there. Yeah, it looks like he's on the spoon trick Okay, whoever it is, but look at it. That's what I'm talking about. You're right It's someone a guy is swinging it full clip. That's what happens to the bat which is crazy That is completely Freud's that's him. Oh my god. That's nuts. Look at that. It's looks like it's made out of rubber That's so great. I'll imagine the fucking force your body has to generate to do that to one of those bats and meanwhile Pete Rose never gets inducted I know dude. I met him. I liked him. I know that didn't make any sense. He's just gambling. It didn't hinder his play No, I mean it was there was some concern that maybe he bet against his team. That's what it was. Yeah Yeah, he probably did yeah, he says he didn't but allow him and or he's gonna be eligible I believe Yeah, I figured you possibly though. Yeah, I figured yeah, that's what they were gonna do. Yeah, but that's not cool No, he's dead. He should have done why he's alive. No, and he's been around sitting in the MGM and Vegas signing shit for a long time You know great player. Yes, he was amazing. I mean just because a guy does something like that doesn't mean he didn't do amazing things playing And that's what it's supposed to be all about the guy was an all star He was one of the greatest of all time He took it away from him because he likes to gamble. Yeah guess what that's also probably why he was so fucking good because he was wild Yes, it's a while boy. It's true. Yes, and Jordan. Oh, dude Yeah, the greatest basketball player whoever walked the face of the fucking earth Yes, and to gent like Pete Rose's dad wasn't taking it comes from the same place Man it comes from the same place. Yeah, it's same deal Well, yeah, cuz there's a part of you that wants to do risky things if you're willing to go that far Yeah, you have to have that element in yeah, so you kind of want to go like yeah He threw a few games with the confidence that the team would still be fine. That's kind of amazing If he did it's a guy chasing money He's probably he's probably well that the thing they said about Jordan was that he wouldn't pay Yeah, oh, that's yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of shady shit that happened well That was that golf hustler that beat him out of hundreds of thousands of dollars and then wrote a story about it because Jordan wouldn't pay him Then it kind of started getting out Then Jordan's dad got murdered that's why there's a lot there. Yeah, yeah, the connection with the people may have taken out his dad over Mm-hmm. That's just rarely talking about you know, here's another connection that I never considered until recently remember when Cosby's kid got murdered Yeah, and everybody was like oh, it's just a random crime. Maybe not right. I don't think it was now Well now now, you know what Cosby did imagine if he did that to someone's daughter and they said oh well guess what Because he wasn't robbed right they didn't take anything right he was just changing a tire Yeah, and who knows if he even was they could have flagged it down exactly who knows if he even was yeah Or who knows if they maybe flattened his tire? Exactly It's a vision. Yeah. They know he's gonna drive flat in his tire let him drive off a little bit And he's eventually gonna have to stop and pull over it It seems so random to just kill someone for fun. It's where yeah very rare And it when you know what Cosby did it makes you go oh Maybe there's something there and now the stuff that has come out is so Dude, it's so dark Are this lady say that he might be the most prolific serial rapist in history? No doubt it be imagine how insane that is the guy who is the You know mr. Hux table to doctor Hux table head of the fucking family and the most wholesome sitcom Everybody loved it cross the race barrier made everybody think of like this black family is like incredibly Respectful and well put together and how great is this dude? Doesn't exist without him right yeah, right right and he had a gynecology office in his basement Which he just slid past everybody on the show Yeah, doctor. Doctor Hux table was a gynecologist and He was a doctor and in his basement is where he saw the women and no one thought anything about it Well, how about the one episode that he did about Spanish fly dude and the he would talk about it in his act He has a old records of Spanish fly. Yeah, we're just talking about it like the whole audience is like yeah the rape drug That's hilarious. Yeah, and he had a whole episode of the show about his special barbecue sauce Yes, oh, and everybody started making out with each other. Yeah, how crazy is that? Well, did you ever see the Cosby mysteries intro? No, it's a pill going into a martini and then it just says Cosby mysteries Like yeah, I think he was more deviant than we actually realized and was leaving these like little like taunting breadcrumbs I had heard that he was doing that kind of stuff in the 90s when I was on news radio She had heard from people that knew him or people that knew of him. Yeah, like that he drugs girls I was like what bill cause I was like this is crazy. This is crazier than Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone Right what are you talking about? Yeah, I heard he was like a I heard he had sex with a lot of women And I was like well, okay like that it's a different thing. Yeah, like that's a you know I'm like whatever so he's not spotless. I would assume I heard about it in Hollywood Yeah, people knew it was like an inside secret But then like when I started becoming a comic and I was doing small stuff like an at like not the the HBO Vegas Fuses it yeah the cause of the mysteries. Oh, that's right. Okay, but this is like reflections in this But this is a mystery like someone's drugging someone right this is this was a show About this was like a cop show, right? Yeah, he came back out He came back out and did a cop show. Yeah How weird it's just crazy that the first thing in it though is a drink being drugged The cop when was that Cosby mysteries? Oh, I think it was 90 was a 90 I made 90s how long did that last I think it's season or two four yeah, 94 Yeah, it didn't last very long. Wow. Yeah, people wanted to see him in comedy. It's like why why would have the most loved Comedy sitcom star ever and his his film career wasn't great. It was like ghost dad and you know He did it. Yeah, it was all very Fat Albert there was a story and I can't remember if it was fat Albert, but What's his name Kenan Thompson was talking about one of the first times he met Bill Cosby and he was like, you know You're gonna you're gonna need two dicks for all to pussy you're gonna get and he was like what the fuck Like he just couldn't believe it was like one of the first things Cosby had said to him Wow, so it's like he got because you just meet that guy and you kind of wouldn't expect it to switch so hard Especially a guy who's Who's been telling people not especially after any Murphy stories and all that stuff Yeah, you know Eddie Murphy from raw. Yeah, doing is like tell mister Tell mister cost me the richer priors that have a broken to smile and shut the fuck Do you get paid? Yeah Be ready because when this movie comes out you're gonna need two dicks because the woman gonna be all over you Yeah, so it was that and imagine saying that to somebody over fat Albert. He's like are you sure that one I think When he was young that drugging people was normal That's what I think I think that whole Spanish fly era where people were just giving people Mickey's they're putting things in people's drinks I think I think people did that all the fucking time I think it was super normal and Then I think society Eventually evolved and people realized how fucking horrible that is yeah, and then he kept me on oh Oh, that was his move. Yeah, absolutely. Especially when he got old and ladies didn't want to fuck him They wanted a career and they thought maybe Bill Cosby said he's gonna help me with my acting Yeah, you know you wake up and your panties are off You know what happened and a lot of them too when you see like the roles they were getting on the Cosby show now You have like supermodel looking women playing a cop And it's like you would have private dinners with them, you know like in this green room just little like super shady shit Boy, yeah, so yeah, like he I guarantee you maybe him and Was it Jordan Madam Bell for you probably met him to the wolf wolf Worship yeah, I'm thinking like Cosby and him may have been the last people on earth to ever have quailudes Like one of them What was quailudes like I never did quailudes it would they were I think they were Joey Yeah, it's a big fan see he's older elder to remember that yeah, yeah, cuz I've heard him talk about it Yeah, but I've never done quailudes. I think they were like I think the last one was like 90's Look at that she'll do things. She's never done before yeah creases sexual duh. I don't even think it's real Did it's an ad for rape? But the stuff That's what they used to say really works Whether it works or not I would say what that's what I'm saying I mean, I'm sure it's real as like a product, but I don't think it there's a thing that actually makes you horny Said would give you extra like it's like a pre-vigra Yeah, but that doesn't get you horny like but Viagra is it just increases blood flow someone had it when I was Maybe I don't know in middle school somebody Spanish fly. Yeah, like a bottle of something that said Spanish. Okay Google this it does Spanish fly work Look at all the ass Look at this love with no strings attached. It's a flight attendant and adding that flight attendants were fucking Hot back then they would hire they would hire only hot flight attendants. They would fire you if you weren't Spanish fly movie so just Google this for me does Spanish fly actually make you aroused Dude if there's a movie it was popular does it work? Hmm. Oh Let's see Spanish fly is not an aphrodisiac. It's a toxic substance called carthir Can can thar it in can thar it in derive from blister beetles that can cause severe harm including pain burning and internal damage There's no evidence it increases sexual desire ingesting Can thar it in can thar it in can be fatal While causes burning sensation in the urinary tract that can provoke an erection It is a dangerous side effect not an aphrodisiac effect so it gives you a bone or while you're dying Yeah, what would it do to women then if you're right? I guess knock you out and that's why they're like she's horny, bro Okay, so just google this is there a drug that makes you horny just google that You put it in a chat GPT I mean perplexity or something MDMA I would you know that it makes you loving right it makes you like Kind and want to hug people. I don't think it makes you sexual But if you were rolling I mean and like a girl just like touched your knee in a way Right, I'm like come you know, it was just sort of It was pretty crazy soft dick. Yeah. Yeah, that's what sucked is it didn't it didn't help your libido No universally proven aphrodisiac drug exists that reliably increases sexual desire across all individuals The concept of an aphrodisiac a substance that enhances libido or sexual performance has been around for centuries But scientific evidence is limited and often inconclusive So sub some subuses are marketed as that historical cultural substances foods like oysters. Okay chocolate. Okay. No, that's not worse medications Viagra, but again these they treat erectile dysfunction by improving blood flow not by increasing desire Yeah, no, no, no, I get it hormonal treatments testosterone therapy boost libido. Yeah, but it doesn't like just make you horny out of nowhere Yeah, I don't think there's anything Like what is horny goat weeded a gas station? That's just like poison Basalt remember basalt Basalt these to sell at the gas station and it was basically like some kind of like horrible drug that they snuck in by saying It was not for human consumption. Yeah, but it was a bath salt so you throw it in the bath And then well you would consume a human because you remember when the guy ate the dudes Yeah, yeah, yeah that guy in Florida But I always feel like I got to put that through the Florida lens. It only happened in Florida That's true if it is Florida. You're like there could have been other elements a lot of other elements in Florida There's a whole lifestyle that could have led to this a lot of choices But Florida where that was the the place where the pill mills really started popping off because the way Florida had Set up they had these pain management centers. Yeah, and then Attached the pain management centers. They'd have a doctor that would prescribe it for you So the whole thing was just to prescribe pain pills so you'd go it Excuse me go the pain management center. Oh my back hurts. Great. You need this go right next door And right next door all they prescribed was pain pills and they didn't have a database So you would go there and then you go down the street. Oh my back hurts. Oh great Here you go and then next door and you could just keep doing this over and over again And then this documentary the oxycontin Express showed how people were loading up the trunks of their cars with these pain pills and driving up north and Indacon tucky into Ohio and that's where all these people started dying of overdoses and all people got to dig the pills There's also one enrichment I want to say right outside Richmond a pharmaceutical company that was also largely responsible Because I remember even being Working at a pharmacy and going like my mom was in our end so I'd go in there I remember the doctors are not the doctors, but like I remember companies taking out the doctors to eat or like You know like oxycontin reps or you'd sign with a pen that had a painkillers name on it. Yep All that stuff I remember my wife's mom's nurse and she would tell stories about how they the pharmaceutical drug companies would take them out to nice steak dinners and treat them really nice and just the whole thing was like make sure you push our shit It was yeah, give our product to the people coming in tell people how great it is how great is our product I do they used to give a lot like I was getting my when I got my knee messed up I got hooked on oxy on vikodin and I had I take lots of vikodin before but I took a prescribed amount that was just way too many for several months in a row and Then when I came down it was one of the sickest times I've ever had to deal with I'm like shaking You know, I'm throwing up every few minutes and this was the allowed amount I was supposed to take like how long did you for a day for two months and Then how long was like the before you became normal again? Oh God It I felt real bad for about four to five days like for me Even when I quit smoking like I used to smoke three packs a day for almost 12 years and but I did a lot of acid and shrooms and shit. It was fun. You know, I was like one after the other one did it was But it felt good, you know, so like yeah, I would do that But even that I locked myself in a room when I was living in LA and I just didn't leave I didn't leave the room for a week I just got clean dude I just let my body deal with the pain and then I left like so it usually takes me about That long, you know to really detox my system if it's something that isn't Killer alcohol was hard alcohol was really hard because I had started shaking when I wouldn't drink when I was 16 Oh boy, so yeah, you got addicted to it early do very early So it's like a genetic thing with your family big time and I didn't know about that until later, you know And like my my dad had talked to me a bit before he died and like you know He died on us 18 and but he He finally talked to me about what was going on with the family and stuff I hadn't known and my uncle who I figured had died of a heroin overdose But my mom's like he just had a big heart. Oh and you're like did he? Can I just know the truth, you know and it turned out it was lines of the years of addiction like my dad's dad was I Rish guy left him the day he was born walked in so my dad was a twin head twin sister and goes I'm not raising two and walked out So then he was the opposite dad he was loving Coach all that stuff He turned it by fuck by the government. Oh, yeah, and then fucked by the government. He became a very Yeah, and then crazy how that kind of addiction addiction and mental illness is just fucking hardcore genetic and When you have a family that has a long history of mental illness It's very rare that you're like I'm fine. Oh, yeah, it's very rare that you're an anomaly. Yeah Fine Maybe you're not good. Yeah, I just know so many people that are alcoholics that their families in alcohol like guys I had a buddy that he would drink and his eyes would glaze over and it wouldn't be him anymore It would like oh, he's gone. We just got to wait until he comes back because right now It's whatever the fuck happens to him when he drinks Just crazy off the rails like didn't remember anything full blackout. Oh, yeah You'd have to tell him you don't remember being on the table with your dick out. You don't remember. Yeah You remember anything. I was the guy on that side of the phone calls. Let's see I think they were like you need to apologize to this person. Did you black out all the time all this time So you didn't remember anything? I wouldn't remember most sometimes I brown out so I'd kind of remember what we did There was times where I actually I was at a party, right? And then I wake up and I'm handcuffed to a Bad in a hospital getting charcoal dump down. Oh, you know stomach pump. Oh my god. Oh something happened But I went from like Being at a party to just being woken up with a charcoal stomach pump I don't think good. Do you talk about anything stuff on stage? I do. Yeah. Oh, imagine you have to look what I'm so ripe for material Yeah, I put out a book It's called party one of fuzzy memoir a little while ago and it's it's all stories of my youth because I Was trying to get it all out and then I had to ask people and I didn't put it out for years because I wanted to be like hey Is it cool if I Try to talk about and everybody was but in a couple of my friends were my really good friends I had to fuck with from like don't worry I change your name from Brian to Ryan so no one knows But yeah, I talked about a lot of this on stage because dude I got institutionalized I got like wow it was all like crazy How do you get institutionalized? I The story I talk about in the book is what happened the night before Well, not the book but on stage because I have to kind of sum it up. I actually did it on this is not happening already show and What happened was was I used to like bong Pines and fifths for like a party trick and I could carry around a case of beer and you know drink that in the night and my mind Do I'm five six? But then I'm in high school. I probably had a hundred forty pounds dude like I was And if I wasn't on if I wasn't on LSD and I wasn't on mushrooms and I wasn't on K I was drunk Wow, so I would switch it all up and The night before I had bong to fifth at a party like what do you mean by bong? You know the beer bongs that I've liked the funnel and go through so my friend Anthony pulled out this beer bong and my friend Nick Port an entire fifth of absolute vodka and next like dude don't do this. He just drank the whole thing Well, they put in a cap full of sprite then I drank the whole thing and Dude, I guess I I say this in the story because I this is what I was told happened I was tab dancing. I told my girlfriend who I love that she had a rang a tang titties and then And then I fell through its table a glass table. Oh, no, and then yeah I ended up getting taken home by the cops. I don't know exactly what happened But my mom ended up calling the police which is you know Like she didn't know what to do. I was doing something right and they arrested me and I was institutionalized For two weeks and I stayed with a kid who thought it was a werewolf So you had to go to a mental health institution? I went to a mental health institution because they weren't they didn't realize it was an addiction They just arrest me because my behavior was so erratic And I remember getting there and I met my and I'm not kidding I met my roommate who was a he was a werewolf. That's what he believed and I'm like I don't want to I don't want to stay with him and they're like, he's not really a werewolf. I'm like, yeah I know he's what happens when the moon turns full what he attacked me. Oh Boy, yeah, so and they hit what they do is they grab a tank or a trank. It's called booty juice and They hit you in the butt with it and like the guards will fight you off Yeah, so and they hate what they do is they grab a tank a trank. It's called booty juice and they hit you in the butt with it and like the guards will fight you off But after two weeks, they're like he's not It's not so much that he's got mental illness which he does, but he's an alcoholic. He's a severe alcoholic But you're roommate the werewolf. Yeah, he attacked you in the moon turn white. Yeah one night He just started a howling and I don't even think wolves howl Anyways, you know, they wolves howl right or not where we'll see. Yeah Where often lunch a bar everybody was barking to and patient says sedative known as booty juice injected against their will yeah growing number of children teenagers admitted voluntarily To North Texas for profits like at your hospitals told WFA a they've been injected with powerful sedative drugs without their parents knowledge booty juice yeah, which I that kid deserved that they shouldn't have call the parents and go hey your wolf boys It fucking naked trying to eat a guy Is he naked when he checked those clothes off because he thought it was a werewolf dude So tell me what that was his life well He's jumping on top of me and I grabbed a lamp to hit him with it But it was fucking glued down because it's a mental hospital So that just kind of made me open my arms to him and he's on top trying to bite me And I'm like holding him back and that's when they came in and they run it They ran at him they hit him with the syringe they pulled him off me and I'm just sitting there like I'll never drink again, you know like basically crying like a bitch like and you know I'll never drink again was like my catchphrase So they pull him out of there and then you know And then eventually they sent me off to a rehab where I spent I think spent 45 days there And I heard it's not there anymore which is a shame because a lot of kids do need that now And I heard they took it down like it's no longer there and and I went there and and the second I got out I didn't drink I didn't drink for like a month But the second I got my friend's car I hit a joint and I'm not saying that's bad But it's like dude the second I was I was they're like you can't drink right and I'm like yeah, like you can smoke weed I'm like yeah So I immediately hit a joint Oh my god Dave. Yeah Jesus Christ And that's what's kind of amazing that you're here dude. Yeah. I got a lot of shit like you look great though Thank you guys gone through as much shit as you yeah like three packs a day alcohol acid Do so much acid UIs Falls through the table look at you fine, you know You know it is interesting though all the drugs now because I like I told you I was real like kind of depressed kid Mm-hmm and all the drugs that I did to treat depression are now used to treat depression mushrooms Ketamine all that shit dude, right like I'm I spent five years in high school when it turns out I was completely accurate with my studies of how these drugs Would help me you were self-medicating and I was accurate with it. Yeah I would do K and I just we sit there in a K hole in class Just think the desk is moving Jesus dude and acid was the most fun to do in class because your teacher's face is melting and you're just sitting there like it's so much fun Wow, but I was a I was a mess, but at the same time so many of my friends were too It wasn't like just me right to felt normal. Yeah, like I mean I was the worst of them and technically slowest because I was arrested more than anybody You were the most fun. What did you think you were gonna do for a living back then? The only thing I ever loved was acting in comedy. Oh My dad would wake me up when I was a kid to watch SNL And I he wasn't something that my him and my brother they'd watch like baseball and stuff But we'd watch SNL together. We would watch like old movies with like John Candy Steve Mark like all those people and then he introduced me to stand up and my dad bought me You bought me kennison carlin. He bought me carlin classic gold on tape when I was nine Which had seven dirty words and all that? He bought me danger field buttoned down mind above new heart Eddie Murphy He showed me delirious when I was like eight. Wow, I do I still left so hard because that like the whole baby does about the hamburger was so relevant then like I got McDonald's at home and he's like you can't have none you on the welfare And I knew what that meant then and I was crying laughing because I loved that e-merfe You know, so he introduced me to comedy and the only thing I had any interest in was that and one day Second city opened up into Detroit and I was pissing this teacher off Someone she stopped me after class and she goes Do you know what second city is and I go? Yeah, my dad told me about it. It's like where all these best and L people came from and she's like yeah You're actually really funny, but you're a fucking pain in the ass in my class And I was like, okay, that's a cool teacher. It really was and she goes She goes you should Consider taking classes there and I said wow, okay So after my fifth year the first thing I did was I Listen to her and my dad and I signed up for second city and dude years later I'm doing improv on stage with this group motor city improv and like it's more bar-provage fucking around, you know, right? but My one of the guys in the group was hey my wife's gonna come to and it was my teacher and I got to do improv with her years later Wow, man because like she it was the first time somebody didn't scold me they stopped me to go like You genuinely have something and you're not just this waste Right and no one had ever besides my parents, but nobody else had ever said that before well That's so cool that she was already in that world so she understood yeah Yeah, yeah, we were actually just having a conversation about that last night in the green room Not last night night before and we were talking about times in your life that someone could have just told you This is Be behavior like a stand-up comedian like that's a real job You know, you know, you know, you like fixing cars and you could be mechanic You know, you like talking shit you're funny everybody laughs this is a job Like just but everybody just tells you you're a fucking loser and you're never gonna mount anything and get out of my class And that's and yeah, I was very lucky like my parents my dad had Was just about to pass when I told him I think I'm gonna do second city and then take this film class up in Lansing Michigan Which is what I did I did film and I did that and I would go back and forth and He was like you should like that's what you've always wanted to do like I had a camera in my hands since I was a kid like My parents never wanted me to have a backup plan. They were like find something you love Like that's you know, and we were really only torn apart as a family because of what we experienced You know from my dad just being screwed. Yeah, so we If I think if I had even a more direct line, I may have gotten there sooner You know, but I was I was angry and depressed and pissed off sure, you know my my whole attitude was fuck you buck the system Yeah, so they're when I finally found that outlet it was wonderful dude Especially when you're writing sketches and watching come to life and you're ripping on the people They're over and like there's such a good feeling about that Yeah, and a lot of people that I met have gone on to do great things like I was in a troop with Sam Richardson and went on to do the Traders and you know, I there's Tim Robinson who I didn't know him well or anything But we did improv a couple times and it's cool to see him like sky rock it with I think you should leave and all these other stuff and He can Michael key with somebody that was out of the Detroit chapter So there's like some really cool people that ended up coming out of there. What was the stand-up scene like what was the big club? The big club was Mark Ridley's comedy cast. Okay. I heard that. Yeah, and I started Was big great spot to it's unbelievable And he he was the guy who you wanted to do stand-up in front of because he was there every night tearing tickets like He was dude He was a part of it from the late 70s Until he had a heart attack maybe around 2010 his son Ryan Ridley was the head writer of Rick and Morty Oh, wow. So he dude. He's a great dude and um You just had my costume. Yes, Mike was in my group when I started. Oh, no, yeah He was one of the people that I started with a guy named Matt McLeod Reeves He's actually featuring for me this weekend who's unbelievably funny dude at the mother show. Yeah. Oh, yeah He's got asperger's Adam nose on and do funny. Yeah. Yeah, if any luck. He'll think he's a lady He's a werewolf But yeah, dude He's he's a beast and like we had a pretty cool group when we started where we weren't kissing each other's ass We were all just trying to figure it out. Oh, that's great So he would like criticize each other and like we've all done pretty well considering like Where people have gone off to you know At least in the sense of making money and making a living you know making making people laugh like and that's awesome We were lucky because there was like 10 different clubs in Detroit Where you could go like okay, I'll go do Ridley's ends of suburbs But then I can go do a super urban room You know in the city and I can get used to that audience then they can go to Ann Arbor And I could be in a bunch of in front of liberals at the showcase or at the Heidelberg project and then I can go You know so you could go all over and you could experience every kind of audience you could ever be in front of at 10 different places and that's awesome. It was really cool. That's awesome Listen to this was a lot of fun. Thank you. I really like talking. I'm glad you're alive Stories it's kind of a miracle that you made it this far, but Your good dude and it's always fun to have you at the club. It's been a lot of fun. Thank you I'm excited to see you this weekend. I appreciate it Joe. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you brother I'll tell everybody how they can find you all your stuff online. Oh, you can go to daveland.com I have everything on there. You can check out tour dates and everything and also yeah, I guess I would regret it My book party of one of fuzzy memoir did really well on Amazon. Nice and yeah, it's a lot of people have enjoyed it and a lot of the Stories will be much funnier to you than they were for me to live All right beautiful part. Thanks brother. Thank you. Bye everybody