Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! Our day! Come on, see you must go hang up. For people who don't know, you and I have been friends for... God, more than 10 years. Yeah, how many years has been? I think it's... I think it's the year we got here, which is 14, 2012. Yeah, we're met in Hawaii on the beach with our kids. OK, so what's your whole memory? I'll just think about that, because I have a very particular memory of that. My memory was that my children and your children were playing on the beach. Exactly. That's how we met. It was just like digging and sand. They were real little. They were the same age. And then we just said, hi. Yeah, but I remember... No, OK, I have a slightly different memory. OK, which is like, that's exactly right about the kids. Yeah. Two girls for you, two boys for me. And your wife was there first before... Yes. I think I was in the gym. And I just remember... Yes, like... I've just moved from England. And it's a whole different world and a different culture. And I just remember you walking down the beach. I remember I'd never seen anyone like this before. Just like the... It was just an amazing cultural moment. And then... You'd never seen anyone walk up the beach. Well, just like the way you were, you know, you're just the way... I remember thinking, who's this guy? I remember I'd never heard of you. And then I was explaining to our people, I'd never... Joe, Joe, Rogan, you met Joe Rogan. It was just an amazing thing. And then the other thing that makes me laugh doing this is that we then did the podcast at some point around then. This is before you had any aspirations running for governor or anything like that. Exactly. It's a long time ago. I was teaching at Stanford. I just had a very normal kind of low-key life. And I remember doing the podcast, not knowing what a podcast was. I literally didn't know. So we came in. And again, my experience was I'd been in England. I'd worked in business, run a restaurant or to that kind of thing. But most recently, I'd been in politics and government. And so I did in the media. I was aware of all of that. And so, you know, it wasn't like I was completely naive, but I didn't know what a podcast was. And I literally thought it was like a radio show or something. I remember coming in, this is back in LA. And we sat down and we were chatting for a few minutes. And I literally was thinking, when's the next guest coming? Like this seems to be going on a really long time. And it's like 10 minutes and then 15. Wow, this is a long time. Not normally you get like 10, 15 minutes maximum. Right. Half an hour. What? An hour? Three hours. I couldn't believe it. Well, back then, I really didn't know. No one knew what a podcast was. Right. So what year was it that Steve was on? On episode 509, 20 hours June, July 3rd of 2014. 2014. Yeah. Whoa. OK. 2014 episode 109. 509. So we're already 509? Yeah. 509. So we've had 2,000 podcasts since then. Incredible. And wow. The other thing is crazy. It's crazy. The other thing, just remembering, I'd never really done anything public as I could behind the scenes coming in politics and government. And I'd just come out of that. And I was very kind of cautious about everything. And you were just talking like you do. Which again, I didn't really know. And you, I remember thinking, oh, this is like, we talked about sex and you were cursed as like, wow. What is this? Like, this is so different to anything I've ever encountered before. But there we are. Yeah, nobody was listening back then. It was nice. You could get away with so much more. You could just talk and not worry about it. And also so immediate was not changed. I don't think you worry about it when you're talking. No. Well, I don't pay attention. That's the key. That's the key to my success. This is like, don't listen to anybody, what anybody has to say about you. Just keep moving. Keep moving to dole pay attention. I think that's obviously works. Well, I think there's a lot of people out there that are crippled by other people's opinions. I think there's a genuine benefit to having a bunch of other people's opinions of you. And you get to see feedback. But there's just way too many bad faith actors on the internet. There's way too many people that have the least charitable takes on everybody. The worst, the worst public narration, like public narratives that they want to promote about anyone or anything about any subject. There's far too many people like that. And it's a poison well. It's like if you went to a restaurant and you knew that 20% of their food would literally fucking kill you. Would you ever eat there? No. Well, that's like Twitter. To 20% of the people there are fucking poisonous. They're like a core of me. I don't think. It's so funny because when we met, I was just kind of a regular citizen, a teaching at Stanford, whatever. Then I started a business. Then I got more public. I went to Fox, hosted a show. Then I'm a candidate. And as that's happened, you get more prominent. And so you look at these comments. And I don't have no weather to look. But the thing that I really just makes me laugh now, is like I'm always tempted to do it. And I never do it. The really idiotic just pure abuse. I don't know. I put something out there. And now there's a lot more of this. I'm a candidate. It's like go back to England. You fucking cunt. You ball whatever. And always want to write. Good point. It's just so tempting. And I never have. Maybe I should. Well, there's a lot of, because it just makes me laugh. There's a lot of sad angry people out there that are just lashing out. And unfortunately, those are overly represented online. Because those are the type of people that have the time to make comments. But then you also have to take into consideration whenever you're involved in anything political, as you obviously are, because you're running for Governor of California. There's a lot of the people that are engaging with your content that are not real people. They are even actual boss. 100%. OK, that pot. I never have in my mind. You don't? No, I should. I'm a good point. Keep going. It's a tremendous amount. It's not a small amount. It's a huge amount. Does the Elon, there's nothing you give about it. It was one attention when he was buying Twitter. So when he was buying Twitter, Twitter was alleging that there was only 5% or Twitter with bots. But see, we find that article again. There's a former FBI, god, he did something with digital intelligence. And he did a forensic analysis of Twitter. And he said it's probably 80%. 80. 80. 80. So it's a bunch of bots yelling at you. And by bots, OK. Some of them, I think now. And this is at the time. So this is 2022. $1.50 by Twitter, 2023, 2024, 2024. I think I'll do that. Was it 2024? I think I remember. I think it was like somewhere on 23.24. Yeah. OK. So back then, AI was not as much of an issue. Like AI is, you could automate anything now. So the claim that 80% of Twitter originates from 2022 assessment by cybersecurity expert Dan Wood, so official company filings have historically claimed fake accounts represent under 5% independent estimates. And security specialists suggest real figures are higher. Those in exact 80% total remains heavily debated. It's very debated. But if you read the article, it's very meticulous, like the way he's describing what 80, it's not only pulling it out of his ass. So what they did with Twitter did to come up with 5%. Was they just grabbed a random 100 tweets. But also they're trying to sell it for fucking billion. Yeah, yeah. Exactly. They want to think it. What was like $40 billion? Yeah. Something crazy, wasn't it? I don't remember. But then wasn't it $40 billion? Fucking insane amount of money for this, what is now, just chaos. You know, it's funny. So there's that. And so this guy's saying 80%. So again, this is a few years ago. So you're dealing with actual humans. We're doing it. So you have these state-sponsored groups that are these bot farms. And when these bot farms are, I don't know if you're seeing them. But people have gone inside and filmed them. Like whistle blowers. But what they literally have is like rows and rows of Android phones that are all connected to people. So it's a bunch of people. Yes. And they'll type one thing. And that one thing gets tweeted by hundreds and hundreds of phones. And there's many of these places. And this was back before you could get AI to automate things for you. Now that you could do a thing where you can essentially start a campaign online. Like say, Steve Hilton's a cunt. Pass it on. And literally, you could hire a company. And this company has bots that will go out there and promote that Steve Hilton is a cunt. And they will put it everywhere. And they'll hire people. They'll pay, this is another thing. There's a bunch of really bad actors, really bad faith actors on Twitter that are paid to post things. And these people have been called out many times by other people that are independent journalists that say, isn't it crazy that all these people use the same verb to be? Yeah, exactly. Because they're getting paid. They're getting paid quite a bit of money. Israel pays people. They've been pretty open about it. And they were saying that we have to win the Digital War against what they call it the woke Reich, which is hilarious. So there's that. So you have to, when you're engaged, I know real people on Twitter. I know real people that I read their posts. And I know there's real independent journalists. But there's a tremendous amount of just utter horseshit. I don't have time. I have no time for this. I mean, I look at it. So you're running around. You're doing all these things for the campaign, whatever. So I don't have too much time. It's the one I look at. But there's all the other, there's Instagram and all the rest. And I don't even look at those. But on X, for a few hours, if you add it up probably half an hour in the morning, maybe half an hour in the middle of the day, half an hour at the end of the day, and you look at it then. And you just find out what's going. I think it's pretty good for news. Like things that are happening. It's the best thing I've ever done for news. So that's why I check in with you. You kind of see what's happening. I do that. I go to the front page like what's going on. What are the news stories? But as soon as it gets to people's opinions on saying, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, that's just me. I do think it's fun. Honestly, the abuse stuff, it just makes me laugh. I think it's kind of, that's good. Well, you've always been really good digitally. Like for people that don't know, like I said, Stephen, I've known each other for a long time. I mean, we're good friends. Like we've taken our families to Disneyland. I know. Like we've slept over each other's homes. This is, again, way before you're running for governor. I know you and you know me and you know my family. We know each other. And you've always had no phone. You were always impossible to reach. I used to have to get a hold of your wife to get a hold of you. I did exactly. It's hilarious. For a while, I don't even know if you've had a fucking email for a while. I had an email. I always had email. Yeah. But you never had anything on you to check that email. So like. Exactly. One time in San Diego, where you always said, it's fine. Nothing ever goes wrong. Are you going to not find a way wrong? Your wife is so mad at you. Because you're going to get a hold of you. You fucking fatter. But this was the thing is like you were well aware that it is a toxic element in your life. And it's distracting. It keeps you from being present. It keeps you from being in the moment. And it's very hard to have discipline and just put it down. And I'm really good at it. But then I'm not. And then some days I'm not. I just find myself on the toilet for 20 minutes. Watch a murder videos. Because my Instagram, it's actually really good right now. Well, actually, what do you mean like true crime stuff? Oh, horrible things. So one of my best friends, Tom Segura, he and I have had this tradition over the last few years of sending each other the worst fucking shit that we find on my. To each other, just to freak each other out first, take it the morning. Like first thing morning, I wake up and Tom sent me. Like the other day, I sent him these two guys were trying to rob an ATM machine. And the guys pulling on it and they wrapped a chain around it and they had a car. So that's like a move that was pulling. It was like pulling. It was ridiculous. Yeah. So the car was pulling the ATM machine out and the guy got trapped under it and dragged with sparks and blood. I mean, it's fucking horrific. And I've seen so many people get executed hundreds. Instagram is terrible by removing that stuff. I don't know if I spend far less time on X because X is so much opinions. It's so much of it is just text. Instagram, for me, it's a lot of it is very interesting. Like I find interesting historical facts, interesting scientific discoveries, cool stuff. There's a lot of it seems to be just generally when I'm around, you know, I'm on planes a lot and like all the time and you see people. So just watching people, Instagram seems to be the thing, you know, I'm not watching what they're looking at. You can see the logo and you can see that seems to be what people are most consuming. Yes. I think it's probably the biggest one that maybe TikTok is probably the biggest. Yeah, and TikTok. I don't know what's the biggest, but they're both pretty big. And it's just mine. TikTok's will be younger. Yeah, I think. But there's a lot of older people on TikTok too now. It's just very addictive. TikTok, when you open it up, it immediately starts playing you something. Yeah. That's different. You know, like Instagram, it opens the page and you go, so what's going on? And you have to like put in a little effort. TikTok's like, gotcha. Like immediately as soon as you open up the app, it's like, gotcha, here's another one. Here's another one. Here's another one. Next, you know, an hour's gone by and you've wasted it. I remember what I first read about it like years ago, TikTok. I think maybe even wasn't cool TikTok. Because bike dance were doing it. And it was music video. There's something to do with it. Yeah, and that's how it started. It started with, you know. You could make your own video to music or something to use it was the focus. Well, the original TikTok was a bunch of people dancing. Yeah, they're trying. It was like TikTok to do things. Exactly. Yeah, they were dancing and lip-syncing. And I remember reading and they were talking about how viral it's got and then this thing is gonna take over. So it's like, oh yeah, that can't be, that's not gonna happen. And then we are amazing. Mm. Well, what's really interesting is China where TikTok originated, they have a completely different TikTok. Yeah, exactly. Their TikTok is curated to like martial arts demonstrations, scientific discoveries. It's all ethylic. Letting the statements. It's doing music. I know that. Exactly. It's all like enriching. So as you can do that. Yeah, and kids aren't even allowed on it after 10 p.m. So like you have to put in your age when you do it at 10 p.m. it bricks you. Go to work, bitch. Go to sleep. Get up in the morning and now now TikTok does that. Or I can't remember. I've read that. The Chinese version of TikTok. So the Chinese version of TikTok. And the government makes them do that all the way. Yeah, they're smart. Like it's not good to censor people, but if you wanna have a society that's not captured by horseshit, that's the way to do it. So I remember, so I'm Hungarian. My parents are Hungarian. I'm an Isaac kid. I was born in England, but we'd go back to Hungary. And this thing I always remember being really pissed off about when I was a kid. Not that the TV was before anything. It was just TV. It's all you had was television. But on Mondays in Hungary, there was no television because they wanted people to do other stuff. Just on Monday? Yeah, I was something, and maybe I'm getting this sort of, and it was like, go out, talk to each other, do stuff, sports, whatever. It was just, and it was common in a strategy, so they can do whatever they want. Right. But you think, you know, they were thinking I prefer freedom, but that's what I think all about all of this. It's so hard. Like even when you look at, like just today, there's this massive trial, this matter trial going on. It's gonna matter. It's a lawsuit. Today's the first day of the trial. What is the trial now? They're suing matter for $1.4 trillion. Brilliant. Trillion, trillion with the T. Whoa. I mean, they're not gonna get that, but that's the claim. It was just today. Claims that addicted children or social media. Yeah. And they're doing this through lawsuits. And I'm just so torn over this, because I've got a very strong point of view about all of this in kids. Yes. But there's something about this that doesn't feel right in terms of just going after these big platforms. Because in the end, I think it's the phones. It's the, that'll be something else if it's not matter. It'll be another thing. Yes. I wrote about this 2015. So soon after we did that show, I was probably working. And at the time I had a book, I published a book called More Human, designing a world where people come first. And the kind of main thing in the book was everything's too big and be a recratic and centralized. And we got to get back to the human skills. It's mainly about other kinds of policy areas. But I did write about this thing in kids and tech. And I said at the time, we, you know, kids under 16, I said then, shouldn't have smartphones. You can give them other phones to stay in touch, but smartphones, bad idea is the screams. And so I see all this going on. And I think, yeah, I have a gut matter or whatever. What's that, or YouTube? I think they're coming for as well. They're coming for YouTube. That's interesting. Yeah, they are. There's already been a couple. And this episode is brought to you by Blue Choo. Man, let's talk about Blue Choo. They're early the number one brand for better sex. But what they're doing with Blue Choo Gold is completely next level. Gold is a four in one formula designed to make your bedroom noisy again. Obviously it gets you hard, like you're back in your 20s. And everything is handled 100% online. But gold boosts your arousal, getting you ready for sex physically and mentally. Plus it dissolves under your tongue for faster absorption so you get that spontaneous energy back. Look at the stats. Gold is three times stronger, five times faster, and eight times longer lasting than old school methods. Blue Choo Gold is the real deal. Right now, by two months of Blue Choo Gold and get the third free with my code, Rogan. You'll also receive free overnight shipping. Head over to bluechoo.com for details and important safety information. Check it out. This ad and the products being advertised are intended for a United States audience. Well, that's like coming for television though. And it's like, I know it's weird. You're created television. I think it's the screens though. Right, but the screen's the problem, right? It's not the content creators. That's what I'm saying. And then if they are coming after YouTube, then they're kind of coming after me, right? Because like, I'm making people addicted to listening to people talk. Exactly. How are you gonna say that that's bad? The four state seek substantial financial penalties, reports differ on the precise figure. With recent reporting describing the state's position is roughly 200 billion. While meta has cited a possible exposure as high as 1.4 trillion, the ultimate penalty if meta loses would be determined by the court. They also want court ordered changes to Facebook and Instagram, potentially including parental verification for teen accounts, changes to recommendation algorithms characterizes dopamine manipulating, removing or limiting like counts, infinite scroll auto play, appearance altering filters, multiple accounts and disappearing content such as stories. What? People love that. I know. So that's what a really mic for a manage. Yeah, but disappearing content such as stories is kind of interesting sometimes. Like my friend Adam Greentree, he's a bow hunter and he goes hunting and his Instagram stories depict each day of these hunts and it's really fascinating because he takes these crazy adventures where he goes deep into the Colorado Rockies by himself for like 28 days and he's like camping out in the snow and it's cool. It's cool to watch. So it's not all negative. So our AI sponsor, perplexity, who is, we've pulled this information from, is saying that a loss could mean not only a very large financial judgment, but also mandated product, redesigns affecting how miners and potentially all users experience Instagram and Facebook. See, the problem is, as soon as the government gets involved in mandating product redesigns, we're fucked because they're not going to make it good for us. Totally agree. There's not a chance in hell. Yeah. It's just manipulating. It's, they're get involved and they'll probably get them to give them some money. And then that when you start getting in, you could imagine these bureaucrats sitting around microman, I mean, they've got too much of that already. 100%. Yeah. One of the things that we would be doing. So I get it's a problem, but this isn't the way to go. No. No. You know, there's a relaunch of my space that is, yes. And so my space is apparently attempting to relaunch and be algorithm free. And this is their idea. They're thinking the algorithms are designed to keep you engaged and get you dependent and get you hooked. And they're doing it by making you outreach for the most part. Right. And what they want to say is like, why don't you just find what you want to find and we'll have it on here? Okay. Which is probably a lot better. Yeah. Because, you know, my feed would be all things only that I'm interested in. Yeah. Not things that piss me off. Well, that was the big change they made to the, the newsfeed versus what you were doing. And incredibly confident, incredibly, like potent in its impact on children in particular. And me, a child, I'm a little kid. I fucking, I get hooked. We all get hooked. You get hooked on nonsense and just paying attention to stupid things. And it just eats time. Yeah. And that's what is, that's the commodity. The commodity is your attention. Yeah, exactly. But you've got with, I hear actually all the time, it's not discussed like a political issue. Like we talk about gas prices, whatever. But then I've done a lot of events last, whatever year and a half, like really a lot. Thousands and thousands. People sometimes, big events, small round tables, you hear a lot of people. And they, the first set of things they talk to you about are what you might cause they think you're a candidate. This is politics. Let's talk about taxes and gas prices and the kinds of things that you think they, you know, a sort of assumed to be part of the political conversation. But then when you raise something like that, like the kids and the screens, they're totally changing the conversation. And suddenly they're like intense and kind of really kind of angry in a totally different way. And what were it's like what are we supposed to do? It's like, it's like, with preparers, it's like with the screens and the social media. And then the video games and outs, AI and they're talking to AI. And then the AI is doing their homework. Like what are we supposed to do? I'm glad you brought up video games because video games are far more addictive than social media. Yes. Video games are insanely addictive. And no one's trying to get rid of that. Exactly. It's because these things can change the way people think. They can change public opinion and they can move people in certain directions. I attribute it to the rise of, you know, the democratic socialists. I attribute it to the rise. I mean, it's a lot of this manipulation. These ideas like people are really getting, oh, maybe being socialist is cool. Yeah. It's all coming out of social media. 100%. It's not natural that people are sitting around, you know, reading marks and going, what a great idea. Like let's implement this. They're not doing that. Yeah. Very few of these quote unquote Marxist that you find on social media are even aware of the consequences. The historical consequences of these strategies and what it ultimately leads to, which is like checkers. It's like real simple. Like you're going to have a military that controls everything you do as soon as you give up everything to the state. Well, the state has the guns and you have nothing. Exactly. And then they tell you what to do. They tell you what to do. It sucks. It doesn't mean that that's the way to do it because capitalism is brutal. Yeah, capitalism needs some fucking guardrails. That's for sure. Everything needs to be. But you've got like, no, I totally agree. Like I always joke about it, but it's kind of true. Is that like, I'm darnie with the state run grocery stores. Like we had that. When I was a kid, I literally went to them in Hungary. It was a communist state. There was only state run grocery stores. I saw them. There's one like at the end of the block where my grandma lived. And I would go there in the morning to get whatever it was. And it's just terrible. Like it's really, I'm very torn on social safety nets. I think we should have them because I think a person who's down on their lock where things go wrong, like a woman who has children and her husband dies. She doesn't have an income. And now, oh my god, I have to feed these children. Yeah, we should have social safety nets. I also think social safety nets encourage people to rely on them and have zero ambition. I think both those things are true. Well, that's why I've always been against, I can see the argument for, but I've always been against this universal basic income type thing. There's an argument for it where it's like quite a low level. And that's the original guy that I think these dog you for that was on the right Milton Friedman. Yes. And Charles Murray, I think also argued for it. Coming from the right, but their version of it was to replace everything else. So you wouldn't have any other benefits. You wouldn't have any other government services. Right, no Medicaid, nothing. Just an amount of money based from it is very simple, less bureaucratic. And that's it. But this is not what's being argued. No, I think that would actually probably be financially more efficient because you would radically reduce the amount of government. Exactly. And the bureaucracy. Yes. Radically reduce the amount of people that have control over other people. Exactly. You would say, listen, we're going to cut out the middle, man. And just give them money to people. Yes. That's not a bad idea. So I had a, I go, and it was very funny in that, like you say, these things before you ever imagine being a candidate and they come back and get sort of twisted. Part of the problem with welfare is, and this is going to sound completely like I'm contradicting myself, but it's not how funny. It barely live. Well, this is what I was exactly what I think. So I was in that book, I think in that book, the 2015 book, more human. I had this idea based on what you're talking about, which is actually for a lot of people, things like the minimum wage for example, is just you can't live on it, especially like in California now. But in a lot of places, it's so low. You cost a so high, can't live on it. And there's a lot of people working really hard, like not lazy on the couch playing with us. Seriously hard working people, often too jobs, who can't live on what they make. It's like really wrong, I think, if it works, it's hard to live on it. So I had this idea which was the business-friendly living wage. And the idea was you increased the minimum wage to a living wage, which is calculated. What do you think that would be? Well, in Cal, it's by area. It's different everywhere. In California, in a lot of places, it'd be incredibly high, a lot of really high level. $30 or $40 an hour. Because you've got now in certain counties in California, more than, I think it goes up the whole time, the official government level for low income is $100,000 a year. Low income. Isn't that crazy? It's crazy, because it costs us that. When I was a kid, if you made $100,000, you were killing it. I know. My dad makes a hundred grand. Whoa. OK, so in my campaign, I had this, one of my first things was no state income tax under 100 grand. I grew the working class tax. A lot of people nationally said, that's so high. Why are you rewarding rich people? Actually, the feedback we got in the primary was that's too low. And there's a ton of people in California making out in 120. That sort of thing. You can barely live. Because everything's so expensive, if you're an L.A. or somewhere expensive. So we've raised it to 150 tax-free. But going back to the. California making out in 120, that sort of thing who can barely live because everything's so expensive you're an L.A. or somewhere expensive. So we've raised it to 150 tax free. But going back to the living wage thing, that's obviously really tough for a business to pay that kind of level. I used to run by ran a restaurant. You know, you'd be killed by that kind of high thing. But at the same time as you've got businesses paying people for full-time work that they can't live the businesses are also paying taxes, payroll tax, all this stuff. They're paying to the government. And then the government is taking it and handing it back to the workers in benefits and welfare. So my thing was why don't you just cut out the middle man and have the businesses pay the workers not the government. And then the net effect for businesses is about the same. Well, that would be so they're paying their workers more. Is it the same amount? Like are they literate? That doesn't make any sense because like what is minimum wage in California right now? Well, it's just it's just gone up. It depends what you're looking. So $15, $16 and a bit. And then for fast food, it's 20. And they wanted it for. That was a pretty simple thing. And a lot of people pushed back against that. And they wound up, they wound up cutting a lot of jobs. Yeah, that went through. So it's $20 for fast food work. And then then immediately cut a bunch of jobs. Exactly. And put in automation. And then I feel like there's got to be some jobs that are entry level jobs for kids. Yes. And that's really important. They used to be supposed to make a living off of that. You're supposed to be a kid that's learning how to work. You show up on time. You know, you get your paycheck. You realize the taxes get cut out of it. You're like, what? Exactly. All that stuff. Like it's good for kids to have. But once you get past entry level jobs, then, okay, like if someone's a landscaper or someone's like doing this is a job. You work 40 hours a week, paying someone $15 an hour to work 40 hours a week is kind of brutal. Yeah. That's what I'm saying. It's horrible. Exactly. You barely can get by. But the, but because we've built all of this bureaucracy, certainly in Cal, well, I really know is California. And just the level of the government in all its forms is so big. You're paying all these taxes and the taxes are coming out in all these hidden ways. Gas taxes, housing taxes that they don't call a housing tax, but it's there. Everywhere you look, they've got these things that they're charging you. Right. But which makes everything more expensive. And what do you get for it? This bloated bureaucratic government that's not actually helping it is actually making it harder to run a business, harder to build anything. And so I think that's, and this is the, I used to call it this doom loop, the Democrats who in charge, even they, they get it. Right. They get that people are really struggling. People can't afford stuff. So what's their response? Oh, we got to, you know, make, give them more welfare, and we got to take, put taxes up in order to get more money to redistribute. But that just makes everything more expensive. They never think about, well, why don't we just cut the costs? Why don't we just reduce the amount that we're taking so that people can have more? Yeah, but then they would have to cut out their slush fund because that's really what it is. It's a big, big-ass slush fund. One of the things that we pointed out was that the number of people that are moving to California and even living in California, it shrank, but government doubled. Yes. It's, there's so many insane facts like that. Right. Well, they say, oh, we've created so many jobs like really have you have you really created a actual job or have you figured out another way to increase the government and make more taxes work for whatever the fuck. Exactly. NGO you have or nonprofit you have or like someone pointed out that there's a sky, sky is really funny reels on Instagram and how much things cost versus like what you could get for. And you know, he was talking about like some new thing they're doing for the convention center. It's like a $5 billion renovation and he was like listing all of the different things. One of them that you could give like every single person on skid row some fucking preposterous amount of money. And it's just realized like, oh, they don't want to fix any of this. Like the people that are working for the homeless who was talking about the average salary was like $800,000. There was just one last week. This woman runs a homeless nonprofit $1.6 million salary. How does not profit? Non-profit. Exactly. That's what it means killing it. Exactly. There's another one. She's a millionaire. There's another one yesterday. He's like, I don't know some business like, business again. It's a nonprofit $2.6 million. Yeah. You know, it's just, and here's the most important thing. The homelessness only got worse. Like if the private sector, imagine if you were a CEO of a company that was just losing insane amounts of money and never completing its tasks, never doing the internet set out to do this. This is the main thing. I think it's like the more I look at it, the more insane it is. And everyone just looks at it. And I don't know. Once I've ever pointed this stuff out, like they all just, the government just makes everything so expensive in California. Everyone says, oh, it's so expensive. What are we going to do? We'd better give the more welfare benefits because we better have a billionaire wealth tax. With a winner, wealth tax, deals money from the most. Exactly. The richest people without addressing fraud and waste at all. But by the way, the richest people already pay about half the income tax, the top 1%. Yes. So there's a small number of people in California alone that are responsible for an extraordinary amount of the tax base. Yeah, just a very small number of people. And you're scaring them away. And if they just, they don't have that mentality of cutting costs like a normal business. Yet paid no matter what. Exactly. This is what I said during COVID. I said, I think the mayor should get paid dependent upon the GDP of the city. Yeah. So like if the city, like if you lose 70% of the restaurants, which like Los Angeles did during, yes, Garcetti should have lost 70% of his paycheck. You should have, if you lose like 70% of businesses, you should lose 70% of your income. And I guarantee you they would be more friendly to business if that happened. But this, exactly. And they don't care. And this is what happens. I think when you've got this one party rule thing that's been going over those 16 years now, they've run everything. They don't care because they think they'll be in power forever. And it just doesn't matter. And it seems like they will. Look, look what they did to Spencer Pratt. I know, it's crazy. And what they did to Spencer Pratt was so transparent that even Democrats admit there's something weird about the fact that Nithia Raman, all the sudden got way more votes than Karen Bass, way more in the mail-ins. And people voted for an increase in taxes. I know. It's just that doesn't make any sense. Nobody votes for an increase in taxes. And actually in recent years in California, anything like that has been voted down. And just in the last year. Only the mail-in ballots that turned it. Well, this is the second. People bring it up the whole time. And I say, yeah, whatever. They've made it legal. This is not illegal. And the scam is so bad. We've looked into a few of these. We were just, you know, through the year, we've been following some this money. It's just everywhere you look. So cannabis, right? They legalize cannabis, prop 64 in California. And there's a tax. And the tax is to put part of the selling it to the public was we're going to have the tax and it's going to pay for substance abuse prevention. It's not nice. Yeah. So they're they they're we looked into it $350 million of that goes to this nonprofit, which would some nice sounding name about health. And then you actually track the money. They give out these little grants, million each, million here, 750,000 to 500 or so other non-profits. And then you look at what they do, voter registration, ballot harvesting, all of this. I mean, this is what they do. And it's and we're paying for it. And there's so many examples. We've just found a few of them. I mean, remember, they've doubled the budget of California more than do in the last 10 years. These are the numbers. This year, the budget is just over 350 billion, the total budget. 10 years ago, it was 170 and everything's worse. Crazy. It's sober. There's my other favorite example is that, and there's so many, I just every day you learn about these crazy things. Prisons, right? They've been shutting the prisons, which I totally disagree with because whatever. That's a different story. But in the time they they basically cut the prison population, it's not quite half, but nearly. The budget has doubled. Well, I mean, what is going on? It's so transparent. Like, look what they did in Los Angeles with the fire relief money. Yes. Yeah, fire rate, that was discussed. So disgusting. You had people good-hearted people wanting to help their own money that's supposed to be charity. Yes. And it's going into this political slosh point. It went all of it into nonprofits. Yeah. And not just one nonprofit, like 200 different nonprofits. Exactly. Spencer Pratt laid it all out like how they're young. Yeah. And no money went to anybody who lost their home. None. And, and, which is, should be illegal. That's not the only legalized all of this. That's the point. And so I always say, yeah, we've got this system, but there's only one answer in advance of being able to get empowerment, do something about it is we just got to get every vote. We've got to get every vote. And I know I people look at this race and say, well, you're never going to wear in its hopeless. I don't think that's true. I think that actually people are really pissed off. If you give them a sense that we can really, this is not a hopeless cause. And I think we're showing that we've just got a, I mean, I've got this guy running against me who's just a complete joke. I mean, he's who is it? He's called Javier Becerra. He was Biden's health secretary. He was, I mean, I want to say one thing before I'd say the most important thing about him. But since we've been just been having a go at him, telling the truth about what he did as Biden's health secretary, his scores been coming down with not that much effort from us. And we're going to have money. We're a scrappy startup, right? They've got this big machine, the government unions, they just, you know, roll on. He's, he's like the first poll that came out in the, in the race was just off the primary. It looks, it's over once the point, you know, 61 36, he had 61. I had 36. The next one is like 55. This is just the other week, 55. I think I had 37. There's one we just heard about where the gaps under 10%. So no one wants this to go on in California. There's a majority who want to get rid of this. But it's just been this sense that it's impossible. And we just have to put up with it or leave. And I think we got it. If we change that attitude, I think people are going to vote this, this regime out. It's so bad. Anyway, we've seen the, the map, the electoral map that they put out from 2020 versus 2024. And the difference being, you look at all the counties that went red. Yeah, that used to be blue, where people are freaked out. The problem is these high population urban areas where people live in these liberal bubbles, which is Los Angeles is the craziest version of that. And Los Angeles county is 23% of the vote in the world of California. Let's put this into perplexity. As perplexity, how many people in Los Angeles are on SSRI's? Okay. I didn't think that's where you were going. I would like to know. Okay. Well, I think there's a lot of people that are, they're medicated. And it's, it's part of what helps them agree to this nonsense is that they're in this zombie, catatonic state from antidepressants and anti-psychotics and anti this and anti that and anxiety medication and they're fucking cloudy. They don't see things. And they're surrounded by this echo chamber of people that only agree with them. No reliable public count of current SSRI users, specifically in Los Angeles. But a reasonable rough estimate for Los Angeles county is on the order of 500,000 to 700,000 adults, not a precise head count. Now, how many people are in Los Angeles? It's 10 million in the county. Okay. I think that's way low. I think that's way low. I bet it's 10 times that. I bet it's everyone. I think no, the all bullshit aside, I bet there's a a few million. Los Angeles county has roughly 7.88 million adults. If about 11 to 17% take antidepressants, roughly 60 to 70% of antidepressants, the user's taking SSRI. The implied range is 530 to 950. So maybe a million. I think it's probably a few million. I know a lot of people that are on a man. I think it's like more represented in Los Angeles. And there's also this idea that you need a medication because you have an imbalance. You need medication. It's over medication. That's really bad. Well, also, the imbalance thing has been disproven. Yeah. It's not real. That's not what it is. And then there's also there's a reality of your physical being. Okay. If you will live a sedentary lifestyle, you eat terrible food. Your physical body is going to feel like shit. And you're not going to be happy. That's just how it works as a human being totally right. That's it. It's like, if you're feeling down or pissed off like literally don't do some exercise. My friend is on a mod who's, uh, you'll see him tonight at the mothership hilarious comedian. He has a great bit about like the people that are in these commercials that are playing basketball. They take the medication and another playing basketball and drinking water and having fun. He goes, yeah, that's the actual solution. Yeah. It's not taking me as a pleasure. Right. It's fucking do something athletic. Yeah. Get active. Thanks. Road for honor. Have a community that you enjoy hanging out with. Like that's what keeps people from being depressed. Exactly. And they've been sold as bill of goods that you have a chemical imbalance in your brain. Well, that that narrative completely was never supported by science and has now been completely dismissed. Yeah. That's not true. We're just doing it still. I mean, finally, enough. That was what I, I, I, I, one of the chapters in that book, 2015, but more human was about health. And it was all that. That's what I wrote about, which is this is crazy. We've got an, in fact, when I was in 10 Downing Street, you, you know, you've, I was that senior advisor to the prime minister and you're getting a mania, I focused on domestic policy. That's why I focused on and you're there. You're at, you know, in 10 Downing Street, you get meeting people. You can have meetings with kind of everyone will come in and have a meeting. And I was really focused. We got the national health service, which is what the left one here, the Medicare, the single payer healthcare, whatever. That's what there is in the UK. And it's funded by the government by taxpayers, 100%. And so it's part of the budget, which is one of the problems. It's always competing for money against everything else. And so there's a real reason to try and get the cost down because you're funding it out of the budget for everything else. And so health promotion is, or should be a really big part of it. And I wanted to really do much more on that that you should actually use their national health service to try and make people healthy instead of all the sickness stuff. So I had all these meetings trying to understand, you know, the royal college of this, the royal college of that, all the cancer people, all they all came in. It was so hilarious after kind of months of these meetings of like, what do we need to do to make people healthy? It's the simple basic things in the end. What you just said, it's like diet, nutrition, exactly. The healthy, take out size, sleep enough, drink water, exactly. All of those things. Like all these geniuses are so handsome, whatever. Honestly, it's so basic. But then I was just saying today there's this awful story about the mother who killed the children, awful story, the mother. And she had really bad depression after the postpartum depression and was asking for help and all this. And they just kept giving her this medication. And she was saying, I think there are texts to her mother saying, this new medication they've got me on is really making me feel even more anxiety. And I don't know what's going on. Help help help. And they, and they, they showed all the medication she was on in the run up to this. It's shocking. Like so shocking. Just the amount of stuff they're loading her up with that must have gone over the edge. I mean, when you look at the commercials for these things and then you see this possible side effects. Like who in their right mind would take something for depression, which has side effects, which caused a suicidal ideation. What? I thought you were during depression. Your side effect is I might want to kill myself. Like it's like this is a cure for depression too. Blow your brains out. No more depression. Like it's a cartel. It's a cartel in the United States. I mean, it is a sanctioned tax. It's publicly traded. It's a fucking cartel. And they buy off politicians and they pass the regulations. I see not just on this, on everything. Again, it's just an eye open. I kind of suspected it. But when you see just how cynical it is, this kind of corrupt, I don't know what you want to call, you know, machine politics. This, I don't know, in Sacramento where they literally buy what they want. They buy the legislators that pass the bills that help their interest, whatever it is. And that's why nothing really changes. And no one knows what's going on. No one follows it. There's all these laws they pass that end up with things happening in the real world that normal person would say, how the fuck did that happen? Exactly. Well, that's, you know, three years ago someone put in a bill that was probably written by the lobbyist for whoever it was, that even the legislators who put their name on it probably never read it. And then suddenly it's the law and all these bad things happen. And that's what's going on. Now, what could you do differently if you get an office? Like how much of this crazy and tangled machine can you unwind? Let's imagine. Yeah, yeah, not imagine. I thought a big wake up. They go, Steve Hilton's making a lot of sense. Let's vote him in. And then even the liberals, like Steve really run out and vote you in, it's got to be too big to rig. Yes, because the mail in ballots. By the way, can you, can you believe? I know we'll get into it. But did you see Kamala Harris the other day? No, she was at some conference or whatever, doing her sort of maybe over on for president. Yeah, good luck. I know. The last one was pretty successful for only spending 1.4 billion dollars. She's very, um, she lost every single swing state. Like, she's, it's very funny. There's, I sort of talk around a lot because my guy, Pacerra, he was asked the same question that she was asked. Do you remember when she went on the view? Right. Right. And it was like, well, what would you do for him? She's, oh, nothing comes to mind. Really? You haven't thought of it. So he was asked, Pacerra, my opponent and the guy who's on CNN, the guy says, look, it's obvious things aren't going well. To be fair, the C and the, the interview said, look, we got the highest. I've got me listed a few of the things, highest unemployment rate in America, which by the way, no one can believe it. We have the highest unemployment rate of all 50 states, highest poverty rate, cost of living's a nightmare. You know, what would you have done differently? Um, he says, well, it can't be that bad because people are still coming to Disneyland and the beaches. It's what he said. And then, said, well, so no policy changes? No. Anyway, Carmela was at this thing the other day. And she starts talking about the election and how, and I don't know if she wasn't aware that Trump and Maga had this slogan that was a massive part of their thing, too big drink. So she starts saying it as if it was a completely new thing. She said it the other day, you know, the thing that we have to do is make sure we get a really, you know, we got to get every, well, you know, to come in a phrase, we have to make it too big to rig. Like she said, no way. She said it. No way. Yeah. So she's alleging that it was rigged the last time. I have no idea what she's talking about. Like I don't know what amount of election fraud there is, but it's not zero. It's not zero. It's never been zero. And the real weird one for me was how many more votes Biden got in 2020 than any other president ever. We have a lot of work to do because, you know, these folks are cheating. They're trying to rig the system. They're trying to draw maps all of it. What, you mean stuff that the Democrats already got? It's so hilarious. It's crazy. We have to make it too big to rig. We have to turn out in big numbers, jump all of these obstacles. They're trying to throw our way. We have to make it too big to rig. What are you saying? Like how are they cheating? Like how are she alleging they're cheating? Everybody's the best. The idea that that's the best they can do is so insane. It's so wild. It's so wild. And it's because if you want to run for politician, they will, if you don't follow their narrative and their, their plan to a fucking tee, they're going to come for you. And they're going to destroy you. And it's usually some creepy sexual thing. Are you going to find someone who says that you did something to them in college or high school or whatever it is. And they'll come up with as many things and throw them your ways as many things as they can find and they get rid of you. And they get rid of all of them. I mean, lucky they don't think I've got any chance of winning. I think that's why they've done that. But just just on that though, it's interesting. Basically, this whole system, this corrupt thing that I've encountered. And I don't want to lose your question about what I would do. I've thought about that a lot. But it just, it's a, it's sort of amazing, but not amazing. I knew it was like this, but to see it is something else, the scale of it. Yes. So even things you might not imagine like, okay, a couple of years, so there's the chamber of commerce, right? It's called Cal Chamber in California. And it's all the big businesses. And like it's a running a business in California is an absolute nightmare. That's why they're all leaving. That's why Elon left. That's why so many companies live. Ever last in and out. And every day, there's a new one that's announced. And then every day, I meet business owners, big small medium also who say we're just hanging on to see if you can make it. And if you don't wear out, right? Every day chief executive magazine has an annual survey of business conditions. But like, yeah, I think it was out in April, California 50th out of 50 states. Okay. And I think it's been like that for 12, 13 years. So it's like a disaster that what's going on, the bacero who's running against the year that out of 50 states for business climate. So Alaska's better every state in America, better not just to code us out the code of Florida Tennessee. All right. So you would think you would think that whether you've got a choice between two people, right? One of whom explicitly says, I'm not going to change anything. That's bacero. And me who's someone with business, most of my career has been in business. When you do the ballot, you're allowed three words to describe yourself. I actually wanted to do it fairly because I've done a bunch of different things. And so I went through every year since I left Oxford 1990s, 36 years. And the majority of my career has been in business. And most of those years running my own businesses. So I put small business. That's the three, what small business owner. And like in a choice between that, you would think the California Chamber of Commerce, which represents business, would obviously want the guy who's pro business instead of the guy who's going to keep up this anyway, there's the money still there for now and they're getting that money. Well, that is the, this is this kind of, yeah, it's all of that crowd, right? And we have these endorsement meetings and then they pick him, they, they endorse it, they are the guy. And then they say, we think their statement was so full of shit. It was like, oh, we, it's time for unifying blah, blah, some completely bullshit political thing. Now of course, because I went in there, I said, we got a change direction. The policies are hurting business, whatever. I just said what I think. And they went for him because they, all they actually care about is the power. And they think he's going to win. And so they want to be in with him. Yeah. And then the other one that was like that that was in a way even more shocking was the police. So the police, whatever it's called, police, poor act, the police officers, association, something, they union. That same kind of thing, they, you go to them and you, you know, try and get their endorsement. By the way, I said at the beginning of this whole process, it's a waste of time because they, they, they will only care about their thing that they want to get more money for whatever it is. And so I don't want to give them that because that's wrong. And so they weren't endorsed me. I'm just telling you, sure enough, this meeting. And I'm completely on the side of the law and order thing. It's gone crazy, the defund the police, the insanity of how they deal with crime. We got a reversal, that prison closure is these things. And he's not said anything about that. He's just more of the same insanity. They endorse him. And then they told us why because he promised to deliver on the one thing they really cared about, which is some bill that would increase their pensions. Why don't you agree to that, because we, the, the pension, one of the reasons that the taxes are so high and the, and, and everything is like, for example, you look at schools. Every RICO parents are saying, what's going on? We pay the highest taxes anywhere, like state income tax, property tax, all these taxes. And then we, we have to pay, the schools are asking us to pay for basics of supplies, like paper, books, like cleaning materials. And the lottery money is supposed to go to schools as well. And they're saying what is going on. Parents are really furious about it. One of the reasons is because of the way they've done the pensions for the teachers. You know, you want people to have good retirement. That's true. But like a fifth, I think is about a fifth of the money before it's even spent in the schools goes to the pensions. It's a really, really bad situation. I'm torn because I think they deserve pensions. They take the police. And I think I like to know what percentage of the budget. I mean, think about, listen, let's, let's talk about money that's gone to places where it vanished, like the homeless, $24 billion. Yeah, at least, at least. And even though they've tried getting audit of it, Newsome vetoed that, stop them. He vetoed it exactly twice, right? And, and, in LA, there was a parallel in LA, there was a lawsuit that ended up with the judge demanding a similar audit. And the estimate was just for LA, it was $2 billion. And Caron Bass vetoed the audit in LA. Let's imagine that $2 billion instead went to fund the police. Yes. Better training, you know, better conditions, better morale, better pensions, higher quality of people that you're hiring. Totally agree with that. We need to massively increase the numbers of police. Right. Now, imagine what an impact that would have on the campman on enforcing these laws. Like, you already have laws. They're just not enforcing 100%. You're not supposed to, the homeless, the homeless are illegal. There they go. That's what I always say. My first point on my plan is enforce the law. They're illegal. Well, imagine what it's done to real estate in downtown. You know, it was downtown real estate group, business group that filed that lawsuit that I was talking about for LA. legal well imagine what it's done to real estate in downtown you know i was downtown real estate group business group that filed that lawsuit that i was talking about for a lay exactly lost angelis is the only place in the country that has a useless downtown it's a major city's in the one i forgive i mean forgive me if you have a great business in downtown and you love the funky aspect of being there's wonderful restaurants and yes i've traveled to them but it's fucking sketchy it's get i took my kids wants to get donuts in downtown and we're walking the street like every step of the way you like uh... is this guy gonna attack us is that guy crazy i literally had a night we got in from somewhere down to a staying downtown right by city hall uh... and got in quite late i wanted something to eat the hotel didn't have a minute whatever and so i just walk around trying to find it's a Saturday night but it's not super late like eight nine p zombies like she sees it's a bit shit and piss everywhere and the public health problem and you walk around you think i thought it's the first it's the second city of america with the richest country in the world this is and with the richest state i mean you're being ripped off like that and and this is what we end up with let's talk about just like a on the on the police that i mean l a p d is saying that by the time the limpixes two years away they will have half the number of officers that they should have half and yet our taxes are the highest in the country as they've just they've just increased the taxes in l a local sale up sales tax go not what i was getting to was imagine skid row so skid row is roughly fifty something blocks right yeah so fifty blocks where no one wants a buy building where no one wants to put up a business no one wants a lease of building for ten years if if it's you've got encampments right in front of it like what you can't make clean them up you can't tell them to move you can't ask them to not shit on your porch just on the news nothing you could do so just think about all the tax revenue that's being lost all the business being lost and all of those areas downtown that is completely unsafe and contaminated it's it's just unbelievable the last time i went i've been a few times we went with this i don't know if they've destroyed the word non-profit now i don't even want to say that like an actual charity like a really nice a real one a real one who dumped beautiful work it started off they were trying to save the dogs and what they're doing with the dogs is just unbelievable using the dogs to test their drugs they use the dogs to make sure the drugs don't have to discuss it anyway so they started off with that it was just a woman who's driving by and saw a dog in distress these are your few years ago and around that has built this beautiful charity it's going there we were there on a Sunday they're giving out clothes and stuff to help people and she knows all the people but this time for some reason i was even more infuriated than before because it's like if you're the mayor of LA or the governor of california and this is going on what are you doing how could you do anything else right before cleaning this up it's so well it's there when they got there and it's sort of accepted that the kids are going particular is always gonna be there so bad it's been bad for a long time you know i did fear factor in downtown LA we filmed a lot of our episodes in downtown LA because there was a lot of abandoned buildings because it's okay real that's a big part of it but also lost angel's lost a lot of its manufacturing just kind of like evaporated for whatever reasons so uh one time i was driving home and i took the wrong turn and i was like what the fuck is this and it was just an entire street filled with people and cardboard boxes and tents and garbage everywhere just piles everywhere i was like this is great and this was like 2004 yeah 2005 maybe it was bad back then it's just tucked away into this old place you know we looked at it um there's a documentary about the sissel hotel because there was a woman who drowned in one of the tanks and apparently they thought that she was murdered but then when they got the surveillance footage it seemed like she had a schizophrenic episode she stopped taking her medication and she jumped into the tank and drowned in there so it was this whole thing of what the sissel hotel used to be like and that these people that come from other countries they go oh we're gonna rent this hotel in downtown LA must be nice it's a historic hotel it's been around since the 1835 or whatever the the fuck it is yeah oh this should be great and then you get there you're like holy fuck you're in the middle of skid row and it was part of the documentary was explaining how bad this area got it's so bad and and it's also there's something about the the just the squalor the filth the the just the total disrespect they have medieval diseases that are emerging yeah we have a scene in like the 100 years it's unbelievable and i just think that it's it's amazing to me it's truly amazing that this just rolls on and like nothing happens right it's on the state and national emergency scandal of the highest purple you know but no one goes there that's the thing as long as it stays contained as this was this was with this documentary was alleging is that the practice of moving people to skid row started a long time ago and what it was is to clean up Los Angeles and Beverly Hills they'd find vagrants they grab them bring them to downtown drop them yes that's where how it got started and then they kept them they can they literally contained them there yep not anymore i mean you know i have to where well they don't have to because now they know this is the place where you can go and you can get drugs and you can get food and you get drugs from the government i mean that's the point the government gives them drugs yes they do it from this state what's cool do you know that's harm reduction they call it what do they give them what drugs they give um they opioids they give them opioids as a substitute for fentanyl to the same or what kind of opioids i don't know if they have like methadone or which is not really technically you know be it i can't remember we went there um they wouldn't let us in actually we tried to film inside there's a guy just did get inside Christopher Rufa from Manhattan Institute and he got and he made a film about the crack pipes they're giving out or whatever they give out crack pipes yeah he did a little i mean i don't know if that was a he made of i don't know how i do see it myself caring for those people but it's just ridiculous you've got but it's everywhere it's not just skid that's the thing that's so like this i mean i'm on the road the whole time i see the whole state like probably not many people do and just there's something about the degradation the squalor in so many people are not everywhere of course it's beautify love california i mean it's gorgeous still still a lot of places yeah but even that whole lot more breaking in entering exactly a whole lot more home invasions the home of ages a huge thing i mean that's why we want other things again we just trying to make a difference here you know you've got one particular thing with these home invasions they're all wearing masks now it's like a really big part which didn't used to be the case and so we've been working on a plan that if you get in enhancements for your sentencing just recovering yourself up because we've got to try and that's just like they're not there's no interest in trying to not only does there's seems to be an interest in letting people out of jail who've committed violent crimes which i would only do if i wanted to destroy a city if i it's crazy if you wanted to destroy a city you would do it exactly the way they're doing it and then they would hire the most progressive d a's who are willing to let people out no matter what and then you use a bunch of words like racism systemic racism whatever the discrimination that is a reason why to you don't this is where is why mike has robbed 99 people over the last 12 years and then that well the one thing that's good news though is the new d a's pretty good Nathan that's good he's good he's good i supported him he's i saw him the other night so he's really doing a good job shows that you can make a change actually right i mean look he's up against a whole system in the political system which is still captured by that kind of insane ideology and so much of what you see going wrong in california is exactly that is ideology over anything that's practical yes yeah and it's also you have to adhere to the narrative yes or you will be punished and so everyone scared so they say a bunch of things that they you know they'd be think make sense there was a really like unbelievable example of it there was a a democrat state legislator i think somewhere like santa cruise somewhere like that there's a couple of years ago who voted the wrong way on a bill that one of the government unions was pushing i can't remember the details but it was that it like offended the maybe it's the university teacher something like that a democrat and then they then funded the campaign of the republican just to teach them not to step out of line you it's amazing just well there's a bunch of republicans that you know they like to call rhinos you know that you know republican and name only there's a lot of those folks that it's they're basically Trojan horses you know like i think we have a real problem in this country where there's only two parties you know i i just i think it's crazy there's so many people like me for instance that agree with a lot of the things that the left pushes and agree with many of the things that the right pushes but things that some of the things the right pushes are fucking ridiculous and some of the things the left pushes are fucking ridiculous but you're too much yeah and you're defined by the worst members of each party you're defined by the dumbest maga people versus the fucking you know the portland people it's like these are these are your options you have to completely ridiculous people who believe in non-binary folk and then you've people that are you know think this is a Christian nation and we should kick out all the Muslims like yeah so we it's it's interesting because i'm out i thought about this when not not that i didn't think about it that much but there are a few people because i think for what i'm about to say it doesn't work but a few people so you should run as an independent you shouldn't run as a real network yeah and you know i am independent minded and i i never run for office i'm not part of this machine i don't i'll just say what i think especially because no one thinks i'm gonna win i might as well just go for it say what i think but um i exactly right you won't win yeah you won't win there's just no way like when barbie Kennedy was telling me that he was gonna run as an independent i was like huge yeah but like like like the selling book you fucking can't win do you know Michael shall i? he's fantastic yeah he's great and he ran for governor twice as an independent yeah and i remember yeah i tried to help i put him on my show i think that was the one yeah i mean he's you know it's good for his career oh i can he and it gives him an opportunity to speak his mind he says a lot of very very interesting and intelligent things yes he's great yeah i mean he's he's great at exposing a lot of horseshit yeah you know he's really good at that and he's very meticulous a good journalist no i'm really doing it because i i don't don't laugh i really believe that i can win for real well you might be able to because calforn is that fucked calforn is that fucked i think there's a lot of people look we lived in a very liberal area when i lived in calforn yeah everyone was very liberal and it was normal it was like it was normal liberal like what what it used to mean like you believed in gay rights you believed in women's rights you relieved in civil rights normal stuff you believed in a social safety net normal stuff like that was what it used to mean to be a little bill clinton liberal that's right the nineties if you listen to bill clinton talk today he sounds like he's running for a republican nobody and on immigration he's a more maggher hill hill hill hill was the most she let you there's one the other day where she was the i hadn't seen before which was so it's like we can't have all these illegal immigrants and and we have to and it was about the health can we we can't be giving free health care to illegal immigrants because we cannot have incentives for more illegal immigrants to come republican talking point amazing crazy what it just shows you it's all it's not real like this idea that if you're on the left you're supporting science you're supporting civil rights you support it they're telling you that to get your like those as i think it can steal money that's all it is that's i mean as soon as you accept that you realize like oh both parties are completely full of shit they just fuck you in different ways there's definitely at the one thing i've noticed there's um in yeah in the most of in in Sacramento that and then the legislature they've i think they're just i don't know either they don't believe it they're they've just been beaten down and so you've had this they've just gone along with it but actually now you've got a few republicans in california and their friends of mine and we're working together you're not heard of anything you know people like caldamio david tongue apart alima sado the new leader in the assembly really actually have got this you know we we're real kind of friends and allies in fighting back against the corruption that's the big thing i think that you learn when you do is the the interest groups the big business the big unions that they just completely captured the government and and i think it's fair to say the republicans have been part of that but there's a group of us now who really don't buy it and we're fighting back i think we can't make a big difference if we get you know if we can they've got a two-thirds majority in the legislature that's they call it a super majority it's been like that for more than ten years so they can do whatever they want the democrats and the republicans have been kind of irrelevant if we can just you know win a few more seats so they don't have a super majority and if i can get elected and then we can start to chip away at it for sure i think it's important to not let either party have complete total control that's exactly right and i don't think that's right i don't think this this is just the democrats i think if the republicans are in the same position we have a unique another unique set of corruption and problems that would be similar yeah they'd be finding other ways to steal money i mean this is the fundamental hundred percent agree i mean that's where i say to democrats and we you know we we we can see in some of the numbers i'm doing well with independence we're getting democrats come to my events one of the things i say is like it's just not healthy to have one party running everything and for the last sixteen years they in in california they've had all the statewide elected positions governor and the other ones attorney general whatever two-thirds majority in both legislative chambers every big city every big county the state supreme court six one democrat appointees they just rob a stamp what whatever they want and it's just not healthy and it gets into this mentality of arrogance where they just feel they can do whatever they want and no one's ever gonna you know stop them yeah that's where we're at and again if the republicans were in the same position of power you have a another different set of problems that was probably very similar because it's just how people operate when there's when they have control yeah they have complete it's just like if you have an authoritarian government yes that's exactly right similar kind of a situation you have no no one's challenging your position of power and you have to do whatever you want to do and then you have a bunch of people that funded your campaign and you have a bunch of money and then they're helping you out with this and business deals to your uncle and this and that yeah wait and you see i'll go right the same just now in Hungary with Victor Orban so i'd like to know Hungary well because it's my family still of that and it finally if it was 16 years he was in power same in line out of time as the Democrats in California and by the end it's all exactly what you're talking about like just unbelievable levels of corruption yeah and it's always if they have total control they're gonna be corrupt especially if they don't have any oversight if they can just get away with it like this homeless thing where they've lost a 24 billion dollars and the government could say no don't look into that stamp you can veto that how are you how is that legal how is it legal that you could veto something there was an actually the amazing thing about that is that it was even the the Democrat super majority the part that did that right so the process was the state auditor it was a republican legislator that asked the state auditor to look at it so it's initiated by republican state auditor publishes the report 24 billion missing they'd legislate as a whole which is two thirds Democrat run said we need a proper audit yes it was everyone crazy yeah because those Democrats weren't completely corrupt it's amazing you know you don't have to be completely corrupt to not look into that i know it's amazing and then the bullshit mis excuse that they come oh it's not necessary because of like oh it's not necessary to look at where 24 billion dollars went and not just didn't work but homelessness increased by substantial margin because the money the answer to the question is the very other I mean when we say that term homeless industrial complex yeah what is it you look at it it's basically got two parts to it you got the non-profits like we talked about that just keep getting the money for you know they've actually made it illegal to solve the problem so they've no it's not more joking they've it's illegal to for the state money to go to any of these organizations that require any kind of response from the homeless person so you can't require a diction treatment recovery anything like that job training nothing it's illegal it's called housing first so like obviously when you've got 80 percent and the fentanyl is a really big part yeah i did that it's a housing issue is so disastrous too so you got a non-profit but then the other part of it which is where actually the bulk of the money is going these crony developers there's a very small group of developers house builders that build these apartment units they called it permanent supportive housing the other you know shelter and they're they're charging up to I mean a local estimate was about 600,000 there are some in LA in the Bay Area that are 900,000 a million dollars per unit to build right I've got a friend that builds apartments in the Bay Area you know you said without all the government bullshit that goes around it the layers of nonsense that they put in if it's taxpayer money the union contracts that you got to use this kind of material the environmental all this stuff you could build it for a quarter like 250,000 per door they call it four times as much that's where the money's going and then you get the unit whatever they put the homeless person in there who's still addicted to fentanyl and as I went again with a real charity in Venice we went around a guy who's a recovered addict recovering addict and 23 years clean and he's actually trying to help people he actually hire you know he rents airbnbs and he does group recovery and they have a you know recovery program they do together he says like these guys that are getting the permanent supportive housing it's like a second home because they're going back to the street to buy drugs deal drugs because they're addicts yeah and you're not changing the behavior their addicts and they're mentally ill and so there's a massive influx of homeless people during the Reagan administration where they kind of like open the doors of the mental institution so we're not gonna fund this anymore which is for a public health and safety that is a fucking terrible idea yeah and they but then the other thing about that I completely agree is that they then that's been incorporated that idea that you can't have mental institutions and saying as soon as there's this kind of general sense that that's barbaric and you don't want people in these institutions and it's better to cab them cared in the community so that's incorporated into medicaid and so often with government you got to look at the money flows and one of the things that's still there is this rule called IMD institutions of mental disease and the IMD rule is that there's no reimbursement from federal medicaid to any treatment that happens in a facility with more than 16 beds it's very specific limit 16 beds because they don't it's all based on this philosophy of we don't want big mental institutions okay so that means there's no incentive to have modern large scale mental health care because that's all these small things because you don't get any money back if you're still there are also rightly suspicious of the potential for a medical health industrial complex definitely and then that would think of how many people imagine if they could just like have you ever seen that video over there's a guy who gets pulled over and the cops on the spot tell him that he's been evaluated as being mentally unwell and it needs to come in and the guy is completely common rational when he's talking to him and he's like well make an appointment and I'll go and get evaluated and he's like no we're gonna bring you in he's like what are you saying well you've been deemed unwell he's like by who I don't have there's no have no ruling against me it's really interesting so apparently there's more to it in this video went viral apparently there have been some videos of this guy where he posts online where he's acting kind of loony I saw a couple of them I was like yeah that's a little problem a little problematic but could also be acting out on camera I don't know if he's doing this in real life like just because someone's doing it in videos so like a lot of people act out in video just for attention or maybe that's how he blows off steam says wild shit like you know we need to eat the earth or I don't know what the fuck he's saying so this but the video is very disturbing because in that moment if these police officers in Canada are supposed to be evaluating someone who doesn't have an official psych evaluation where he's been brought in and they said you know you have to be institutionalized so that hasn't happened and so they're pulling this guy over and based on his interaction with them he is completely calm and rational in fact like charitably so because they're saying something fucking totally proposed yeah and he's not yelling he doesn't raise his voice he's coherent he's articulate I want you to watch it because it's kind of crazy Jeremy I'm sure you can find it that's really terrifying but let's just look at the actual video itself because the video itself is bizarre because without any context it's been again I think there is some context there have been some videos where you're nutty and this guy might just be manic depressive where he's capable of keeping it together like to pretend he's normal when the cops are there but then as soon as he's on his own as no one's watching me goes insane that is possible but what were they did they have any prior knowledge of him well with that space they would someone had told them that he's off the rails so they went in to go get him but the thing is shouldn't there be like some sort of an official psychiatric evaluation conservative influence or I he's a conservative insulate being held captive in Canadian okay well let's watch the video put your headphones on because the video is kind of kooky and this is Dr. Emory he's a resident psychiatrist senior resident he's on a rotation with the car 87 we're part of a program includes Vancouver coastal health and the Vancouver police and what we do is we go to people when there's different reasons that come up every case is a little different and we go to people to see them where they are especially if there's been issues with trying to find them and talk to it so in in your case I think you were certified under the mental health act just I don't know how long ago but like maybe three weeks ago or four weeks ago were you aware that Dr. Taylor saw you in a cafe she didn't certify you I think you filmed part of it okay and this is Dr. Emory he's a resident and then she spoke with your family got some more information and you know you can have the turnout just once once yeah what the officer just told me is that you know you and I can set up a meeting and we can chat then so why don't we do that okay yeah I'm not turning the camera and I have a legal right to keep the camera on if you don't want to make the appointment now we can do it at another time but um I you know that's what the officer just asked that we do so why don't we do that so I'm gonna circle high under the mental health act we're gonna bring you to hospital to testing it and you're gonna talk to us like hi interest in a controlled environment because we don't believe that you're gonna attend in a point I've never been given a chance to attend in a point so you certified I've never been given a chance attended appointment what is going on I haven't I was never given a psyche bow or nothing you just looked at me and said you're certified okay so I don't know why but it's up to the doctor so if you but no he didn't even give me a he didn't even give me an info he just looked at me and said I'm certified please please consider what you're doing and please think about the fact that I'm more than happy to come into her appointment I'm happy to go through and do everything properly okay I just I've been completely surprised with everything yes really good meaningless but listen that's his fault and unfortunately we can't do anything you're interacting with me at a very very very time I've been here in the gym so I had some eggs instead of for breakfast this morning I didn't put in my dreams so I had to tape this up because my window didn't have drapes and so all night there's just light beaming into my room so I couldn't sleep last night so I demanded that if they give me tape and stuff to put on my windows that I could sleep tonight I'm like one of the only rooms that has no dreams shanker law baby so that's how fucking strange this is crazy strange so here's the thing like this doctor ran into him somewhere yeah instead I'm certifying you based on what that's right and is he really a conservative influencer or is that a narrative like I don't understand what that means like if you are quote unquote conservative and you have a thousand people on your Instagram and you rant and rave you know and manic depressive manner is that are you a conservative influencer now or is that like rage bait to get them to say like but here's the thing like Canada has socialized medicine and they also have insane government over exactly and if there was someone who was a rabble rouser online and that person happened to be acting a little cookie wouldn't it be a great time but meanwhile how many fucking liberal this is Vancouver which is like Portland on steroids like how many cookie fucking people on the left are being pulled into mental hospital and making these similar videos fucking zero which is a little odd but it doesn't mean that this guy's not a little off the rails because the videos that I saw see if you can find some videos of him off they might have been pulled from the internet but a bunch of people were saying hold on there's more to this and we're showing some of the here's the other problem I don't know if those videos are real those videos could be AI you know in this day and age it's almost impossible to tell you could say you have video of this guy you'd say have this guy screaming shit stuff about what you need over a giant end in the middle of his back or go ahead you could have anything you could say anything but this is why you got to be so careful about authoritarianism yes being into government yeah he really is that right there first of all I don't like his back seat all that shit like boxes and stuff that looks a little cookie like that fits that he might be losing his marbles if he's got you know stacks of stuff unless he's like leaving an office and moving stuff and putting his back seat temporarily it's a weird sign when the entire back seat is filled with boxes and trash you might be losing your marbles um but he did sound like there's no in my eyes listening to him talk there's no indication that this guy's a threat to himself and he must be institutionalized that guy's more than capable of speaking in a very rational manner so even if he's nuts he's not that nuts there's a lot of nutty yes who's much more dangerous there's to me this is very like we're talking about the medicalization and everything and there's a trend here of this inhumanity that is really really dark I mean did you see the um I don't know if you follow the back and forth on you know with the AI guys on regulating AI and whether AI is positive or negative that whole debate which uh which did you see regulating AI and whether AI is positive or negative that whole debate. Which, did you see Amadei, the anthropic guy? Well, it is just in the last few days there was this, he was, I think it was on one of the other, on all in. That's right. Someone, someone was talking about him wanting to have, like, hyping up the doom scenario from from AI. These guys that are hyping up the doom of AI, are they actual people that were working on it? This is Amadei, who is the CEO of the anthropic. And he replied, and so the argument was he's hyping it up because he wants regulation, government regulation, that will protect the kind of big incumbents against, you know, competition. That was the argument. And then he replied to the argument by saying, he's had some stuff about regulation, then he did long posts on X. And the first one was about the regulation at the second one, was about actually I'm not that, I'm not Mr. Doom when it comes to AI. I've always said it can be really positive. And one of the things he pointed to was this essay that he wrote, called, Machines of Loving Grace, 14,000 words. And that was his response to, like, being characterizes Mr. Negative. When you look at this thing, it's so dark, like he's going on about, well, there'll be no, we can foresee a time when human beings can't make useful contributions to the economy. And the people won't have much to do, and then they can play video games. And then at one point, there's the thing that made me think of it. When he was raising, well, what a kid's going to do, and he starts going about, we have things like ritlin, and we know how to medicate people when they're depressed. So it's fine if they don't have a sense of ritlin. Are you giving me a sense of worth, well, numb them? Literally, that's what he wrote. And that's what he pointed to as him being Mr. Positive. It's just terrifying. So this is recently, within the last week. Okay, what is his position in the company? The founder of Anthropic, like the main, the big two, the programmers though are the ones that are leaving and writing poetry. They're giving up on society, and they're hiding and waiting. You know, you hear about that? There's one lead programmer that read. He wrote some, like, basically a statement as he was leaving, explaining the impending doom that is coming to civilization. And he's checking out, and he's going to ride it out and see what happens. But he left the United States. I think he went to Ireland or something like that. Okay. And he says he's going to write poetry. Okay. Like, I mean, this is an existential crisis. This guy's having a lot of his work. Well, he's working on it. Working on this thing and realizing this thing is conscious. Well, that's one of the things that I feel is so odd about the two that have been most negative are Amade, Dario Amade, he's Anthropic, and Sam Altman, OpenAI. Yeah. They're the most negative or have been. And if you believe half the things they're saying, they're like, well, why are you doing it then? If you think this is the end of the human, whatever. I know they have dialed it back a bit. But why would you keep building something? Did you want to be so bad? But Peter Thiel got asked without the human race should survive. What is it? It's paused for like, fucking 15 seconds. Um, um, I didn't read this, but I'm just curious. The mention of Ritalin is like a good thing. I figured out how to improve ourselves with things like Ritalin and using AI could potentially make it even better. I mean, come on. That AI will make Ritalin even better. No, no, no. It's been awesome drugs. No, yeah, that will find better versions of drugs that are better than Ritalin. So instead of people finding meaning in purpose and life, not just not how it's being talked about. What is he saying? Why is it using Ritalin is not nothing to do in work and meaning discussion. It appears this speculation is just about the future of neuroscience. Oh, I see what you're saying. They're talking about increasing the potency or making these things more effective for mental health interventions using AI. Okay. So you argue that AI driven biology could enable much greater cognitive and mental health interventions than those available today. That's really wonderful. If true, right? Look, I personally know people that have been saved by SSRIs. Like I'm not, I'm not a blanket. SSRIs are bad. I have a friend that was really depressed and suicidal and I got him a psychiatrist and he got him an eventually got his life back in gear, weaned himself off of him. Now he's great. So who knows? That guy could have made a hazy decision and taken his own life and if he was in Canada, they might have probably fucking encouraged it. So he's fine now. It's just the problem is they're ridiculously over-prescribed. Yeah. And there's another solution. The other solution is a natural human solution. It doesn't involve medication, it involves exercise and nutrition and community. We can all encourage things. That's for free. You know, you fucking do push up some body weight squats. Doesn't cost you a nickel. You don't have to go to a pharmacy. All these things are already here. Like why are we developing addictive chemical solutions? Yes. These are all addictive. Every one of them. I have a good buddy right now who got off of him. He was doing great and now he's back on him again. Because he's just his fucked. His system's fucked because he's been on him for 20 years. And it's scary because I know people that have been on them that have done rash things. And they just don't feel like they're themselves anymore. And then there's also the weird sexual side effects, the numbing numbness of the genitals, inability to have orgasms. There's a lot of fucking weird shit. Exactly. When there's another solution. That's what so. Here's some interesting context. According to Snopes that guy was arrested after he posted this. Oh, the vacuum had been. After he posted what? This document. This is not solicitation. If you find this document unattended, do not remove it from the property where it was placed. Unless you're the owner of said property, removing this document, you're criminally liable for inditable offense, carrying a penalty of up to 10 years in prison. So what is this? It's on Google Docs. It's just the brief like explanation that's talking about how China and Canada are corrupt and making a dick case. Is China and the corrupt Canadian government are trying to turn Vancouver into a dictatorship police state. China has been classified as high risk adversary by all long term democratic security alliances, NATO, NORAD, the five eyes alliance, the Canadian Center for Cyber Security, even Carney himself during elections. Carney has committed treason via secret Chinese policing and law enforcement, MOU, legal Chinese police stations in Vancouver selling Vancouver to China via the Aboriginal peoples on drip. Well, is he right? So that's right. I have no idea if he's right or not, but that's it was saying he was not maybe an influencer, but a commentary of like 67,000 followers on Instagram. Oh, and this could be why they're saying he's nuts. Right, I guess because he's he's uncovering some shit that's probably going on. I'm going to say this is not exactly out of the mainstream to be. Listen, the fucking mayor of Arcadia in California, they just found out was a Chinese spy. The mayor of a city in California today, there was more about Swalwell and Fang Fang, the Chinese. The guy wanted to be governor and he's like, I don't shacked up with a spy. I wanted to make the joke. I was like, it's a very first debate, the very first TV debate. You know, you kind of getting ready to think and I really wanted to make a sort of Fang Fang Bang. No, Fang Fang. It's an obvious joke, right? So he admitted to physical relations. No, he denied it for you for either time, but denied it. So just today he admitted it. I think it's just in the news today. I don't know. Well, was he trying to make it come back? No, no, no, no, no. I'm bang the spy. Whoopsies. But I was, I knew I really wanted to make this joke about, you know, the Fang Fang. It's just so, you can't resist it, right? It's a funny name. Exactly. Fang Fang Bang, but whatever. Anyway, so and then he didn't show up and I said, well, he denied that it's a, can I really say that, you know? You've got to be fed, you've got to try to be accurate for you. But then he didn't show up to the debate because he claimed that there was, I don't know, you had some vote or whatever. Well, I never got to debate the idea that this kid in, in Canada is being brought into, for mental health evaluation and in prison because he's uncovering that. That's not unprecedented. That's, that's, that's believable. I don't know if it's true. He might also have been a little cookie. Mm hmm. This is, again, I don't know the videos that I saw are real, but the videos that I, again, especially considering what we're talking about now. If you were trying to make someone look insane that was uncovering some real serious corruption with a foreign government. Right. Which is possible. Of course it's possible. And also it's America, right? We're in a huge country. It's like beautifully crazy in many ways. Yes. And people can think what then they've got the internet. And you get people's, you know, honestly, all the time people are giving me think, you know, they, they've shot things in my hand or envelope, whatever. And it opened it up every single time because half the time it's something that's, you know, something conspiratorial that isn't right or doesn't seem right. And other times it's like really good ideas. But the point is that that actually are useful. Well, that make me think about something in a different way. But the point is that yes, there's lots of people out there with credit or some more crazy ideas. You can't lock them all up. It's not just that. There's lots of real corruption. Yes, it's got to be. And as they're in an investigation, do we know whether or not this is an act? Has it been completely debunked? Because if it has, oh, well, then maybe you're right. Maybe he's crazy. Or if he turns out that everything he's saying is true, maybe he's a slightly crazy person who's also uncovering the truth. Which is exactly right. Sometimes it takes obsessive people. That was the premise of that Mel Gibson movie. Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy, but he was actually right. No, which one? I think it was called conspiracy theory. Yeah. Yeah. It was like a nutty dude who was on the things. He's basically like Alex Jones. That sounds really interesting. It was good, but I love that. You know, for the time, a little dated. You go watch today. Yeah. What are we doing? We want one of the things that I went on the road the whole time. Like long drives is California. And so find some of these, you know, every now and again, you just want something. You know, so the I, you want, there's a lot of movies. It turns out that are big parts of the world. American culture that I haven't seen. We watched what was it the other night. Super bad. I never seen it. That's a bad thing. You know, so good. It's one of the best comedies of all time. It was so good. I'm never saying it. I unfortunately tried watching with my kids when they were 10 and 12. I'm just a don't watch this. And we shut it off after three minutes. Like this is sorry. I forgot. Good. Yeah. Really. Right. I forgot. Oh, good. Brilliant, right. It's not brilliant. Funny and kind of slapstick with a bit of that, but it was just really clever to see where my kids just sitting in class drawing dicks. It's really funny. By the way, could not make that movie today. And the people that we have seen were what would not make that movie today. We were literally talking about it. So, my friend Eric, he's on my team. We become good friends. He's, you met him earlier. That's exactly what we were saying. They couldn't make sure. They got captured. That's the problem with being on the team of the left. They got captured by an ideology that destroyed comedy in their world. They cannot do that kind of comedy anymore. But kind of, nobody believes that you support all the things these people are saying. So, is you just showing a ridiculous human being who's saying some crazy shit and it makes you laugh. It's not changing the fucking world. It's not altering anybody's opinions. And it's not going to force people to do anything that they wouldn't ordinarily do. No good person is going to watch that movie and want to go out and do bad things. That's not how it works. It's just a piece of art. It's just like Bob Marley didn't really shoot the sheriff. It's a fucking piece of art. It's a piece of art. And it's a piece of art that we have fucked up. It's particularly movies because movies are attached to Hollywood. And then stand up comedy fortunately has an out. And because of the internet, we don't need to Hollywood anymore. But because of that, we now get labeled right wing, especially some to be what is funny. What is funny, fair enough. What is funny? Yeah. Across the board. And as soon as you say, no, you can't make fun of this anymore. Like why? Yeah. Why? It's a religion. It's basically like it's blasphemy to make fun of whatever you decide. It's a big thing. It's weird. Yeah. And that killed that kind of movie. Yeah. Yeah. Those fucking movies were everywhere. Yeah. The hangover. There was always a movie like that. Fucking, there's so many of them. And a lot of them. I haven't seen what we were just talking about it. The other thing. Yeah. The famous film was about a transgender woman. And you find out she's transgender and everybody throws up. Do you remember? No. I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to say, I have to do a little bit. I know you've got to do a list for the rest of you watching Monty Hall over there. You fucking Benny Hill reruns. Ben here. My favorite Benny Hill thing. Benny Hill was like, I'm not saying this. But I couldn't, for the first, there's someone, there's a friend of mine at Fox. Cool. She's called Candid. She's very fun. And she used to always remember Janet Yellen. Yes, she was there. She always called her Benny Hill. And then the minute I saw that, I saw picture of the next time, I just couldn't care. Candid was an MTV DJ. She's great. And then she became a Republican talking head-on fox. I was like, that's nuts. She's a real libertarian, though. But isn't it interesting? Yeah. Like someone's like on MTV with like a girl with glasses on, like a progressive, for sure. And then winds up on, but she's cool. She's libertarian. She seems very smart. She's great. Very funny. She does freedom fest. She's like, that's, she's a big part of that. Oh, she's a libertarian. Okay. She's great. How'd she go from being a VJ? Like, I don't know. Here's the next fucking, you know. She's from LA. She's very, you know. She's great. She's a co-ch J. Yeah, I'm very young. That's funny. But I love, no, the comedy think, like, that's another joy, actually. So I used to really, so Eric's really into Louis C.K. So I've, I'd seen a bit of him, obviously. But I've watched a lot and I was so great. I mean, we've really enjoyed that. Brilliant. Brilliant. Brilliant. Brilliant. And yeah, did some fucking videos with the shit. But the way they described it was so different than the actual acts themselves. But those are his response to it. Yeah, that show where he addressed it. Uh-huh. It was so good. He had a weird kink where he wanted people to watch him jerk off and he would ask them. And if they said, yes, he would do it. Look, I don't think we should do that. I think it seems crazy to me standing in front of a couple of girls and jerking off of him, but I'm not him. Okay. And I also didn't say, if I said no, open the door, let me out. And then you wouldn't let me out. That's a different story. But that's not what anybody is alleging. It's just kind of gross and weird. And I think he would probably admit to that. But you know, he did. And yeah, very funny, I thought it was brilliant. I can't remember exactly. But the first big show he did after that when he sort of returned from like being his art away from him. He's like, you got to judge like what is he, as long as he's not did what like Bill Cosby did. That's a completely different thing. Yeah. And I think it was a kind of systematic, like really machine like predatory thing that was just ongoing. It was a weird kink. Yeah. It a weird kink. You want to jerk off in front of people like, okay. It's so look, I get that people would be upset. And if you don't want to watch this comedy more, I get that too. That's fine. Everybody has, that's your product. But like the comedy itself is some of the best comedy that's ever been written. It's never been done. He's one of the best to ever do it. I mean, if you have a top whatever group of comedians, you'll kind of gang here. How do you like this? Well, he's in New York, but he actually helped me design the club. Okay. He came when it was bare bones and we went over the club and he gave me a bunch of great suggestions and I implemented all of them. The smaller, our rooms are named after the nuclear bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima Nagasaki. So it's a fat man and little boy or our rooms. There's a reason for that. The reason is actually that, because it's the comedy mothership, it's a UFO based comedy club. The UFOs really started showing up in America after the nuclear bomb. So once the nuclear weapons program was implemented in the 1940, the amount of UFO sightings went through the roof and the real big ones were like Roswell, New Mexico, which is 47. So right after the war. they started, so this is like part of UFO folklore. So that's why we did it. That's why we named him after the nuclear bomb and not making light of people dying in horrific nuclear bombs. So he told me to make the stage smaller in the little room. It was great idea. I was like, right, why is the stage so big? Small rooms. And then he also said, can you, it was already a low ceiling. He's like, can you lower it more? I'm like, we can lower it like right to the top of that door. It's like you should do that. And they gave me some advice on sound deadening in the room and what to do and make it, you know, how to make the sound crystal clear and just great awesome advice. And the beautiful thing about that club is I took advice from every comedian that was in town. I bring them there. Tell me what you think. What would you want? Like if you wanted to design a comedy club, I literally let you just tell me what's the thing. And we ran through a vote. So there's a whole group of us. And it was like me and Brian Simpson and Ron White, Tony Hinchliff and all these guys that were good friends of mine that we performed with all the time. We all just sat around and none of the ideas were like, I think we should do this. I didn't do that with any of them. And I said, tell me what you guys want to do. And they were like, you should have this. Like, okay, we'll do that. Great. We should have monitors in the agreement. We should see the guy on stage. Okay, let's do that. What else? And everything anybody said we did, we should have three mental health services for all the employees. So we did that. So free availability for counseling, psychiatry, we have that. Psychologists, they can all go to counselors. So it's this free. Healthcare, take care of everything. Give the comedians way more money than any other club does. We did that. We just like, what does everybody want? What does everybody want? What does everybody want? What does everybody want? Let's do it and let's do it in a way where we're just trying to make the best thing possible. We're not doing it like let's make the most money. We're just trying to not lose money. So let's just do it that way. And it worked. And it worked because of people like Louis C.K. And all these people that came by and gave us advice and told us what they think. Fantastic. So yeah, Louis, great. I love him. He's fucking really smart guy, but like a lot of smart guys, he's fucking weird. You know, a lot of people, I think that about these AI's. I want to be a great comedian. You have to be a fucking weirdo. You know, they're all just weird in different ways. She pels weird in his way. You know, Chris Rock's weird in his way, hinch cliffs weird in his way. They're all weird. Shane's weird. Everyone's an incredible thing to do, honestly. It's like really in a tiny way. I'm not even comparing it, but I'm comparing this in terms of what I'm doing, which is you got to go there and you've got, I don't know, I just do a few of the other just in the last few days, you've got hundreds of people and you've got to entertain them. Now, I'm mainly talking about politics, which is much easier because you've got, you know, material that's just obvious and out there and it's put it. You've got to keep them entertained. You can't be boring. You can't like, and it's, you know, you've got to give a good show. Yes. And so the thought of doing that and being funny all of it instead of what I do, which is throw in the odd joke, you know, political joke or something or self deprecating joke. But that's just, that's nothing. But if you're not focusing on that, if you focus on that, you could do it. No, but I'm just saying it, I now really appreciate how hard it is. Just, just the, it isn't. Joe ideas has the greatest saying because it's the fucking hardest, easiest thing you'll ever do because when you're flowing, it's easy. You know, when you're up there and you're killing, it's so easy. It's hard constructing the material. Well, I was going to say a little preparation. There's a lot of preparation and there's a lot of time you have to spend alone thinking. And then you have to spend a lot of time bulsioning with your friends because sometimes like the green room conversations, some of us like Brian Simpson said something the other day and we're like, write that down. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's the course. Each other like, right, dude, that's a bit. That's 100% a bit. And he started doing it on stage and it's killing. Like that happens too. And it's like the camaraderie and the fun of like being together like a bruise comedy. But you also need time in front of the fucking computer of the notebook. You need to be sitting there going over your stuff. If you don't do that, you're not going to come up with new material and then you have to try it out and you have to be willing to like trot it out there. You have this idea. Yeah. It's only existed in your head. Yeah. So you're kind of convinced that there's something there but you're not totally sure. You're like, what do you think about this? And you just throw it out there and sometimes it's great. And it's like 50, 50. Sometimes it's dog shit. And by it's 50, 50 to what I bring to the stage where there's even got life. Writing it down. It's like not even it's like, you know, it's like the Canadian healthcare system for me. It's like what? What? 20. 120. 20. It's just really no. I think it's well, I totally appreciate what you're saying. But it's very, I mean, to me it seems the ultimate. You're just putting yourself out there. You definitely put yourself out there. But you're also doing it this way too. Like when you're having conversations, maybe you're putting yourself out there even more. Because you're actually putting out your opinions and some of them you had no idea you were going to discuss. So you're just trotting it out there thinking out loud in front of millions of people like we're doing right now. When you're doing stand up, like I know these by the time anyone sees me perform at a club or they're paying money, most of those bits I've been doing. I'm just trying to add to them and hone them and same the right way and move the order around. That's why I love about it because I really do love it. And that's why I've really enjoyed it. Like I said, Eric really into it. And he's showing me a lot of comedians that I didn't know about. And I just love words and language anyway. I've written completely different. I've written books and whatever TV scripts when I did my show, that kind of thing. So I really appreciate language. And I love just how changing the order of a word or whatever can just make something work or not work. Oh, yeah. I'm changing the order of a word, changing the way you do. Sometimes you do a joke. Like Louis used to do that where he would like reverse a joke, like turn it around and then maybe he would like take it and do his best joke and open with it. So that his jokes afterwards had to get better to follow his best joke. Yeah, it's a constant little fucking laboratory up there. And you need the audience in order to find the life to whatever that you do. Do you see their faces? Like can you see or the lights too much in your face? You can see most of the first few rows. Right. Because that's important must be for helps. It definitely helps. It's not just listening to the volume of laughs. Is it like what is it? There's both things, but obviously they're there to have a good time. But my job is easier because I'm going on after they're already laughing. Right. So there's been a few people on before me. Everybody's having a good time. And then you're basically just connecting with them. You know, you find them. What's up? How are you? You let them get comfortable. You connect with them. And then you're just doing the material. You're just finding the reality. You have to be like whatever you're saying, you have to be 100% thinking about that thing. You can't be thinking. And then I'm going to say it like, no, you have to be thinking about the thing. And that's it. That's the primary thought. You know the pacing of it. You know what's coming next. But you don't think about what's coming next. You think about the thing. That's where preparation is important. You have to make sure that you like have a set list and order. But you also have to be flexible because there's going to be moments where you want to like dive out of that set order. And something might happen in the audience or something might come up. And you have another thing, another take. And you're like, this would go better right here. So I'll shove this in here. And then you have to remember your order and go, I didn't do this. I'll put that later. It's so fun. It's not the set. But there's a similarity because I do all these things and you've got bits really, which is my thing on high speed rail. And you know, I and sometimes and there's a long version of it and a short version. Yeah, it's a bit. And like, and then suddenly you'll find yourself. Doing it, even though I hadn't intended to. Right. And then oh, shit, that's like really long. And I've got to finish like, what am I going to cut? So you're right. Right. Right. I mean, it's not the same, but it's similar. It's similar. And I definitely find Trump does bits. Oh yeah. And he only ages on for so I'm never doing that long. But remember when he just did this impromptu bit about Biden losing himself on stage, just wandering around not knowing where he was? It's like, he's too in standard. Like everyone's laughing. Exactly. But I find it much better. I much prefer it when you can, you're closer to the people. Like physically when you can, you're not on some stage. Comment how's the way, you know, that kind of thing. Yeah, Kylie clubs a way to do it. That's the real way. However, there's something very intimate about doing an arena in the round. OK. So I've done a bunch of those where you're standing on a circular stage in the center of the people. And what's intimate about that is all the people over here are looking at all the people over here. Everybody sees everybody. Yeah, yeah. You see each other. It's the right way to do it. Because that way, everybody's seeing everybody else having fun. And they're a lot closer than you think they are. They're all right there. There's a lot of them. But it all, the coming like sprays out to the outer edges. But the center hive all around the stage was just thousands of people. Yeah. And a 16,000 seat arena. You're looking in the eyes of 6,000 people. Plus. And it's like they're all seeing each other. It's very intimate. Oddly. Great. It's fun as opposed to a big arena when you're standing on a very high stage and the people are all out there. Yeah. It feels crazy. Yeah. That feels very detached. That's not my favorite. That's my least favorite. It's an arena where it's just a flat stage and you're not surrounded by them. Yeah. I agree. It feels like you're just delivering something rather than connecting. Exactly. But a theater can be pretty intimate too. Like especially when you're used to doing arenas, if I do like a 3,000 seat theater, it's kind of intimate. It's like it's all what you're comfortable with too. That's a part of it too. It's like are you comfortable with all these people staring at you? Well, I know. You see, that's the weird thing. I would never have done it before. Right. And suddenly you have all these, you know, and it's a mate. I mean, I love the response, but it's, it is weird because I've gone from nothing to this and you go in a room, it's like hundreds of people like cheering. Was the biggest crowd you've had to speak in front of? Well, probably when I did Megan Kelly's show, when Megan Kelly was here, not here in California. And I did, I did a spot there. I did the announcement. Make a skills. It was in an arena in Bakersfield. The announcement for the UFC weigh ins. So I, I, I, I, I'm seeing the weigh ins at the ellipse on the White House. Oh, so it was 80,000 people. That was fucking nuts. That was the most people I've ever talked to. Right. And that was a very different way of talking because all I'm doing is reading people's names and their official weight. It's very easy. Yeah. You know, it's just hyping it up, getting everybody pumped up. Yeah. You know, you know, ladies and gentlemen, Tom, pour it on. It comes out. Everybody goes crazy. It's easy, but it's the vibe, the feeling of 80,000 people is fucking nuts. Yeah. It's a weird feeling. You know, Shane Gillis, my buddy just. It comes out and everybody goes crazy. It's easy, but it's the vibe the feeling of 80,000 people is fucking nuts Yeah, it's a weird feeling. You know Shane Gillis my buddy just did stand I heard so 76 thousand Philadelphia, right? Yeah, yeah fill a fucking football stadium That had to be in Santa day. You could do that easy if you wanted to it's you'd get the people It's a crazy thing to do. I don't know if I could do that easy It's not easy. He broke the world record. Okay, and change is huge He's really funny. He's like one of the funniest guys. Yeah, that's a good example I've never seen him maybe I get him to come down tonight. I don't know if he's there If this is the town sneezed dad again run that was the first thing so many good bits It was just a bit about George Washington's museum. I don't think so. Oh my god Is one of my I would request it from all the time like please do that bit It's so fine about George Washington's false teeth being made out of lead It's such because they were it's such a crazy bit. It's so good He's he's a great comedian. Yeah, and that's all he cares about. That's what he loves and he's like all in and Just an awesome guy too when you're around him. Yeah, he's just so fun And like everyone always smiles your round. He's have it. He's he's like he's contagious You know, he's a contagious party great fun guy But like we're really lucky that there's a lot of those guys here now, you know, this is like this is a giant hive of them now Boy you've built that what we all did. Yeah, you know, we all came no I hear what you're saying that they contributed but Well, we ought they had to be here for me to be able to do it It's not a thing that I could have ever done and said hey everybody move here now It's not it would have never worked they had already be here Everybody moved here before I even had a club a lot of them. Okay. Yeah, like cigar moved here before I had a club Was that an epidemic thing? Yes, like getting out of places with ridiculous. Yeah getting out of places and going to a place where you can Actually perform we're all addicts, you know, stand up comedy is a very very addictive thing and if there's a place where you can go Well, you can do it and your friends already live there and for me it was Ron White And it was also There's a thing about the freeness of this city like the freeness of Texas the freedom that you had here Yeah, to be able to go to a restaurant your businesses could stay open They didn't put the same kind of restrictions They had a small lockdown for a short amount of time and they went okay Let's get back to work and they did and California's like Driving around their cars with them. I know it's so crazy. I remember It's so funny thinking about because all this I was remind of all this because of the fauci stuff the other day Yeah, the fauci stuff and why because I was really honestly that I mean I didn't you know I did this show on Fox News I'm would never say I'm a journalist right ever It was an opinion show. I just said why thought but I did do Some I would like one piece of journalism like actual journalism which is the fauci stuff It's inferior, you know the origin of the virus. I really did You know lay that all out on a way that no one else did because I had these people on you at Stanford I taught at Stanford so a lot of that information about fauci and the origin and the all of that I had For and and people helped me piece it together and it's just infuriating that he's still infuriating well, I think that I just infuriating to me thing was that he knew about the miscarriages during the first trimester he knew about that and He was still promoting it for pregnant women like how many women listened to him and got vaccinated and then to The message but then we don't even know what the numbers are right because those are never reported as vaccine injuries We have no idea just I mean I was listening to who did you have on the other week? That lady who wrote the book you got into it with her. She had a book You're talking about I can't remember she's like an investigative any Jacobson. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. She's about the germ warfare about So I just listening to that and then I did like you we didn't really get into it Like we did a little bit on the on just on the origins and the gain of function and all of that. Oh Well, she just probably was trying to be politically correct and probably not well Let me still try to sell books or something. I don't know. Will I remember thinking is I wanted it is that It's still not I don't think understood how directly Fouchy was implicated like it's still you hear this language of oh He you know he funded The gain of thought he thought no he in He pushed it this was his thing. Yeah, he really really was the main Global champion of gain of function not only that he enforced the narrative that this was not a lab leak and that a lab The talking about us a lab leak was racist. Yes. He did the thing that ever I remember when I first laid that out and it was You know it's still on the way on my Wikipedia. I pushed the conspiracy theory that you know Fouchy did the virus The that why I was trying to show people like when they said well, why would he do something like that? He was really the main advocate. There's a PC wrote I was start with this which is I think it's December 2011 Because gain a function had been around a few years They started with the ferret so whatever and they had this new technique Ralph Barrick mm-hmm all of that. Yeah, and then it became very controversial in the scientific community had a whole bunch of scientists saying this is crazy This is gonna lead to a panel yet people saying that. Yeah, and Fouchy argued back and he wrote this piece at the end of 2011 With the other guy Francis Collins who ran the NIH saying Engineering I think it's almost exactly engineering a potentially dangerous Virus in the laboratory is a risk worth taking he wrote that like he was pushing this stuff and like the thing that everyone It's it was his initiative. It wasn't he like passively funded this thing that some other minions were doing this was his big thing Yeah, it's just outrageous that it hasn't been and he broke the rules That's the other part that that people forget that a bummer in 2014 put a moratorium on it Yes, which included stuff that was already in train which included the project that led to Covid and then again People often say well Trump lifted the moratorium. He did but he put back a new thing which was it was good potential pandemic pathogens thing protocol which said that when you renew a project It should go to independent review. He broke that as well So he broke the rules to push this and he's like still not really had to pay any price for it Unless he's reputation look well the reputation But he's also so old that he's not working anymore anyway But the thing about it was that pardon that gave him a pardon for crimes that he had not been convicted for which had never happened before a Preemptive pardon for and also for ten whole years for everything he did He could have been eating babies for ten years and like no pardon fine and then when you have a pardon You're not supposed to be able to plead the fifth and yet he please death with everything including the color of his fucking tie It's disgusting. He's a strange guy and the fact that he was a hero really shows how sick people were in 2020 looking for some sort of a solution But they didn't know his history. They didn't know what he did during the AIDS crisis Yeah, he's a scary person. Yeah, and there's arrogance of it and the thing that I'm also really Get really pissed off about still is when you hear the conversation around this On that going back now to the lockdowns and all of that in the school closures There was such a disaster business as judges and people say well We didn't really know and it was early and we were just being we did know it's not true I did a piece March 2020 like right it was in the before the end of 15 days to slow the spread right at the beginning because I got to know through Stanford Jay Batter, chariot John you need is all these guys that were speaking out They did a blood whatever call it Sarah prevalence thing in Santa Clara County where this whole thing started proving everything that we now knew And including what fouchy now we know from the whatever the diary New as well though Santa Clara Clara County is just the two doctors that they went public with this and then they lost their license and they're Jay and John you need is they were the So you know I know of our Jay and the crazy thing about him was that he was one of the people that was kicked off a Twitter Correct. Yes. Yeah, which is what when worse than that kicked up really persecuted by Stanford Yeah, they need to be held accountable that was a crazy thing so The first lockdown in the country was Santa Clara County in one of the Bay Area counties then the next day The other Bay Area counties did it and then after that Gavin did state why that's well started and the woman who pushed it was the public Go I haven't talked about this phages the public health director or whatever of Santa Clara County Sarah Cody and she was married to the head of Stanford Medicine and Jay spoke out against what was going on with actual data They did a study of what was happening in the community that proved that the case fatality rate Was it far lower than what they're saying? Well, it was also in the leaked emails all of he was aware that it was far lower And he was still promoting exactly but the point is that this it was again corruption because he was speaking out against the lockdowns that were pushed by this woman Sarah Cody Husband who was head of Stanford medicine persecuted Jay. He was treated so badly They suspended him. They accused him. They had some bullshit investigation into him outrageous That that no one's ever done anything about that as far as I can tell with Stanford No, it's it's creepy to watch that top-down power in action when you know that they're lying and We're seeing these lines and emails. Yeah, the fauci thing is very creepy One of it just shows you why he was pushing for that pardon But then there's the question of whether or not that pardons even legitimate because it's all auto-pan stuff Yeah, and Biden was out of his fucking mind like it dinner. It was the thing. I always think is also this In the state levels. He's a federal pardon Right, so states are good, but then there's this immunity if you're doing stuff in your public role You can't be sued for that or something. I don't know Well, I mean he lives in hell. I mean he knows but I think he's a bit of a sociopath I think there's something about him like when he was prescribing people AZT for AIDS He's a doctor. He's well aware that AZT was pulled as a cancer medication because it was killing people quicker than cancer They were using it as chemotherapy and people were dying faster And so they already had this FDA approved drug and so this new gay cancer. I mean they literally were calling it the gay cancer at first They just started giving it to them like well We have a medication for it and the fauci is on record saying the reason why we prescribe AZT is because it's the only medicine it's both safe and effective effective of what affected killing asymptomatic people they were also using the same playbook that they used during covid by using These testing methods that had an enormous amount of false positives Like Kerry mullis himself was there's a video of him He's a guy invented PCR testing. He's talking about fauci fauci as no, but the fuck he's talking about He's like he's a bureaucrat. He guys full of shit. He doesn't know that you should never use a PCR to determine whether or not someone is ill He's like it's not how worse because if you ramp up the cycles enough you could find anything and that's what they did during covid They felt like it's 80 something percent false positives Fortunately a lot of those people weren't forced to take AZT But there's a lot of people that turned positive for HIV that probably didn't have it at all They gave them AZT and they were fucking dead And this is the he's the fill-in in the dowers fires club that movie with Matthew McConaughey Yeah, it's all about people who have AIDS seeking alternative treatments and being denied them because he was trying to find a vaccine for it Even back then they were testing the vaccine for it on fucking foster kids and killing them in New York It's all in yeah, yeah, yeah, you're in your book It's again of his books lies How come he has a monsu? It's really amazing how They're able to get away with stuff that's truly evil truly evil. Yeah. I mean testing the AIDS vaccine on foster kids is crazy and then dying it's crazy, but this joke The AZT things I don't know how you know what determines when so that they're sort of the media mindset towards something or whatever that means that this story gets Attention and and massive Oh, it's really simple. It's really simple Pharmaceutical drug commercials all that would change if they're not allowed to advertise We're one of two countries in the fucking world that allow pharmaceutical drugs to advertise on television One of them is New Zealand and they're far more restrictive than us and because of that You look you have ads that you see that are playing on CNN that are not even for a drug that's commonly used For some weird conditions, but they're trying to people out and you know persuade you you've got the condition That's so what they're really doing is not selling drugs What they're really doing is making sure that CNN does never talk shit about the pharmaceutical drug companies and doesn't do any stories on the Adverse side effects and doesn't do any stories about how many of them get pulled by the FDA that initially get approved and they find such a Terrific side effects. They have to pull them because it's a large percentage It's fucking nuts, man, and it's who wasn't that brought it up that was explaining how You know he had figured out a long time ago that the reason why they spend so much money on advertising is not because they're trying to sell drugs They're trying to buy these networks. What makes sense? It's an enormous part of their ad budget Right and they spend so much money on television and who the fuck is watching CNN at this stage of the game You know what other numbers their numbers are pretty piss poor for the amount of money that these drug companies are spending and then you see so many Ads so many for this and everyone's always at a barbecue They're always having fun they're having fun and like There was a brilliant parody the Nicole Shanahan did when she was with Bobby running She did a brilliant one for TDS Do you suffer from TDS Trump derangements syndrome that she did like a farmer? Really really really great That's so crazy, but the thing I just think of when you like that You know where you got really dark human consequences. So like you know, obviously I'm focused on it because he's my opponent but this story of Bacerra and the kids the migrant kids is a story them I bring it up to people and a lot of people have never heard about it like literally no idea what is the story when he was Bob he had job Bobby's job and Bobby got his job at HHS secretary and you had It was during the four years. You had the open board and the way it works is that At millions of people can't cross the open border. We don't know exactly how many but the kid unaccompanied kids Are the responsibility of HHS? That's how the system works So he was responsible for them and the total number we know because it's recorded 479,000 Kids I'm a company. I'm a company kids without parents. It's an amazing number in the four years of the Biden administration All of those kids were my Javier Bacerra's Responsibility so they had they were overwhelmed. They set up these camps Do you not know any of this? They have these camps They set up to process the kids In Florida, Texas. There were three in California and the point was to try and Get the kids to a safe sponsor relative someone who looked after them and They had so many they were overwhelmed and there's really bad stuff going on in the camps There were reports of sexual Abuse the older kids Some of the older kids were like You know 17 year old rough You know some were gang members whatever So there was all this shit going on in the camps sexual abuse physical abuse. It was bad and it was like pictures of You know like we went to one then Pomona one of the exhibition halls like 150 kids on cots It's bad and so Bacerra Once these kids out because it looks bad and they'd gone on on about kids in cages with Trump And so he basically we've now got these whistle blows coming forward and the New York Times reported it the New York Times broke this story But it's just basically not gone anywhere. They did it in 2023 That he dismantled the vetting that was supposed to put the kids with a safe place and so they lost track of thousands of kids and many Went to child sex traffickers slave labor child labor traffickers just horrific stories you had What was the rationale for because they were two? They weren't moving them out of the camps quickly enough so we had a whistle blower Come to ask because these people said how can he be government? um Who said We were supposed to connect the kids with the responsible adult check their identity ID checks home visits all this But the the instruction was it's going too slowly We got to get the kids out she said speed over safety and so when they raise flags about it like 200 kids Sent to an address that turned out to be a container lot Like not a real address. It's just a front for traffickers um a kid sent to a woman who was in wanted by interpol like a gangman like just crazy so when they raised those stories They were fired like it's really terrible what happened and still there i mean hhs just published them because they were still responsible numbers from i think it was two weeks ago that there's 330 000 that they're still missing They don't know where they are 40 kids died like it's really bad And yet it's like fauches like He's the candidate for governor. No one's really Palling him out on it. It's amazing to me. It's really bad Joe. Honestly. You've got that is crazy You're responsible for that many kids and say Speed over safety so there's a story again whistle blow we've put about the videos I mean some people you know this woman said she was a caseworker It pomona and bessare actually visited that camp visited did a photo or whatever and he's going on about how we're doing a good job of finding safe places whatever And then the interviewer I was at the taping it was she didn't she's in a job where she doesn't want Retaliations so I was there for the two hours we take the conversation and the interviewer asks her Did anything change after bessare is visit She said yeah Everything was at the speed up and they had strike teams that were set up to tell us Don't check that you know when she would say this idea is obviously a fake ID for this person like the photo is like a selfie It's obviously fake Don't worry just send them quick get them out. She's really embarrassed and and this even the New York Times story had a Boy who she had a few examples because she tracked them down. She want to put it surprise for it um A kid who ended up in a I don't know meatpacking plant 13 14 year old had his arm ripped off in the Arc our girl one of those she came forward as it was so blow she evicted She was on camera She said you know she's telling the story. She was like put on a plane And they said you know what happens they didn't let her take us off She Was met at the other end. She did there's there's three guys They picked just no idea who these people are she's from I think quite a minute. Who's the else of it? Um Gets in a car with three guys no idea Taken to a house. She has to work 20 hours a day sleep on the floor with four guys in a room. She said go from You know it's just and there's so many of these stories um Bobby the way Bobby puts it is that bersara turned hhs into the largest child trafficking operation in history Holy fuck yeah exactly And yeah is running for running for car. I remember honestly Joe like When we did these debates? You know you we did a lot and not just a base but forums and you meet and I thought he's a nice you know I'd see him we chat backstage or whatever and I thought You know he's kind of Nothing he's a bureaucrat type person Nice guy perfectly nice smiley's a nice immutable guy and I just thought he's an amiable non entity But the more you learn about this it's like really bad um because it's a classic thing with these career politicians obviously all that mattered was I don't want to look bad We've got all these kids there in these camps the media has access to them It's really look-making me look bad get these kids out It's just shocking That's so evil Yeah, it is so and it's also Really racist all of them were Latino. Yeah, because you think about it if that was all kids from Norway Little young boys and girls from Norway. Do you think they would treat them the same way? So Pomona where this camp was there were three in California long beach San Diego and Pomona So the caseworker who did that was what she was she said There's a notorious child sex trafficking Street area near that She said before this most of the girls were African-American black girls after the camp Suddenly it was all Latino girls Like it was just so obvious that that was what was happening God, it's so sex trafficking well if if there's child sex traffickers and there's such an obvious vulnerability Like hundreds of thousands of unaccompanied kids making across the border. Of course They're gonna sneak in exactly The whole thing was in second one of the thing. Yes, boy I mean They took away that something they had these papers that they would send them off with and it had a line That's information on it which included a hotline that they set up If the kids felt they were in danger It took kind of trafficking hotline There were 65,000 unanswered calls to the hotline It just a bullshit like Thing that didn't work And again the people who pointed that out were fired Oh my god It's like to me the people that pointed it out were fired It's just this is to me I've been you know, I've been in and around Politics, media government one more another for long time. I've never seen anything like this And and he's like it doesn't even seem like it could be real. That's what I thought numbers are so crazy It's so crazy. I'm sort of a conspiracy theory. It's easily disproven exactly Well in the first reporting of it was the New York Times 2023 Holy shirt and and and it but everything that's coming out is it's worse even than that What do you think was going on with the whole open border? I think that they I think they believed That any kind of restriction on immigration was racist and therefore It was part of the ideology around that that we can't put people are coming and They're fleeing bad conditions and you can't stop them because it's racist restrictions on immigration. I think that's what it was mainly. Okay, so that is a great way to justify Flying people into swing states And then trying to turn them into citizens Which is what they were actively talking about doing? Pelosi talked about that Schumer talked about that they talk about got it getting these people citizenship Which means those people can vote? There's also moving them into these swing states And if you move them into the swing states the census doesn't count or they're not your citizen The census cons whether or not you're a human being and so it changes the number of congressional seats that are available So there's that and then there's also putting these people on free health care and giving them money and Setting them up and then if you can get those people to vote eventually you've got to built in voter And you could change like so I never thought about that whatever million people got in over the last four years They're not going to vote for Trump How many say you can make those people vote if you can let those people vote? How many of those people are going to vote for the Republicans that wanted to get rid of them with ice And how many of them are going to vote for the Democrats that wanted to fund them and help them get across the border? It's pretty simple even if you don't get all of them. You're going to get most of them So you think that I mean I hear that often this is what Elon thinks It seems to me that's so dark and cynical Well if they wanted to do to the whole country what they've done to California and have complete and total control with one party Well, they've already done it in a state why not just implement it through the entire country in California? You can't show It's illegal that's why would you do that? Why would you do that? There's only one reason Yeah, you want to cheat and then they reason and we've got votes right D on the ballot in November in California which is crazy that you have to ask for that exactly and The attorney general have kept this guy bonter. I don't know if you've been following. He's doing the paramount lawsuit He's like a total political hack All he ever done like we got out of control crime and all this shit All he does and they're same with by the way, bersera Mike. I keep coming. He's my opponent He was the attorney general of California Appointed he didn't get elected All he talks about in terms of his record And he was attorneys during the time when crime exploded is how many times he sued Trump But this guy bonter now There was this ballot in his there is a ballot in his chief on November For vote right D. He just changed the description. Did you see this? No, so It had a kind of accurate description of what it was You know this measure you know on the ballot in the vote for information this measure will require people to show I to blah blah and that was approved by the whole system and Just in time before they start printing them he because it's the attorney general who decides changed it to say Like the most negative possible thing this I mean I haven't got the exact words you can find it It was like this measure Prohibits voting unless you have and it goes on to make it sound really good. It's like it's so cynical This is just what they do Yeah, well, they weren't trying to get people to look at it in terms of looking at it through their ideological lens Rather than to repract the lens But it's also like it's so crazy that you have to have ID for almost everything. It's crazy and they say It's so discriminatory like what you're talking that's racist. Yeah, what about driving a car You have to have a license to drive a car. What about you know check into a hotel. I mean every night I'm a different Hampton in That's where we stay ID yeah, like you have to show ID to buy booze. It's like ID's everywhere. It's normal. It's like we need to know that you're real It's a very when you watch them defend Their opposition to it. It really and I'm generally not a you know, I I've really true try and see the best You know, that's just their ideology whatever then it's not really cynical But when you see the way they wriggle and squam You know, I really try and see the best. You know, that's just their ideology, whatever. Then it's not really cynical. But when you see the way they wriggle and squirm over voter ID, it's like what other explanation is there? Exactly. It's such a ridiculous thing to be opposed to. It's pretty clear. It's pretty clear that there's an advantage. And the advantage is definitely on the side of the Democrats. The voter ID advantage. It's just crazy. It's just we have lost our fucking collective minds. And, you know, it doesn't help when, you know, this administration is in this war with Iran that makes no fucking sense whatsoever. And everybody's like, oh, so you look at that. Like, it just builds up the other sides argument. Well, that's what they say. So you have to hook them out in a matter of what. It's an example. Massive thing in California for everyone is just gas prices. Highest in the country by fall. High then Hawaii in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, even though we have abundant oil reserves in California. So insane. The literally shipping in, they're shutting down California oil production, shipping it in from halfway around the world, like 80% now shipped from Iraq. And the Amazon rainforest, like Gavin goes to the Amazon rainforest to the climate conference, the lecture everyone about climate. Because of his climate policies, oil drilling in the Amazon is now being increased to provide California soil. Anyway, it's so crazy that they've do all these things like right now. And, you know, and it's all as a direct result of what they've done, right? The gas prices are so high. And it's regular working people who are screwed, like people to drive their cars and trucks every day for what's not the climate war is, you know, it's the same jobs in the Rinn County, do you know what I mean? Anyway, the war is now there go to response. So you make a point about gas prices, oh, it's Trump's war. And of course it's true that the war has increased gas prices everywhere, but it's still $2 higher in California than anywhere else. Yeah. But it lets them off the hook. Well, it's just indicative of the same problem that you're going to have a single party is running a state for that long unchecked. Just like you were talking about Hungary, or it's just like it could be anywhere. Good feeling the blank anywhere in the world where you get power. And you get complete control. And then you get his tax to fuck out of people. And then you get increasing government, which they keep doing. It's pretty wild. We're changing this vlog, make it cheaper. That'd be even harder to do. California gas, because it uses unique strictly regulated clean burning boutique blend mandated by the California Air Resources Board to reduce smog and greenhouse gas emissions. Specialized fuel must be refined locally on an energy island because no pipelines connect the state to outside fuel networks. It's just more of the same. So that's important. So see that California Air Resources Board, Cobb, that's the main agency that's driving the cost of everything high when it comes to energy gas and electric. And actually now you're earlier question, what can you do? There's basically four reasons the gas prices are the highest in the country. One is the gas tax, which is the highest in the country. That I can't do anything about as governor. That's the legislature. They just increased it. So you got all these Democrats running around say affordability. We have to do something about the affordability crisis. They just increase the gas tax in California. So it's so ridiculous. That's the first thing I can't do anything about directly. All the other things you can, it's partly that, is the regulations on the refinery. But it's also these hidden taxes. Like you've got the low carbon fuels. They all sound good. The low carbon fuel standard, cap and invest. They call it the cap and invest fund. That's funding high speed rail. These are basically taxes on gas that the energy industry is paid. Then you've got the fact that we're importing all this oil, rather than producing it. So instead of producing in California, in the cleanest regulated standards anywhere in the world, which is what we have because we've got all these regulations. And sending it in a nice pipeline just a hundred or so miles from near Bakersfield, current county to the refineries in Long Beach and Torrance. What I said earlier, shipping in, because there's no pipeline from outside California, bringing on tankers from the number one in the Middle East is Iraq. Bernie and Mans amount of fuels along the way. Because they run on bunker fuel, which is the most dirty form of oil. So they are not, this is an accurate statement. They are increasing carbon emissions in the name of climate. To make it look at it, their climate war is fighting fossil fuels. It's just fucking crazy. Yeah, but it's the ideology. It's not even, it's so funny. I used to sort of talk about their climate policies. It's not even their climate policies. It's climate posturing. It's like they want to look as if they're doing this. Well, it's a part of the ideology, like you said. It's a part of the doctrine, the religious doctrine that is left. You have to say that climate change is real. Science is science. You have to say a bunch of things. Love is love. You have to say a bunch of things. It's in its house. It's the thing. Yeah. It's not just virtue signaling. It's kind of religious doctrine. It's a religious... It's the ideology signaling. It's the accurate. It's not just energy phrase, but that's what it is. And it's kind of religious and like Mark and Driesen's talked about this. It's kind of like a cult. Like if you don't follow, you are excommunicated. Yeah. And I did a conference the other day in Sacramento where I went up. And there's something about it. It was the smugness. The smugness was so... I normally try and be reasonable and just, you know, make my arguments and sort of... There was something about this. It was a kind of climate thing. Things I agree with, it was green energy. I'm all for that. Whatever. Great. Let's have innovation. I'm not against any of that. I am against the windmills. The insane windmills. Totally inefficient. Yeah. And then they have to go into landfills. And they only last a certain amount of years. And they have to take them down. And they bury them in the earth where they never degrade. Great. And they catch fire and it's... Yeah. I think kill birds. Wait, but they've got... Have you heard the latest though? This is the... It's actually one of my bits to go back to the thing. Because it's so crazy. Is the new plan for windmills is offshore windmills in California. In two parts. Moro Bay of the Central Coast Humboldt up in the north, including having them far out because the wind is more. But acceptals are the ocean is deep there. So they're going to have floating windmills. Have you heard this one? No. Floating. And these windmills are... They're big. They're like a thousand feet. That's the height of the Eiffel Tower pretty much. Floating. And one of the proposals, like 10,000, it's a 10,000 Eiffel Tower floating off the... It's insane. Trump just stopped it. And now they're suing to reopen it. Oh... By the way, when... When energy... When we have in California today existing, natural gas fired power stations, which could provide all art more than all our electricity needs today. More than all. It's like something like 300 gigawatt-aurs-e, we only use about 270, something like that. But they're running these natural gas power stations like like 20% of their capacity to use as backup for the windmills and for the solar farms. If you ran them at full capacity, what we've already got is you don't need to build anything. You could more than meet all our needs. But no, that's too sensible. So we have the floating windmills. And of course we have the highest electric bills in the country, apart from Hawaii, double the national average. And the reason I got across at this conference is that they were going, you want to reduce the renewable goals or something. No, I just want common sense. I'm all for it. If it makes sense, if you can make it pay great. But the people who you're hurting with all of this is regular working people. Not kind of elite people are conference in Sacramento. It's just working-class people who are just being crushed. And I see it every day. And the struggle, you know, literally they, the number one thing people say to me, it's really striking when in all these, you know, I've really met a lot of people. As I said, hundreds of events, thousands, thousands of people. They say, it's not a good luck. It's like you have to win. There's like this intensity. It's really interesting. Well, because they know it's slipping away, they don't want to move. And they're so, it's hard. It's definitely worse over the last 10 years. And they don't want to move. And it's so difficult. And the fucking story. But people just, oh, and it's not even, it's so casual and cruel the way it's like, yeah, for our ideology, will jack up your electric bills and your gas prices. And you just have to suck it up because we want to make ourselves feel like we're leading on climate. That's the other thing. I was like, there were yelling at me from this conference. And I said, you tell me what is the impact of any of this on climate change? I said, I'll give you everything you're saying about climate change. Okay? Let's agree. Climate change. We've got a fight climate change. What is this doing to fight climate change? What is the impact on global temperatures of any of this? And like, nothing. Because the answer is zero. It has zero impact on global temperatures, which is the only thing that matters. And then someone shouts out, this is where they always go, oh, we're leading. We have to have a leadership role. We're leading. That's it. Who's following? No one. Because it's crazy. It's hurting people. All these countries are backing off it. That's the one thing that China has an advantage in is that their government and their business work like that. And the business works for the government. Exactly. And it controls the businesses. It's not a good thing. But the one advantage that they have in there, they don't do anything stupid. That's going to lose money for virtue signaling. Exactly. They open coal funds. Fire funds. Like crazy. Exactly. Which are part of the energy that's going into making the solar panels that are shit to force the ocean to make these people feel good. It's true. It is true. It's wild. I mean, it's just wild company. It's wild. But I mean, this is the problem with a government handling something versus the private sector. The private sector handled it. It would have to be profitable. It would have to make sense. And they keep saying solar is really cheap. You know, I said, great. So why do we have the highest electric bills in the country apart from Hawaii? If it's also great. I'm not against it. If you want to have a solar panel, a battery, that's great. You know, like I'm not against any of this. But don't force it in a way that just raises the cost for regular working people. Look, California just loves to regulate. They love it. It's part of the big government. Have you seen the tires? The tires? The tires. Yeah. No, you've seen the car. I was going to bring that out. Yeah. So what is the tire? Let's pull it up, Jamie. The new California regulations on tires restricting the kind of tires you can buy. They can't help themselves. They can't help themselves. They need to justify all these jobs. There's so much government. But I just want to give you this is a good example, which is all of these things. California regulations approve new rules limiting what replacement tires you can buy for your car. So what is the rationale behind this? Approved new rules that were restrict, which tires you can buy when it's time to replace them. In NANOS-VOTE, California Energy Commission voted to adopt new rules that will phase out the sale of replacement tires that don't meet certain energy efficiency standards. Ultimately about protecting consumers. I see this as a sheltering the public from higher costs in the long term, long run excuse me. Tire manufacturers and the commission staff are at odds of whether this will add to the cost of living the state. It will both sides of the knowledge. This will no longer allow the sale of significant portion of the tires currently sold in California. By the way, that's 70%. The rule so the center of this is a tires rolling resistance or how much energy a tire uses as it rolls down the road. Lower resistance means a vehicle uses less gas or electricity. New cars come with energy efficient tires, but consumers typically replace those with higher rolling resistance tires. I wonder if that has anything to do with performance cars. So I would imagine rolling resistance. So rolling resistance, what would that mean? Does that mean friction? Yes, basically friction is traction. So you want more traction. So you're basically making people buy performance tires? No, the other way around. Really? Yeah, the other way around. So traction is less resistance. It's more resistance. Maximum resistance is traction. But they will allow the sale of tires with a maximum rolling resistance of 9.1 Newton's per kilotone. It lowers it to 7.2 starting in 2033. So yeah, it's making it less traction. That's what it's saying, right? Rolling resistance. I'm not sure what it says. What they want is the energy efficient, ensure replacement tires sold in California are at least as energy efficient on averages the tires that come with the truck. So my perception is that a tire with more traction would be more efficient. No, for driving. Yeah, but no for climate. When you go into the store to buy them, you're just most people are going to buy the cheapest thing available. They're not going to. Right. And the cheapest thing available would have less traction. Correct? I just beat the cheapest thing available. Right. The thing about the cars like performance tires, they don't last as long because there's a softer rubber. And the softer rubber grips better. And so like if you buy less, they want to get rid of. There's really want to get rid of them. But those are the ones that have more traction. That's what I'm confused about. It seems to be more energy efficient in terms of the use of the car. Well, that's what they're arguing it's for. But they are, you're going to end up with these little tires that don't, I mean all the people that want to go off road or whatever. That's what you can't buy off road cars. I know. I, 70% of the of the tires are going to be banned that are currently sold. That's 70%. That was one of the reporters at KCRA Ashley's of Olive. She's really on all these stories. Very aggressive. She's really exposing like this nonsense. And that was that I think her number 70%. Wouldn't they just make new off road tires then? Yeah, but there wouldn't be as good. Bad. How often are you driving off road in the middle of it? Well, I'm not, but some people are. But I just want you who love driving off road. And they're not having views. Are we doing this? We have road stores. The bad times. We're always talking about. Over you, we've got homeless everywhere. The highest tax in country. Businesses are leaving every single day. It's a real economic emergency. We have the highest unemployment rate in the country. We have the highest poverty rate in the country. The highest cost of living. And this is what the government's focused on. I mean, people got to wake up. Right? This is insane that they're focused on this. They're churning out absolute nonsense. The regulations, the bureaucracy. This is totally unaccountable. This is some bureaucrat that's discovered a rule. Nancy Skinner from Berkeley is to represent Berkeley. Just found this thing in some obscure place that no one had noticed for 20 years. Suddenly, this bureaucratic agency decides to bring in this rule. Not no input from the voters. But here's my question is, what is this impact going to have on the car market? Like, if you sell a car that has a particular type of performance tire that no longer does this? I don't know. Quick, can we ask, perplexity? Is this referring to tires with more traction or less traction? Energy.California.gov, second sentence, is unfortunately, replacement tires are often less efficient. That's why your mileage drops. The first time you replace your tires and the efficiency gap between new car tires and replacement tires means California drivers are paying nearly a billion dollars in additional fuel costs. Are these inefficient tires less expensive? Is that what it is? Yeah, I think I'm about it. Makes sense, right? So the more expensive tires are more efficient, which means they would have better traction. Is that what it is? That makes sense, right? No. Because if the tire has less traction, that means it slips more. If it slips more, it sounds efficient. You wouldn't get as good a gas mileage. But they're doing this for climate. That's what they're saying. We need to lower emissions. That's what it's all about because of the use of the car. There's 70% of things crazy. So if you have a, let's say if you buy a Chevy truck, that's an off-road truck, right? Those are not efficient tires. So what are you going to be able to get for them now? I don't know. I mean, it just comes out. So everyone's looking into this. And you just think, and there's no recourse? Well, there will be one I'm there because I'm going to get rid of these people because this is going back to the question earlier. Okay. Benefits of the proposed regulation. Consumer savings. Proposed regulation would save nearly 1 billion per year in gasoline and electricity costs. Right. Air quality. By reducing fuel consumed, the proposed regulation would reduce CO2 emissions by 2.0 million metric tons per year, which the equivalent of taking 400,000 gasoline cars off California roads would also reduce other criteria air pollutant such as nitric oxide and particulate matter. Reduced energy demand. The proposed regulation would reduce California demand for gasoline by 141 million gallons, also reduced demand for electricity by 0.9 terawatts per hour. Oh, excuse me. Each year. Yeah. Okay. The following tires are excluded from the proposed regulation minimum performance standards. Competition tires used for motor sports, winter type snow tires, all season winter performance tires used and retreaded tires, deep tread tires, tires designed for ATVs or other off-road vehicles, a large off-road tires for use up to 90-9 miles an hour, motorcycle tires, temporary spare tires, small tires with 13 inch nominal rim diameter proposed, limited production tires, tires sold for use from the emergency vehicle, high load index tires, tires not capable of sustaining speeds over 50 miles per hour and space saver tires. So it seems like there's a lot of caveats. Nope. This is because look at that. Like that list again. Nobody believes that this is about saving money. No. Like they're just wanting. This is entirely the ideology for climate. That this is some bullshit calculation. Is there a world where that makes sense though? Were they right? And it will reduce all that gasoline and it actually will be better for everybody. And you'll force people to make better tires. And, you know, they're churning out low quality tires and this could be mitigated a long time ago. Well, I don't know. I think that the reaction to it is exactly the opposite, which is here they come again. Here they come again as real. Yeah. Yeah. Another thing, as I said, it's just been announced. So we've got to dig into it. But I mean, it's just to me such a kind of crazy example of them endlessly micromanaging everything. Yeah. The market didn't decide. We've got these big, big problems. New tire rule could wipe out 70% of what's on the shelf and Sacramento sat on the law for 23 years. So Sacramento did invent a new law on Monday. It finally read one. It wrote in 2003. Okay. I mean, it's just infuriating day love to tell you what to do. Okay. Sort of what California is. So they did. So we did a thing last year. They in the latest. This is the point about there's no checks. No one's stopping anything. Right. In the last legislative session last year, not even the whole year, just a few months, they passed 1,118 bills. We counted them. We printed them out. It was double my height. Obviously no one's written. No one can read them. New some signs, most of them. Like the vast majority. He hasn't read them. It has stuff like this in it. And no one's paying attention. And the corrupt system, the interest groups that want what they want from the system, they get these bills written. And then they get passed. And then here you are 23 years later, something that's in some obscure law. That's how it all works. And the answer to the question, like what could you do about it is basically captured in these two things. Like number one, all these agencies that are pushing out these rules, it's the executive branch. So as the governor, you control the executive branch. You can fire the people on these boards and you can replace them with people with some common sense. And you can actually merge them. You can reorganize them. You could cut them back. There's a whole bunch of things you could do on the bureaucracy. Because so much of this is coming out of the bureaucracy. Secondly, you can veto the legislation. And the point is always made if they have a two-thirds majority, they can overturn a veto. That's correct. But the last time they overturned a veto from the governor was 1979. So they don't like doing it. Because suddenly they have to justify all this shit. That goes through without any scrutiny. If you veto it, they have, if they want to overturn it, suddenly they have to make the argument. And so much of what you get in California just goes through that anyone noticing. That's the real corruption in the system. And so the other thing I'd say is that you also write the budget. The governor writes the budget and sends it to the legislature. And then you have to negotiate. But again, if you take out all this waste and we just announced last week, operations zero waste, cancel funding for high speed rail, cancel free health care for illegal immigrants. All these things that we said we do. How much has been spent on that high speed rail? So far, total $15 billion. Oh, that's a bargain. So the total got a lot done though, right? Okay, so that was, so it was, it was, it was 2008. It was supposed to be $30 billion in the total budget. And it's supposed to be open in 2020. And it was two and a half hours from San Francisco to LA. So the latest is it's going to be open maybe if you're lucky by the end of 2030. It's going to be the new budget from $30 billion. It's now $230 billion, right? The plan, as they laughably call it, is the first bit is San Francisco to Merced at the top of the Central Valley on the regular train line that's already there. And then Merced to Bakersfield is the high speed rail. And then Bakersfield to LA, a bus. Have you heard that? That's real. It's real. That drive from Bakersfield to LA, which I've done a lot is through the district already can chest it as far. Right. You can take that can take to an hour of pounds if you're unlucky. So it's, it's, it's, it's, it's so, it's $230 billion for that. $230 billion. And then Bacerra, my pun, he went to Fresno the other week. He announced that he would, that he would finish it on time and on budget. Oh, on time was six years ago. On budget. They've spent $120 million. They've spent the total, the budget was 30. They've spent 15 and they've not laid any tracks at all. Gavin, it's classic Gavin. It's one almost my favorite. He did an event because obviously he's running for president. He doesn't, this is embarrassing. He wants to sort of shake the narrative. So he did this press conference somewhere there with trains in the background to make it look like this is a real thing. And they haven't laid any track. And there's no plansel laid any track. But he was standing by tracks to sort of, I think, make people think there's tracks. Oh, but even he, the phrase that he used was to announce that we are now entering the track laying face. That could be another 10 years. It's so ridiculous. And then you're going to have to get a bus. And the bus, it's real. That is the plan. And then, why is that? Because the logistics, they can't get the train through the mountains. Yeah. That's it. So you have to have a bus. Yeah. I mean, oh, they, they, I don't actually know what the long term plan. I can't believe that's the whole idea. I think that's just what's going to be available. So it's just like the most tunneling has to happen on that part. So maybe they're just waiting. I think it's a long term. It's not that eventual. So the days of more tunnels. It was kind of. They were required the most tunneling of the mountain crossings with four separate tunnels to like 28 miles and length. How much of the nature across the San Andreas Fault, which is the biggest problem? Oh, you bet. They're going to cross the earthquake. How much of nature is going to get destroyed in the production? I know. But who even wants this? I mean, tunneling through mountains. The other thing is, so I somewhat spoke to someone who's works with the, you know, the the whole thing for five billion. Not enough. That's true. But it's such a, you know, it's such a monument to the whole thing, right? Take the money, waste it, spend it on nothing endlessly delay. How come Gavin's not running again? He can't. Oh, he did. Two terms. Yeah. Yeah. It's so crazy. And you've got this pretend, this is what's really, they're just a video that someone found of him talking in 2015 when he was Lieutenant Governor about what a joke the whole thing was. Yeah. On to speaking very honestly about it. Yeah. And it's kind of funny and ridiculous. Oh, look at that. He says that then. Now he says, but it's actually infuriating because they're still taking the money to pay for it. They're still pretending and they're taking money out of the, the funding, like I said, comes from this thing called cap and invest, which is the gas tax. It's just insane. Steve, I hope you win. We've got to wrap this up and bring it home, but I hope you win. It'll be fun. Yeah. It'll be, it'll be hilarious if you win. Great. What job do you want you? I don't want to. I'll have you decide. I don't even like going back to California. Oh, well, okay. The only reason I'm doing it is that you've moved back. I know it's too good here. I love it here. I love it here. I can see that. I really hope you win. Thank you, man. I think you have a chance. I really do. I mean, you make, you make a lot of sense and that's a lot in this, in this day and age. It's a lot. You're also actually a good guy. Like I know you. You're an actual good guy. You're not like some weird lizard person. You know what I mean? Like there's some. Yes, I've met a new and Sacramento. You are who you are. You are. You are really you. I could attest to that. I know you. Like I've known you before you had any political aspirations, you're the exact same person. There's a lot of these people that are just skin suits. They're skin suits over lizards. There's lizards in there. Whether perfectly or physically. Yes. They're fucking lizard people. And that's a real thing. Oh. So I hope you win. You can come to my inauguration. I will. Just that. Come back to that. Yeah. I'll come. I'll come. All right. All right.