Hello world today my guest is Seth Ferranti Seth spent 21 years in federal prison after being convicted as an LSD kingpin He initially faked his suicide to evade law enforcement and he ended up on the US Marshall's top 15 most wanted list Before he was eventually arrested being a first-time non violent drug offender This a very of his sentence garnished national attention and was covered extensively by the Washington Post the Rolling Stone Vice and many other big publications. Hope that intro. What's your whistle folks without further ado? Please welcome Seth Ferranti All right boom Seth Ferranti welcome to the show so the the short synopsis of your story is You were a teenage LSD kingpin right yeah, I mean basically more or less So what you probably tell it better than I do so people who aren't familiar with you want to just give me a quick background I mean basically Like around 13 I start getting into drugs. I started getting the counterculture. You know mostly psychedelics and weed and You know like most people when you start Using you know you look for you know especially when you're young like you're looking for a way to pay for it So you know I was the type of person, you know all my friends wanted weed all my friends wanted a LSD So you know I was kind of the bold adventurous one so I would find the connects I would find the people to go to and I would go and buy it, you know and at first just get free drugs You know but eventually after doing that for a couple years. You know by the time I'm 15 or 16. I was like You know maybe I can make money. You know doing this. So you know I got better contacts. Um I Started following the Grateful Dead You know like the late 80s. Mm-hmm. What year was this? Oh late 80s. Yeah late 80s You know like around 87 88 you know when I was 16 17 years old like a you know about a junior in high school Started following the Grateful Dead. Got it LSD connect Got some weed connects like actually Down here for my ears. I got a weed connect out of Fort Myers. I got a weed connect in Dallas I got a weed connect connecting Kentucky plus I was getting stuff out of California like Northern California Animal Triangle through some homeboys in San Francisco and um Yeah, first it was just high school. You know I went to a big high school 4,000 people You know we had like a sister high school like 4,000 people So I was kind of doing a hand-to-hand, you know retail sales But then as as all those kids this is in north of Virginia as all those kids went off to college You know they went to college and they would call me they'd be like hey can you bring stuff up and then instead of just one You know friend it was like they had 25 friends You know so then it just like you know about my 89, you know just my my Network just started expanding You know and really I only had I only had like a nine-month run where I would say like I was a real big drug dealer You know not even big in the big scheme of things. You know, I mean I wasn't like Pablo Escobar But you know for a teenager. I mean I was 19. I was probably making like 25 30 grand a month and we're talking like 1989 Yeah, that's big money, you know, so you know and I was and not like I was getting a lot But I was getting like 10,000 hits of acid a month, you know 100 sheets and I would probably go through I don't know like 100 pounds. This brick weed though back then. It's brick weed Yeah, I mean it's totally different game than now, but I would get like 100 pounds of brick weed You know might last me two or three months in the fall You could get good weed like from northern California like what they would call what they would call outdoor now You know about back then like we called it kind bud because compared to the brick weed It was like kind so I would get that a Kentucky Southern Kentucky and Northern California, but you can only get that in the fall because you know that it was like little small farmers They grow like 25 30 pounds. So by December all that stuff would be gone So was weed the best drug to make money off of was it could you make the most profit off of weed or or why did you choose weed? Okay, listen if you aren't already gambling and betting on sports you need to be because I've been cashing in big for the last two months After I signed up with my bookie dot a G I fucking love my bookie a G I was using my bookie way before they reached out to sponsor the show and this month only our listeners and subscribers are Gonna get matched on their first deposit up to five hundred dollars when they sign up with my bookie by using the promo code Concrete KON CR ETE football season is officially here and betting My throat is so my fucking voice is so fucked up football season is officially here and the betting has begun It's time for you to win big with my bookie dot a G they have all the crazy pregame Prop bets you could ask for and you can even bet the games live to shift the odds into your favor and always come out on top They are the leading betting site globally. That's why we use it and I've been making so much goddamn money I'm gonna start investing in some more real estate if you want to bet and win big this NFL season It's gotta be with my bookie dot a G sign up today with a promo code concrete KON CR ETE and you're gonna get matched up to five hundred dollars on your first deposit. So do it now Back to the show. I you know, I always tell people I never consider myself a criminal You know, I considered myself an outlaw because I broke laws that I thought were wrong so I mean I sold weed Because I mean to me weed and psychedelics are the righteous drugs You know, so I never fuck with like cocaine heroin even like I never did drugs like that I was never interested, you know cocaine heroin meth You know cuz those you know people are always Jones in it's like a bad drug You know addicts people steal stuff. So I was never into that You know I was into what I consider the righteous drugs and um just because you so it you Were mainly into trafficking weed because that's what the drug that you are into personally Yeah, and and and also because I mean I like believed in it. I didn't think it should be illegal You know I was like I was like why it's a fucking plant man it fucking grows You know I'm saying it's been around. Yeah, it's been around forever. So it's cocaine though, right? Not in the form that you buy it in I mean cocaine before the gasoline on it. Yeah Yeah, but um, but definitely weed I Mean I wouldn't make a lot of money back then. I mean I can make like a thousand dollars a pound Basically, you know I would get brick pot at a like Dallas, Texas I would get it for like three four hundred a pound and I could take it up to the East Coast And I could sell it for like you know 13 14 15 hundred a pound, you know easy Mm-hmm, you know the back then I'd say ounces were probably going like You pay maybe 50 60 a quarter and I'll tell that brick pot would go for like 150 160 Wow And how old were you and you eventually that busted? I was I was 20 20 years old when you got busted and and how long did you do in prison? I did 25 years Well, I got census 25 years. I did 21 years Fuck yeah, so I went in You know I went in in 1993 and I got out in 2015, but um, you know I was a fugitive for two years too So you know I got I caught my case summer in 1991 Got indicted and I didn't like what I was looking at you know They were they were talking about you know you go to trial your face in 20 to life You know they you know and and that was like kind of the beginning of the war on drugs 1991 and I was actually in the first wave of Kind of the psychedelics and weed guys, you know because when they made those laws in 1988 It was all for the you know the African American guys in the inner city right Right, right, we're cracking all those dudes in the head given them like 20 30 years for five little stuff Yeah, five grams of crack. That's why they made those laws But then when they got some criticism after they've been doing that for about three years They started getting criticized and especially I'm in northern Virginia So we're right outside of DC so that's you know, it's kind of like You know all the politics and stuff so I almost felt like when my case happened It was like you know, they were like look we bus white drug dealers too I was in that first wave of like weed and psychedelic dudes, you know when they came out to the suburbs You know, they just started they just started hammering us but um Yeah, they they were trying like I was looking at 20 to life You know they wanted like back in the feds too because if you know anything about the feds of feds got like a like a 99% Conviction rate right so yeah, most people in the feds like plead guilty, but even you know more people in the feds like cooperate Mm-hmm. Those people cooperate right. Yeah, that's the only way to get your sentence down Basically, you know, so they were pressing me to cooperate, but you know I was like looking at the situation. You know, I didn't want to put somebody else in a fucked up situation Like I was in I didn't want to do 20 to life and I had a little bit of money You know, I didn't have a lot of money, but I had a little bit of money, you know, I mean I was a You know like I said I I was making you know sometimes 20 25 30,000 a month So I had a little bit of money put away so you know, I basically I took off I was like man fuck these guys You know I'm saying that I took off and I was a fugitive for two years So I didn't get caught or in sentence until 1993 Wow, so you were on the run for two years done Yeah, what was it like when you first found out that you were in trouble or you had the feds on your that you were on the feds radar I mean it was a shock. I mean because I mean basically I was I was a You know, I grew up in the suburbs man, so I was basically a white middle-class kid, you know military brat so I Just didn't think you know I didn't think that that I could face that type of time especially for what I was doing You know considering I was non violent and and like I already said I didn't fuck with like what I considered the bad drugs You know, I was an a violent person You know, so I was like really surprised. I was like how the fuck could I be facing 20 years for like weed and LSD and Really not not even a lot You know in the big scheme of things I mean I mean there's dudes bringing like tons of marijuana into this country right You know, I mean and and like I knew the LSD scene and the grateful did I mean the chemists I mean they make like hundreds of grams of LSD like each grateful dead show they would fly 25 grams of LSD into each show You know and I was getting like I was getting like one you know one gram You know basically a month one one gram is like a hundred sheets is like 10,000 hits Wow, so I was getting like a gram a month You know in each grateful dead show they were flying in 25 grams. I was like You know, yeah in high school, you know and in You know a fresh min to sophomore in college. Yeah, I was a big drug dealer You know because you know I had the money I had the drugs. Yeah, you were the guy. Yeah I mean we're all kids. Yeah, but you know the big scheme of things so Yeah, I was fucked up man when when that should happen. I was like I couldn't believe it. You know it was kind of like uh I mean it was really a big shock to me and it was also even more to me. It was like a It was like a betrayal to me. You know because I grew up. You know I was American You know I was like man. This is my country. You know, I believe all the bullshit land of the free home of the brave You know capitalism you can do anything you wanted and then like they're gonna come in hammer Me and I'm like damn. I'm like fucking You know not I need to go to war or nothing. I'm so free anymore. Is it? Yeah? I mean I didn't like I went to war and fought for the country. You know, but I would ever if they called me I would have you know just you know that was my time, you know they didn't have that then so Whatever, you know, but I was like a red blood in American dude and they did I you know I felt I was like damn my own fucking country's doing this shit to me Just know for some yeah for some fucking weed and LSD for some shit. This should be legal So that's really that's really how I felt that's like was really my motivation You know not I can say now, you know, whatever 30 years later. I mean I feel justified in my actions, but you know maybe I was a man I had my time or whatever, but I mean that was like my whole thing You know, yeah, I'm not saying I don't I like make money. I mean everybody likes money who doesn't like money You know saying money makes life easy. So I like money You know I like being the rock star. You know I like getting that recognition. You know being the man when I came and I liked all that You know, but I have like an underlying my underlying thing was this shit should be legal I mean all my friends smoke we you know not all my friends at L's people that I did L's D I was like you know a people you party man you fucking do shit. That's what you do especially you know Whatever you want to say white America whatever America college America. I mean that's what people do You know and I saw myself as like a facilitator of that whole scene Now the whole thing started was when there was like Watching the little vice clip there was like some kid who was running through the woods naked on LSD and he shot He grabbed the cops gone and shot him in the arm or something. Yeah, that was like the the cataclysm of everything right? Yeah, so there was this You know they got this area in Fairfax County called Clifton And it's like all like big million dollar houses and you know this is like back then it was million dollar houses So we're talking you know like eight nine ninety and they're all like on five or six acres and You know sometimes like every time like any any place in the suburbs. You know when people's parents go out of town People throw parties, you know So they used to but they used to throw some big parties out there because they had a lot of land You know sometimes they would like bring they would bring like stages out for bands They would like skateboard ramps. They would like literally move skateboard ramps in you know and have skate shows and all types of stuff So they were having this big party out there and you know eventually like all parties You know that the cops get called you know so the cops got called and there was this one kid I never met the kid. I don't know who he is, but you know 15 year old kid I mean his name was all in my paperwork. I can't remember though, but like a little 15 year old kid He was tripping on acid. He was like basically the cops came and like he freaked out and he was running through the woods naked and You know this cop chased him down, you know Tack on them or whatever grab them and I guess whatever the kid freaked out grab the cops gun and you know I shot him, but It was like basically like he shot him in the arm. I mean, you know I mean it could have been I'm not downplaying anything. I mean it could have been more serious I mean you shot him but I mean he shot him in the arm You know so basically like a flesh wound or whatever, but uh That like you said that was a catalyst. Yeah for my case cuz that was like LSD. That was like LSD they came from You know a batch that I brought into the area so and that kid told him your name Well, he didn't know my name, but you know he knew he told him who he got it from and you know how this how the feds do the feds It's like dominoes. Yeah, you know, so Let's say something happens to you. They're like who do you get from? Oh, I got it from him You know and he got it from him and it's just it's like dominoes You know, that's how the feds do because they go in threat and you know, especially you know back then they they go in threaten You know middle-class kids tell them they're gonna go to jail for tinnert life and and they do they play it up They say like oh yeah, you're gonna end up in the cell with fucking big bubba What do you think's gonna fucking happen? Yeah, they really sell it to you? Yeah, man You know the end and like I say I'm not saying whatever you know you break the law you get caught You got to do time, but you know the the more the older I've gotten I Look at how the system is you know the war on drugs all that I mean Everybody can say now that the world drugs is wrong pretty much but it's it's more than the war on drugs Man you got to look at the way law enforcement operates you got to look at the way You know that they try to manipulate people and the things they say I mean really if you think about it Dude, that's like fucking evil man. Yeah, those are something you know Some of those dudes are just doing their jobs and you know They're probably decent dudes and they probably let motherfuckers offer some little bullshit or some weed or whatever but the whole concept That whole war on drugs and law enforcement and enforcing people to inform you know on their friends You know become an outcast or whatever. I mean, I'm not even gonna say take it to like you know It's not like we were the mafia So it's not like anybody was you know fearing for their lives because they snitched But I'm saying just that's like you know traumatic to put somebody you know like like what do you think most people do? Are you gonna go to jail to 10 to life and big bubba's gonna be your soulmate? All right, you know you're fucking like an 18 year old fucking white kid, you know you just want to fucking go to college and party All right, you know so you know at the time when all that should happen Right my first five years in prison, you know, I was pretty angry You know and I'd be like oh fuck these snitches rat ass motherfuckers, you know Whatever you gotta be hard play the convict role and shit you're in prison, you know gotta put the mask on and all that shit But uh You know now I look at it, you know as a years went by and I got older I just look at it more like a I Mean it's a system. It's a system. It's fucked up. I mean, you know You still might got some pure say oh well somebody should have told somebody no the system is what is fucked up to make people have to make those choices What was the story leading up to your? Final arrest to when you actually went to prison like explain the story how you're on the when you're on the run and You had to you did some research and you figured out how to create a bunch of fake identities and then you tried to eventually fake your death Yeah, well, you know that the fake identity started basically You know getting fake ID to go to bars, you know because I was all the East Coast College is so I had a bunch of buddies at West West Virginia University, right in Morgan town and it was like you could just go up there And you know you need a fake guy you need a fake ID for the bars on Main Street So you would just go down in somebody's room and they would like have all the photography stuff everything set up You know where they could process it, you know the computer stuff and print it out and That's when I start first started getting fake IDs, you know, so I had a bunch of like I was 17 18 19 I got a whole bunch of fake IDs just to go to the bars at the college You know, I mean, it's it's like some bullshit, you know, it's not gonna stand up, but you know at night You know going in with the bouncers that she's good enough. Yeah, it's good enough so That was kind of like my first experience with fake IDs so then when I called the case You know and I and I started deciding like you know I was gonna take off I already had some fake IDs, but I was like man They're not gonna you know stand the test of time You know like in the daylight with a cop, right? You know, I'm like this She didn't go to work so you got like holograms and shit built into them But were they it was it like that back then? Yeah, yeah They they they they have like the little holograms, but it would be like I mean it would it would just be like pressed or something Right it would try to emulate a hologram, but it would be like pressed on the plastic or whatever So I mean it really you know, it wasn't that good, but uh So I started I was like man. I got to find a real idea and um I'd actually read this book The book that they made into a movie You know they made the movie catch me if you can Like whatever like 2000 or something early 2000s, but the dude wrote the book like in the mid 80s You know he wrote that book So I'd actually read that book and I'd read other stuff like that and I was kind of interested in Stuff like that. You know for uh I want to say from like a criminal pursuit, but more you like from a scholarly or academic pursuit You know, I've always been a big reader. So I was I was interested in basically like how people would like And I don't even want to say fraud, but just how like how people would get over Mm-hmm You know not like in a fraudulent way like a ripping people off from any just how people would like get over on authority You know that's always kind of been my thing and um I found these companies man. They had these companies uh paladin press lupanix unlimited and It was like Subversus books like probably one of the most famous books a lot of people have heard of that these companies sold was an arkis cookbook In the mid nineties, you know exploded, you know when the internet, you know came around and the an arkis cookbook came out and uh Basically tie everybody had to make meth Mm-hmm So that's probably the most famous, but these companies all they sold was like these subversive You know underground books how to do you know and it's all protected by the first amendment right So um, I'm not even sure if these companies like after the Patriot deck. I think they You know Put these companies out of business. I'm not even sure if they so exist, but um They have like you could get their catalogs and they have like this whole section On um Like getting fake ID Right But not even fake ID like real ID So what I did is I ordered like all these books man I ordered like 25 books. It was like there was this one author like uh It was like called reboard in America Trent Sands They had this whole series called the paper trip. It was like the paper trip one two three four You know they have like books like understanding us. I did identifying documents You know just Like a litany of books man. I mean they had like a whole there's probably 40 or 50 of these books So I ordered like 25 And I just I read them all man I read them like from cover to cover and that's that's the type of dude I am too like when I want to do something I like to read I like to research And I like to read and I like to get as much knowledge as I can about it But then I like to make my own plan You know I'm saying based off the information, you know that I attained You know because because sometimes you would read one of these books and There might be like one page or like one chapter That I actually learned something You know because a lot of it was just like rehash You know a lot of these books rehash But there might be one insight that the author gives you You know that you can take and it's very valuable So um Yeah, I did that and I basically learned to uh You know what they call paper trip and um That was like I would get real ID From the from the department of motor vehicles, you know licenses Uh, you know like what they call the Walker Walker licenses You know like not a driver's license to the Walker's license ID And um And I would basically I would do this what I learned from these books is You want to find a candidate that died before he was five You know so find someone that passed away for whatever what ever reasons You know died before they were five and you wanted to find somebody that was born in one state and died in another state because um You know back then even though they even back then they probably had the technology but You know they they didn't have the money to cross reference all these records So let's say like if you're born in Tampa Bay and you die in Tampa Bay It's like the same department Right? It's like a final they call it's like uh the vital health records or you know department of vital statistics or whatever So they they they match your records up and they'll Stamp deceased on the birth certificate But if you die in one if you die in one state and you're born in another state especially different states I mean you know I mean they don't even do it on a state level probably like even in Florida They don't even do it, you know it's different counties But definitely they don't do it across state lines So once I found this out I would scour the obituaries Right? So I would I would go through obituaries and I would look this was my candidate You know I would look for candidate somebody that was under five and the reason I would pick somebody under five because typically You know especially back then you know in this like the 70s like I was born in 1971 So I was looking somebody You know there was born like anywhere from 68 to 70 you know 76 I had about an eight year window, but especially back then Before before you were five you didn't get a social security number You know I mean I don't know nowadays they may give it to you younger You know I'm saying but back then you know you they need to get a social security number Sometimes not until you were like a teenager You know you started were really yeah Wow. Yeah, so things were different back then you know so You would want to kid under five because then they don't have any other You know records of vital statistics So it's just basically the birth certificate. So I would look for the I would look through the obituaries and in the obituaries I'm looking for this candidate and then from the obituary you basically Um, you know get a lot of information that you need to order the birth certificate Right From the obituary. I would get like to order somebody's death certificate you need to know their name Place the death Data death Right, so I could find somebody there. I get those three things. I order the death certificate then with the obituary and the death certificate I can get the five things that I need For the birth certificate because get the birth certificate. You need like a full name Place a birth data birth Father's full name mothers made a name Right and like I say these are just the vital You know, statistic bureaus or whatever. So I mean basically you write a letter You know you do it through a mail drop. You know like a PO box. It looks like a real dress You know and you you send them a money order, you know like eight or ten dollars and you say like basically like you know On the person's father or on the person's you know and it just has to be a relative You know until you write and then once you got the obituary you find the candidate you get the death certificate to get all the information You need for a birth certificate once you get the birth certificate. You're pretty much home free Because look I can get that birth certificate And you know now this is like whatever. You know. I'm like I'm like I'm like 20 so and a lot of times it Maybe the older you get it's harder to do and it's probably harder to do now because they got identity theft and all that back Then they didn't even have identity theft you didn't have identity theft to like around the mid 90s or so You know, so it wasn't even back then you could legally have An ID and someone else's name as long as you weren't using it for fraudulent purposes. Wow I mean, but you know, that's like America. You know, that's what America used to be and stuff like that You know, it's changed a lot but So once I got the birth certificate I was home free because then I could go in To any DMV right and the only a lot of times if you just get the walkers license Not the driver's license. All you need is a birth certificate and like an address You know like you know, address that says you live here You know like electric bill or something like that You know in that name right and to get the driver's license you just need to verify social security number And so what I used to do to verify social security number I had this book It was called understanding us identifying documents and in the I understanding the identity you as identifying documents each state Has like a the first three numbers in your social security number are by state So each state has like you know from You know, whatever 039 to 042 So that determines the state then the two middle numbers Go by the year, but It's not like if you're born in 71 the middle two numbers are going to be 71 It's like if you're born in 71 in that state the numbers might be two three But it's all up done by a chart It's all like corresponding and they have these charts in the book You know because that's what the social security administration people use and then the last four numbers are random So what I would do is You know depending on where the person was born I would fucking determine what the number is I would look at the charts You know in the years and everything and then I would determine that and then um And then like I would get a w2 form right And I would put that social security number and that person's name You know who's identity I was going to assume And I make it seem like I've worked at like some local place You know restaurant or whatever and I'd write their address and I'd do a w2 form just like You know they give you a w2 now and you can get w2 forms from like any Like business wholesale supply company You hope like a box Of like those government those government printed You know like I mean I don't I don't know what it is now But back then you know because everything's probably electronic now But back then it's like you know these multi You know like so it makes like five copies. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The carbon copies. Yeah. Yeah That's so you know you could just type it right on I have type right I would type that shit on and then I'm going I'd have the birth certificate I would have the uh w2 to verify my social security even though the social security was fake it under scrutiny The social security number would not stand up Because it was fake but a lot of times when you just go to driver's license You know that social security more like if you went to a bank or you try to open a bank account Because I did that couple times. I tried to open bank account Under these assumed names and the social security number never stood up They would tell me straight up. They'd be like are you sure that your wife's so scared? No, no I'd be like oh, I think I need to get the fuck out of here Yeah, we have a guy on here who used to do the same thing for bank for bank fraud and he would go and He would get he would convince homeless guys Who'd pay them for all of their information for their social security number for all of that stuff Give him like 20 bucks. He'd spend like a hundred bucks to get five socials. Oh, yeah. Oh, he's probably killing it Oh, yeah, he was killing it. Yeah, I know I know now a Lot of people they get those federal tax numbers You know like the the federal It's just like a social security number except for a business. Hmm. It's like a tax idea. Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, so in like like doodle by like you can like get like 10 of those I mean, I don't know where they get them from but they get like 10 of them if they're good Like they just use those like social security numbers just for like all types of different fraud really You know X-Cons X-Cons are not hard to look up. You can like sun biz is the Florida like business director You can you can just type in any name. You can find a list of businesses and look at it find all their EIN numbers most most X-Cons Not hard to look up. You can like sun biz is the Florida like business director. You can you can just type in any name You can find a list of businesses and look at find all their EIN numbers most most ex cons most ex cons are They basically do like I mean, I'm not saying I'm not trying to put a bad name on ex cons ex cons are still doing criminal stuff They basically do like weed stuff and Like fraud, you know because it's it's like you know the least you know what you get in there and you learn like what they punish you know Yeah, it has a biggest risk or the biggest reward with the least risk. Mm-hmm Yeah, but um, so how many of these fake ideas did you create? I probably had like 25 25 25 one time Wow, yeah, I had four passports and different names You know my eventual plan was to get like a quarter million cash and Fuck off, you know because because you know I was military Brett So look I lived in Germany for two years. I think a little bit closer I lived in Germany for two years when I was a kid. I lived in England for three years So I was familiar with Europe You know I'm saying so like I was gonna, you know, but I don't know the a lot of the stuff with dealing drugs and I guess with anything in life like You just get used to the lifestyle, you know, and then it's just you're just trying to maintain the lifestyle You know, so I guess I guess that could be said for any any walk of life for whatever, but uh Yeah, I never got that quarter million and I never got through Europe Yeah, clearly right So what what did happen? Well what happened? You know you had all these ideas you were basically you knew the feds Were onto you didn't didn't you didn't you have like your phone tapped? So didn't you and your friends have like your phones tapped? You knew they were like following you right and they were like pinpointing where you were at and tracking what you were doing Yeah, well not at first. I mean You know for two years, so I'm a fugitive for two years. So look like the first six months like I'm paranoid like I think Like the feds got that power, you know because when you go through a situation like that Especially as a young kid and basically you know all your friends tell on you and you're just like you think the feds are like Omnipotent Right, but in reality right? They're not omnipotent all their information. They're getting from the people that you know You know I'm saying yeah, so So it first you know I'm saying they I mean they can't have people's phones and all that but that that With me that came like if that was like maybe like a like when the US marshals were like hot on my trail like right at the end Mm-hmm, you know they were kind of tracking my movements through like a 1-800 beeper You know, but that was like like right at the end, but you know so for the first six months I would say I was pretty paranoid because I thought they had all these powers and a plus I was fucked up You know I always tell people it's like um You know that there's this Jimmy Hendrix song, you know that it's like called castles made of sand and it's like You know castles made of the sand slip in the sea eventually and that was kind of like like my story, you know because You know I'd made myself into this like you know want to be rock star or whatever But it was all based you know on my ability to move weed and LSD You know and when that foundation was like ripped out from under me by the feds I mean I was fucked up. I didn't know who I was you know, so You know, it's all this shit and then you know I take off. I'm a fugitive like can't even be my real name So that first six months, you know a lot of paranoia a Lot of like you know, you're just like question like you know who the fuck am I what am I doing? You know is this the right thing, but you know at the same time the fucking alternative You know snitch on your fucking friends or do 20 life. I mean, you know, you're just like fuck but uh You know after six months it took him about six months. I'd say I started getting my mojo back and um First I went out out to LA I was in Hollywood, you know I had a little bit of money I spent it though really quick like when six months I spent all the money I had so I ended up back in Dallas Texas With my weed connect this dude, you know, Mexican Eddie who had a trucking line was bringing weed over from Matamoris up to Dallas and I started selling weed and um You know like Texas and Dallas But I mean down there was like back then like ounces were going for like 60 So it was like you really couldn't make a lot of money So I was kind of selling weed to like this. There was a stress runner called hair against and I was kind of selling weed to like the restaurant crowd, you know I lived with his dude. He was a cook He was actually from Missouri So one weekend he was like hey, dude. I'm gonna go home. You know I'm fucking go party. He's like you want to come and I'm like shit I'm like, you know people that can sell weed. Can you sell some weed? He's like fuck yeah, so I go to my dude, Mexican Eddie, you know, I grabbed like fucking 20 pounds on him Like fucking we drive up in this dude's truck and Fucking I didn't even sell all the weed man. I probably only sold like 14 pounds. I probably bought six pounds back to Texas But I made connections and then that was kind of how I made my money in the first place I would like buy something somewhere at a low cost and I would bring it somewhere else and sell it for a higher cost I mean, that's a basic premise of you know, drugs mugging. Mm-hmm So once I found this out I was like fuck it I was back on you know where I could I had a margin I could make like a thousand dollars a pound taking that shit up to St. Louis so I started doing that Kind of got my fucking mojo back, you know and basically I had like another little run, you know like another little run Probably you know it took probably took me like Six to nine months to build up my clientele where I was making good money and then I had about probably another nine eight nine months run before before the feds got me and How that happened I was actually the same dude the cook We'll just call him the cook and He was selling weed for me up there and he was still working as a cook and he was actually working at TGI Fridays Right by the St. Louis Airport and so we were actually going out to party in the street this place It's called Saint Charles. It's like Main Street like down down on the river But he would need to go make a drop with one of his guys, you know at TGI Friday So we go to make the drop, but you know that the kitchen is so busy You know, it's like on a Friday night his dude can't get off the line So he doesn't make the drop, you know, and it's not even a lot of weeds like half pound So you know, but I don't know this, you know, you know, you know I thought he made the drop so whatever you know my bad You know or whatever, but he didn't tell me so then we go and I make a drop You know, I dropped like two pounds with this guy and You know work waiting in the back of a Burger King parking lot and you know We're about to go on a party and I've just waited for money and I don't think my dude has any weed and he doesn't say nothing So you know, we're sitting in the back of Burger King parking lot. We're just fucking smoking joints like fucking crazy, you know, I'm saying and And this is another fucking You know turn of bad luck So just so happens like we were in the Burger King first or even but you know when people do drug deals They take forever. So you know, I give this dude two pounds. He goes down to the trailer park It's taken him fucking forever to bring the fucking month So we eat in the Burger King. We go out. We're smoking fucking joints and Just so happened this Burger King Had got robbed like a week before and they had gone in the back So they see us out in the fucking back in a truck and they fucking call the cops on us You know the casserole up and the fucking they smell the weed You know, so boom they're like fucking on us and you know, I'm thinking we're cool like whatever I got a couple joints on me, we know what the fuck they're gonna do, you know what I'm saying but Dude had a half pound and it could tar case and they found that so they rested us both Brought us in printed us and still I'm good because it's not my car I'm under fake ID and it's his weed So I mean he got a ticket whatever. I mean it's my weed, but you know really I fronted to him It's his weed it's his responsibility. So you know, he does the right thing. He tells him. It's my weed He tells them. I don't know anything about it, but they printed right and When I was a fugitive I had watched all those shows like America's most wanted You know like all all the fucking all the fucking shows, you know cuz I was interested like do you become more interested in it When you beat you were on the run. Oh of course. I was studying. I was like they find people. Hey, you know I like how long does it take you know from so from watching these shows I'd seen like serial killers it took him like 90 days to match up their prints like fucking serial killers, right? So I was like who the fuck am I? I'm like a little fucking weed fucking LSD dealer non violent, you know fucking from the suburbs like who the fuck kids fuck about me But I had no idea I had no idea I was top 15 US Marshall's list. Oh shit. Yeah top 15 fugitive dude like For whatever fucking reason, right? So they match out my fucking prints in like three days and they got the fucking because they they released me, you know cuz dude He's like it's my charge is my car. It's my weed. So they released me, but they ran my prints You know cuz that's what they do when they rest people. They just run your prints just to see They mash up my prints and they're like oh, you're not fucking this dude. You're fucking Seth Ferranti. So fucking the you the fucking Fugitive task forces like fucking on my my tail and this dude It's like his real name and like you know he has family in St. Louis You know I'm saying so they're like all on his grandparents and his fucking mom and shit And he's all like fucking freaking out and then he starts fucking cooperating and That was when it was like the little thing like the seven days where they were like tracking my movements Because they were trying to see because you know I had some weeds. I was selling weed and the dude The cook who got busted knew I had weed and I was trying to know I know I got arrested But I had no idea they're gonna match my prints in the fugitive task forces looking for me But still I'm still like I need to get the fuck out of dodge Cuz they're gonna match my prints up in like fucking 16 to 90 days and they're gonna find out who I am So I'm trying to fucking move this weed and then I'm gonna fucking take the money and I'm gonna go fucking You know just basically go somewhere where nobody knows me and hide out But you know I didn't have the opportunity because they were fucking on me and is that when you tried to fake You're death oh No, yeah, I skipped that part so we can go back to that that was when I left so when I left in 91 Right that was like I told you I was doing everything with the books I was coming up with a fake ID plan right and then this was like my my grand plan right after getting the fake IDs because I knew if I was gone like after seven years Like if I just disappeared like after seven years like you could be declared legally dead in this country Okay, like if you just disappear without a trace Mm-hmm. And nobody finds a body or nothing like in seven years you can do be declared legally dead So that was like my that was like my grand plan cuz I was like How the fuck can set for on pages go away and these charges just go away and I can just be okay? You know just live as somebody else and I was like you know after seven years my parents would have to declare me legally dead so What I did is I? I got the fake ID and I was ready to go and I have a little bit of money But you know then I wanted to throw something extra into it You know I went to fake my suicide because that was like my plan then boom I fake my suicide my body washes out to the Atlantic Ocean They never find my body seven years. I'm declared legally dead. No Seth for on saying no federal case You know so I'm good. I can just live my life as whoever You know, but um So I made this whole big plan that there's this place in northern Virginia. It's called a great Falls. It's like a national park And it's like it's like a lot of cliffs and it's like rapids and It's it's kind of famous like among kayakers because they got like what they call class five rapids and like all the Superstar kayakers like to go kayak there because class five is like you know like you don't want to unless you're like superstar kayaker You don't want to kayak there. It's like a black diamond of skiing. Yeah, basically Or like double black diamond. Yeah, but uh yeah, so it's basically like if you fall in the water there There's so many rocks in the in the river so You know, Lou so much. It's so rapid that you know, you're gonna you're done. Yeah knocked unconscious drown. Yeah, so From being in that area in northern Virginia and going to high school there I used to remember you know, I was always a big sports guy So I remember you know back then it was newspapers, you know, it was an internet so every day I would like rip over the Washington Post and I would go to the sports section Before the sports section is the metro section So sometimes you know, I might catch the headline on the metro section and I remember people always committing suicide there Like great falls because they would jump in the water and get smashed against rocks and drowned So it was like it was like a You know, it was like a popular spot for suicides Interesting so Dye and nature peacefully. Mm-hmm. So I remember this right so then when all this comes about I'm like boom great falls fake my suicide Disappear Seven years declared legally dead no case So that's my whole plan right so I make this whole plan You know, I do a suicide note. I park my car there. I stage a little uh You know, I make a little setting on the side of the cliffs, you know like with you know with like my clothes my wall I put like a vodka bottle, you know, I like even leave money in my wallet You know like a pack of cigarettes, you know some weave like I was sitting there, you know comped and playing the suicide I even Leading up to this for like two weeks. I was even like dropping hints to people You know people that I knew are people that I was around like oh man. I don't know if I can take this you know blah blah blah whatever and um So I staged my suicide, you know and and um I actually I was on the on the cliffs like it's in an area where you're not supposed to be you know It's not necessarily roped off, but it's just like you know off the path and I Went until some people came by Like some joggers I went up there and I'm like my friend jumped And then I just rolled out, you know and I had somebody waiting for me and I went in the car You know that they took me to the airport and I flew to California You know, but um I found out years later those people because when I was in prison I got all the uh freedom information acts And those people actually did like a report with a park ranger like they were the people who reported it Oh, that I went in yeah, but um You know when that first happened I was out in LA and Hollywood and I'm reading the papers every day Right because I want to see like I'm I'm the clear declare dead Right so first it comes out and it says like you know Fairfax LSD kingpin commit suicide and I'm like fuck yeah, like my plan's gonna work And dude, I'm like 20 so you know, I'm like fucking You know like I'm saying I mean I was a smart kid for 20 but still I'm like 20 So I'm like incredibly naive and a lot of things You know, but you know You know Think near that age when you're like man like something you planned You know, Mon you minnow and it's fucking going down, right? But so then I kept reading the fucking things right and then uh like two weeks later Dude I was just like fucked up like just fucking Like heartbroken because I read the headline it said fucking it said the uh US Attorney's office You know calls the Fairfax LSD kingpin suicide of hoax And I was like what? So I fucking start reading it right and I read the fucking article dude and it's like crazy because I'm like literally Driving down like back then they had new stands You know, so like you go the newsstands to get like the newspapers from different areas You know, I'm saying like in the big cities So I'm like literally going down there. I'm like run into the newsstand It's like a big magazine newsstand. I'm like ripping off the paper And I'm like reading them. I'm just sitting on like you know Hollywood mainstream Brussels, busle reading this shit and fucking just like you know I mean on the outside I probably look cool But like on the inside You know my fucking heart is just crust because They said it's a hoax because what I did I planned everything brilliantly right But I committed I staged my suicide on the wrong side of the fucking damn Right so my body didn't wash out to see Right they dragged the river for two weeks Because it would just stand by the dam Yeah, and they didn't find a body so when they didn't find a body they told the prosecutors There's no body the park rangers And so they said it's a hoax. So you know, I mean I thought it was smart But you know in retrospect, I was probably a little dumbass Wow Were you in touch with any of the people in your life after that? Do you let them know I hate this is not real? I'm still alive like what about your parents like anybody only only my mom the dude that drove me to the airport Was actually my god brother somebody who I knew my whole life You know basically like uh No grew grew up with him and um So he told my mom Then I didn't commit suicide but everybody else You know for at least that first two weeks Yeah, that one lady they were interviewing They she said when she found out That you'd committed suicide or saw the article or something and she was instantly like No way wait a second This guy could never kill himself. He's too much of a sociopath That's my girl that's my girl Marce She knew me pretty well though, but uh Yeah, but um Yeah, so that was like the whole suicide thing and then um Like the reason I even became top 15 it's it's like fucked up to me because There was this dude named Henry Hudson For my case he was the assistant U.S. Attorney like during my case So I mean I don't know I wasn't privy to what was going on inside the U.S. Attorney's office But you know in retrospect and kind of looking at everything and how it happened This dude could have been like the driving factor in my case Like I say I can't say that you know unequivocally or whatever But you know I'm just like you know making assumptions on everything that happened So this dude could have been like Henry Hudson He could have been like the driving factor in my case For whatever reason, you know You wanted to bust some white LSD marijuana guys You know for whatever reason. I don't know. Maybe he never got high. Maybe he had a bad trip I don't know. Maybe they wouldn't give me any acid of college. I don't know who knows but then as soon as I disappear This dude transfers To the U.S. Marshall's office in northern Virginia and he becomes the head of the U.S. Marshall's office So he makes like this, you know lateral transfer like within You know government, you know within within law enforcement for the federal government So he does all the paperwork To make me top 15 U.S. Marshall's because dude. I was a first-time non-violent offender dude I mean are you serious like a first-time non-violent even when I got caught like some of the marshals. They're like how are you top 15 Like they're looking at me. They're like and they basically told me like straight up. They were like who did you piss off? Yeah, you know what I'm saying because that's how that's how fucking shit works. You know how do you think it happened? Who do you think you pissed off? I pissed that fucking dude Harry Hudson Yeah, that's who I fucking pissed off. He was a like you know from everything I can see that I pieced together. You know over the years. He was a driving factor in my case He was the one that was pushing it when I took off it put like a black mark on his record He took a fence at that. He took it personal He went to the U.S. Marshall's office made me a top 15 fugitive when I shouldn't have never been a top 15 fugitive There was no reason for me to be a top 15 fugitive. It's that that I pissed this motherfucker off Right then when I got caught He gets a feather in his hat and You're not gonna believe where this dude is now He's a fucking Force circuit appeals court judge in Richmond, Virginia for the feds All right, so look if you look at everything in this country like if you look at our judicial system and prosecutors and like You know how all that okay? You guys know Rudy Giuliani Rudy Giuliani Yeah, he was the prosecutor from the gottie case the John gottie case in the 80s so everything in this country in the in the judicial branch is based like on Making a big case You know you you advance By winning big cases. You don't advance By doing the right thing. No, you don't advance by advocating justice You know you don't advance There's no incentive for doing the right thing. There's only incentive is money and moving up the ladder, right? and you do that by having these big media cases so basically this dude Henry Hudson Blue my case up into something. It wasn't You know not to say whatever. I broke the law. You know I should have been punished But I should have got like fucking five years in the state You know I'm saying so he blew me up into this big fucking drug kingpin You know Took it one step further blew me up into this top 15 fucking fugitive And then you know in his career his judicial law enforcement career he capitalized Right off that shit. That's why I like like sometimes I just tell people like okay I was in prison and I'm not saying there's some fucked up people in prison. There's people that belong in prison You know what I'm saying? I mean I'll be the first to say that. You know violent people do belong in prison You know, but you got a lot of people that don't belong in prison, but there's just so many cases Especially like when we look at the war on drugs in retrospect where these people like this Supposedly doing the right thing. They're the fucking most evil motherfuckers man. Yeah, you know I'm saying this dude is a fucking Force circuit U.S. Appeals court judge so this dude is like one step down from the Supreme Court now That's how powerful this motherfucker is You know like I said I talked shit about him on a lot of podcasts So he hasn't sent nobody after me yet, but fuck them, you know Whatever send your fucking dude, you know, I'm just that type of dude, you know I'm like whatever I'm gonna say what I want if they want to come and kill me coming kill me. He needs to He takes a mass that are some mushrooms. I'm saying you know and really my dream my dream is to eventually have like a You know like a big scripted series or like a big Hollywood movie and and I want to fuck him like portray Like this evil motherfucker for the person he is like he'll be the main really Protagonist, yeah, and I just want to show and I'm gonna use his real name and everything You know, I mean I would I don't know maybe I want to change his name the lawyers who knows But uh, yeah, I want to this dude should be exposed man because he's sitting up there like he's this fucking Righteous fucking law abiding person and he basically made his career off of fucking my blood You know not my little blood, but you know my blood and and having to go prison and all that you know and I'm not the only one I'm not saying I'm the only one I mean But that's what he does, you know these people that's what they do in law enforcement and the judiciary in this country They step on other people make them out worse to be they are and you know if anybody any other country does it They criticize it, but they do the same thing to us and they prop themselves up on on our backs Right, you know, so I mean to me, you know, that's just my own personal thing But I think those dudes are fucking Evil as fuck the DEA evil as fuck You know what I'm saying this yeah, hey, they're good people, right? So I don't really want to talk about this. Yeah, yeah They might come kill me What was it like when you finally got caught for the last time like what what Describe the scenario do you get like your doors kicked in like what how do that was actually I was in this? um a Conelage in St. Louis right by the airport and And I was actually waving man. I had like I have like 20 pounds of pot and I had this dude Columbia, you know like one of my distributors I mean his name was Dave. I'm well. She's last name, but his name was Dave So I'm waiting for Dave To come down and get this 20 pounds because in as soon as he brings me the money He's up in Columbia, you know, that's where Mizzou University Mizzou Mizzou is that so he sold for me up there. He was a big volume dealer for me and He like I told him I'm like dude. I got this fucking 20 pounds. You know this was after I you know I had got registered I knew they were matching on my prints I knew I need to get the fuck out of here. I knew the clock was ticking so I you know I was like dude I'm gonna give you all this shit for like $500 less a pound than I normally charge you just I need all cash So he's like okay, let me talk to everybody. I'm gonna get it together So he's actually getting together. He's actually supposed to come down like that morning like around 10 or 11 You know and bring me the cash and then I'm gonna like fuck off Right, but you know I didn't know everything that's going on behind the scenes, you know the marshals are tracking me And I was top 15 US marshals list and all this so I have no idea another stuff is happening behind the scenes so Six o'clock in the morning. I'm in this fucking a carnal lodge and And I'm already you know, I'm like I know the clock is ticking. I know I need to get the fuck out of here You know I can like feel it. Mm-hmm. You know I'm saying because when you're in a situation like that like you can feel that shit dude You know I'm saying like it's just like you know It's like the walls fucking closing down on you man like you feel that shit You know even though I didn't know like I didn't was it Congress and everything that was happening But you know like your body your mind you can sense that shit so Yeah, they fucking bust in do the the federal marshals man they bust in like like probably like six o'clock in the morning You know what I'm saying they fucking It's just fuck it's like fucking three of them. It's not even no local law enforcement like they're just fucking basically scatting me out themselves Like you know a lot of things people don't know about these law enforcement guys But like these dudes are as much cowboys as a lot of the drug dealers. Mm-hmm You know a lot of people don't realize that but I mean these motherfuckers are cowboys like they're fucking They're basically scoping me out. They don't have no local law enforcement. They don't have no backup. You know it's just it's like three of them You know they fucking come in you know They're gonna do whatever they want to grab you. Yeah, so they fucking come in they fucking get me They find the weed, you know, I have a little bit of money and um You know actually you know to answer your question. I mean it was in a lot of ways. It was a relief Because you know I was I mean I was constantly dude I had all these different IDs and it's like you got like school yourself man It's like okay boom like I take out this fucking ID today And I got it I would have a process in my mind. I'd be like okay well, I'm fucking Jacob birchfield today and I'd be like okay Jacob Fertz show born on this day You know this social security number live at this address because you know if somebody ever pulls you over or are you You get addressed by a cop you have to know that shit like you So I would do that and so every day I'm fucking you know I might do it for like a week You know I'd be this guy for this week, you know and that shit wears on you man and then it also wears on you I mean I'm meeting people all the time, you know I'm meeting people, you know friends You know some people are lying some people I don't like you know especially you know meeting girls and I mean you can't be yourself man You got to have like this backstory and none of it is true and then you know you got to constantly like Remember like what you told him or what you told him or you know how these backstories connect or how they disconnect You know because you don't want to fucking you know just as a basic premise you don't want to fucking people think Oh, he's full of shit. He's a liar, you know and saying nobody would want to be considered that so You know just trying to coordinate like all this stuff in my fucking mind I mean that's a lot of fucking that's intense shit, you know what I'm saying and plus you know I'm you know I'm not gonna lie to I was fucking probably smoking weed like crazy You know drinking like crazy to handle you know whatever stress or whatever But you know it's all like mental stress that I put on myself because of my situation So um Yeah when they got when I got caught, you know, I like I told him like you know I didn't try to lie and say you know they're like you're this yourself. I'm like yeah I'm so cool. Whatever you got me You know I'm saying so it was it was it was kind of like a relief But you know at the same time to show you like You know, I know I keep hammering this about the evilness of these motherfuckers But like you know they're looking through all my shit They find the weed they find the guns are not guns. I'm having a gun So they find the weed they find the money they find all the IDs and Then like they're asking me they're like you got guns you got guns, you know because any if you know if you're if you're Evolved with the feds like any you get a gun for any criminal act on the feds a gun is like five extra years So like these motherfuckers. They don't get a fuck. They just want to give you time You know I'm saying that's like their job is to get catch you and give you time You know the more time the better so they're like they're like no guns no guns I'm like no I don't have no fucking guns, you know like I never had a gun I don't deal with people where I need a gun. I'm not that type of fucking criminal, you know So like the one marshal dude like he takes his fucking gun out and like he throws it in my bag And then he's like oh he's like what's this? He's like you got a fucking gun You know what I'm saying I mean obviously he didn't put that gun on me You know he picked it back up, but I'm saying that's just like shows you like the mentality Like like why would you even do that dude like like you're like what you mean you threw it in your bag Like joke with you or what yeah, yeah I'm with you. Yeah to fuck with me dude, but they didn't charge you with it No, but I'm saying but I'm saying like what type of person would do some shit like that like you think that should is funny Fuck with you. Yeah, to fuck with me dude, but they didn't charge you with it. No, but I'm saying but I'm saying like what type of person Would do some shit like that like you think that shit is funny right? Yeah You know what I'm saying. I didn't know what I'm looking at dude. I'm looking at fucking 20 to life. That's why I fled You know what I'm saying? It's a fucking height of the war on drugs. The laws are fucked up You know, I know what the fuck I'm looking at and you're gonna fucking try to play me like that and you're like a law enforcement You know you're supposed to be the good guy good guys don't do shit like that You know what I'm saying and especially like look. I'm not resisting arrest. I'm telling you who I am You know, I'm not fucking trying to go out like fucking Billy the kid or no shit like that or Bonnie the Clyde Bonnie and Clyde whatever If you're a criminal and you're trying to go out like Bonnie in the Clyde whatever law enforcement do what you got to do That's your job But I'm saying in these other situations man You know I'm saying you know to introduce shit like that. It just shows like their whole that whole culture man is inherently Fucking evil when it comes to the war on drugs and like I think like our whole judicial system right now look they created a couple things That is the reason why our law enforcement is how it is today right first they did this thing called qualified immunity We're basically like a cop or law enforcement or a federal agent they can do whatever they want to do Under the guys of their job and get away with it Right isn't that the law that says that they can't get sued for their it's called that's what that's right qualified immunity right so as long as they do it under the color or the auspicious of their job They can do whatever they can fucking just come in and clocking in the fucking face Pete the fuck out of you right isn't that all changing now though I Mean I think there's more there's more discussions There's some states where I think some of these laws are changing and let's get it's being challenged It needs to I think it's more like it's been challenged. It's been talked about I don't know how much it's been changed yet stuff is slowly changing for the better But I'm saying this is one of the worst things it has made us why basically we become a police state right now right the second thing is a forfeiture dude Right like the forfeiture like dude You can literally and I'm not saying It doesn't it happens to some white people, but you don't have it in the white people as much but people of color like african-american or you know Spanish no brown people They bust and pull them over or find a joint and they take their fucking car dude Mm-hmm. I mean it happens all the fucking time dude. I'm be probably more than 90s than it does now but you know I mean dude and look think about this and and I've know you guys have probably seen this even even down here, right? Okay, so they got a big bust They get the fucking money and I'm not saying I mean some cops are corrupt. They might put that money in their pocket You know me but you know more times than not they they're not putting the money in their pocket You know sometimes they are but you know more times than not they're not but all that money is Going to their department and then you see like the head of the department the fucking sheriff is driving this big fucking GMC fucking Yukon fucking Denali all fucking loaded out like a hundred and fifty thousand dollar fucking car as his Company car because they use the four feature four-fisher proceeds the drug money to do that So I'm saying if that's not corrupt dude. I mean that's fucking corrupt on its face You know what I'm saying yeah Because that dude is driving around that car that's his car Why does a sheriff have to drive around a fucking hundred and I'm sure you guys have seen it down here Because this is kind of like some country boy shit I see that in Missouri like up in Missouri like some of the police departments or the sheriffs They have like these big fucking four-wheel drive fucking police trucks dude Like outrageous like some shit you would see on fucking monster truck And they drive and they got all their flags and it says fucking Saint Charles County police Right, and I know you see that shit down at floor because it's some country boy shit down here too. Yeah, right Dude that is outrageous. What do you think they get that money? The taxpayers didn't get that fucking money. So you're saying the money that they can They can see that they seize in these drug operations whether they rate a house or somewhere like that they keep that to buy trucks They keep it for their department to buy whatever they need so the department gets to keep that money Yeah, they keep really yeah, who that whatever the seizing whoever sees is it? You know like even if the feds are involved That money goes back to the local agency You know the feds might take a percentage But you know the feds don't need money the feds fucking print money. They got the money. The feds print fucking money They don't fucking need no money. So look so All right, so those two things so you got qualified immunity and you got four-fitcher and then the third thing So you got you got basically law enforcement in this country They can do whatever they want to do and get away with it They fucking basically go after fucking drug dealers just to get money You know I'm saying that that's like they don't even care about what's right or wrong or the laws or you know What laws are being broken or who's getting fucked over? Yeah, they're just going for the money That's what it's turned into they're just going for the money because the four-fitcher laws and the third thing that has turned our law enforcement in this country to this big bloated It's fucking Feeds on itself in his evil as fuck right the third thing is the fucking Informants because look these dudes are detectives like you got detectives like in law enforcement or agents or investigators They don't investigate nothing dude All they do is threaten people with time and people tell them whatever they want here They don't investigate So they have they have no investigative skills. They're not fucking detectives. They can't figure fucking nothing out The only type of bus they want is a bus they get some money for their department and They have no accountability because you know if they arrest you and you say man fuck you pig They can punch you in your fucking face and bust your fucking teeth out yeah and Say whatever and and they don't have no criminal case. It'll have nothing nothing happens to them a lot of times They don't even get suspended You know I'm saying so that's why We're at the point where we are right now. You know with law enforcement and like and look I'm gonna break this down for you and further All right, so you look we're all fucking white Right so a lot of the cops are white so you know sometimes I mean they could be asshole to us But that's sometimes they can look at us too and be like oh, you know He kind of looks like my cousin or my brother or my family member right so they might be a little bit more lax with us You know I'm saying but Think like but they still you're not saying they beat the shit out of fucking white people You know if you get lippy with them, they'll be the fuck out of you. They'll give a fuck You know they can't do nothing but think about like the black and brown people dude Like they don't give a fuck they treat those motherfuckers like sub-human and get away with it every fucking day well I mean you see it way more nowadays Because of the internet and social media and I'm sure they got I'm sure you know cops definitely got away with it way more in the 70s and the 80s and the early 90s But with like the way things are changing now the tables have kind of turned Now if you're a cop and you're a piece of shit, it's easier for you to be exposed No, true true and and you know being I mean think of like who Who would want to be a cop who would want to be a person who has to go into these places and have to be constantly worried about? Your own life, you know playing I mean just just imagine like pulling over a car at night and Ask them to roll down the window. I mean the amount of cops that get shot I mean you're worried about your own life. I don't think I mean I could see that to a certain extent But I think I don't I don't think it's I mean basically man people are people yeah If you treat somebody like a person in give respect, you know cuz dude I've been around cops prison guards everything, you know if they treat you all right, you know you treat them all right Whatever you got to do your job, you know, I got to do my job Especially if you're criminal, but I mean I could say some of it I mean everything in life goes both ways, but look I'm gonna throw something else at you and this is what law enforcement does All right If you're law enforcement and think most people when they do their job They just want to do the easiest job possible Right so if you're law enforcement, right? Who would you rather go bust? Unless you're like some gung ho fucking super marine cop and there are all those type of dudes There's those type of yes, but you know, they're not they're like you know one out of a hundred But who would you rather go bust would you rather go bust the fucking meth fucking addicts or cocaine fucking cartel members with fucking machine guns and shit Or would you go? rather go bust the fucking Kid smoke and marijuana or the fucking marijuana non-violent marijuana dealer Look you know What are the what are the most arrest for fucking drugs in our country every year dude in still now and it's legal in? Half the states Marijuana is still the number what marijuana has been their biggest cash cow dude. Look at one time. I don't marijuana still the number one Dude, I'm telling number one thing to be arrested for the US. Yeah, they don't want to let it go man They don't want to let it go. I mean it is changing But we're in this process now like it might take another five to ten years dude I mean people are still catching cases for fucking we do this fucking crazy dude. Yeah, you know I'm saying I mean they're not getting the same severe punishments. Yeah, you know, but it's still fucking the same and especially You know if you're fucking well, I mean it's the system, right? It's what they're incentivized to do It's it starts at the top doesn't start at the bottom. I mean No, it starts when you build a system that's based that incentivizes people to you know meet a quota You know to to make more money and to raise more money for you to partner That's like my whole point my whole point like everything I brought up and like it all stems from my case Because I see this all in whatever I see this all from a color view because I see it all from the point of my case and what happened to me But as all that has happened to me I've seen a lot of other stuff stuff that's that's I mean that's been my whole point It's evil man. It's inherently evil like the whole system the way it's made I'm saying there's a lot of people individual people. They're just doing their job. You know I don't blame the individuals. You know, I mean if you're a bad apple you're a bad apple I mean the truth is gonna come out in the wash You know, but the way the whole system you know from the war on drugs down and law enforcement is fucking inherently evil And I know a lot of people in law enforcement dude. I like for my work do my documentary work I've I've interviewed fucking retired DEA. I've interviewed retired FBI You know ATF like I say, I don't got no beef with these dudes whatever they did their job You know whatever they thought they were doing the right thing, you know I can't blame them whatever circumstance they were in in life right, but sometimes like even I Talk to these dudes and like especially these DEA dudes and I'm just like Like they cannot admit that the war on drugs was wrong Really and a lot of them. I mean some of them have come out and said a lot of them You know the rank and file you know because I mean whatever if you've been 20-30 years of your life doing something Dude, you're not just gonna be like, you know it takes big balls to be like oh, yeah, it was fucked up You know so a lot of me and like I say it goes it good to me this whole thing It goes back to like all America like dude. I'm still America. I'm a little my country I'm not gonna go, you know, they put me in prison for 21 fucking years, you know like I'm like you know to me It's like the matrix right like I got out. I'm like plug me back into the matrix You know what I'm saying? I mean the prison fucking sucks dude. That's shit's like the netherworld of corruption and violence Prison were you in I wasn't like I did 12 years in medium highs and I did nine years in lows Okay, so you know basically the feds the medium highs. They call them gladiator schools You know a lot of fights, you know in the pin I wasn't around the pin at injuries the pin at centuries That's like the highs. That's where they say like boy state penitentiaries. Well the it's a federal pin Oh, federal penitentiaries, but what they say in the federal pinitentiaries like they say boy's fight men kill You know like you don't fight like if you got a beef like you go stab them other fuckers 60 times You know what I'm saying so that's how that means like boys fight men kill I Was in what they call the gladiator schools the medium highs were like, you know basically you got a fight like if you don't fight You know then whatever you know you can be fucking start now Somebody taking your conversation end up getting raped, you know, I was saying I mean that's just how it is You know and then I did my last nine years in the lows and the lows I mean it's pretty tame, you know I'm saying I mean shit happens a lot of white collar criminals in there I white collar crime is more like in the camps. That's like the minimum I could never go to the camps. I was always behind a fence because I was a top 15 fugitive You know so I could never go out to the camp You know I would never meet minimum security, but uh You know the lows you got like the people that fuck up at the camps So it's a lot of minimum security dudes, you know that fucked up and you got a you know a lot of you Even got dudes that started the penitentiaries, but they you know they did 20 years there at the end of their bid They don't know problem and then you got a lot of dudes, you know, they're just short timers, you know They're coming in they got like two three four five years. Yeah Lot of informants, you know there, but you know it's funny in prison Because even like when you're out of low and you know there's a lot of informants like nobody Everybody's like oh no, I didn't snitch. She's a snitch. I'm not a snitch. It's like crazy It's like you know because nobody wants to wear that in there, you know nobody's gonna wear that shit, right? You know I found out like all the time that I did it basically came down to it like usually the person that was going trying to say Who was the snitches like usually you have to like look at them? Right because like why like they're deflecting? Or like why are you pointing out you know some of the dudes like that? They're just crazy and hate snitches You know, but you know a lot of times, you know, I mean, but that's maybe like one out of 10 You know like the other nine times out of 10. It's usually somebody deflecting Yeah, that's a it's a It's a crazy subject that always gets brought up When you go to prison or you get caught with you know on it with a big crime is like the first thing you think of is You know you get offered a plea deal or you're gonna snitch are you not gonna snitch And that's like the number one question people ask you when you're when you're locked up like yeah ask you about your crime They try to like poke and prod little questions figure out more about your story is you snitch is he not a snitch? When I came in you got to show paperwork so when I came in in 93 I came in in 93. I went to FCI Manchester. It's a medium high in Kentucky Right I got 25 fucking years and this is like 93 so when I came in you know a lot of the people are still under the old Lodge from the 80s So I come in with 25 and I'm like this little kid. I look like a college kid, right? I'm like fucking you know 22 years old man. I wait maybe like 185 You know I'm saying and Fucking clean cut everything look like just being college and the dudes are like all the cons, you know They're looking at me. They're like like who the fuck did you kill? How did you get 25 years? You know because still that you know they just started those laws like in 89 so you know a lot of dudes aren't used to people You know like for for my crime what I did like in the 80s it might have been like you know maybe 10 years maximum and it was Perolable, you know but then after 89 when they made the new laws, you know mandatory minimums the sentencing guidelines You had to do 85% of your time so there was like no parole so you know like on 25 I had to do basically you know almost 23 the only reason I got in 21 is because I took this drug program For 10 months 500 hour therapeutic drug program and I got a year off my sentence You know right at the end, but uh, yeah, dude when you when I went in back then It's like they call it a paperwork party like you go in Like wherever you're from like your homeboys come to you like the other white people, you know It's all it's everything's ethic and race and their race based You know, you don't got like black dudes coming to you asking see your paperwork You know your own people white people come to you. They want it. You got to show your paperwork You got to show that you're not a snitch. You got to show that you're not a chomo You know child molester and you got to show that you're not a rapist Because if you're any of those fucking thing it's like your own people your own homeboys They're gonna check you in do they're either gonna beat the fuck out of you and leave you there or They're gonna tell you're gonna be like look you need to roll up do you got to check in the hole you ain't walking on this compound You know that's how shit goes You know what I'm saying so what what would happen if you're like yeah, I was a snitch I'm fucking ran it out this guy. This guy this guy cut all that throats and I saved 25 years of my life now what They're gonna fucking beat the fuck out of you right there. They're gonna check you in do they're gonna roll you up You're really walking on that compound fuck. No You know, but look I have seen I've seen a few cases Where there's been like some fucking tough snitch motherfuckers But you know in the end they always they always lose there was I was in Beckley West Virginia Right it was a medium high second joint. I was that and it was it was a pretty rough and tumble joint man You know it was like like they were always hitting the doosies like what I when I say they hit the doosies That's like if there's a fight or disturbance like you know the cop hits the body alarm and like all the cops go running You know like the Calvary, you know to to quell the disturbance So that's what hit the doosies mean so I mean they were hitting the doosies like all the fucking time like you always see the cop run And so it's a fight here a fight here. You know whatever sometimes multiple fights at the same time so There's just one do I don't know his name big dude Country boy had like a cocaine case. He was a West Virginia country boy Right so he's on the fucking compound dudes know he's hot right so fucking the Like some of the West Virginia dudes, you know, they say oh there's motherfuckers hot like they show the newspaper articles about them Whatever and I mean he's hot like he's a snitch. He's oh so They try to check him in He said I ain't checking me beats a fuck out of the snitch beats a fuck out of the dude So like they end up they get beat up there in the hole You know I'm saying they're in the hole because they got the shit beat up because what happens like they're like they say you're gonna fight and I beat the fuck out of you and you're all marked up so the cops when they see you marked up They're gonna lock you up Basically for your protection and if you don't say what happened like you you'll say some shit like if you're a stand-up car You'll be like all I slipped and fell in the shower or some shit, right? But they put you in the hole because they're been investigating they want to know what happened, you know So so this snitch he beats these fucking dudes up You know who supposedly like the shot callers for the West Virginia car You know who whatever they weren't that tough. They couldn't even check their own snitch out of the yard So he beats them up. They go the hole, but you know they don't say nothing whatever So this dude's like still on the yard so you know You know the thorities don't know what's going on, but like all the white boys know what's going on Right so then fucking so then like some other white boys on the yard Like they go to the rest of the West Virginia dudes and they're like what the fuck man? They're like clean your fucking car, dude. This is your responsibility You need to get this motherfucker off the yard So then like some more West Virginia dudes go or they can't do it or whatever So then like this like was going on dude for like fucking about three weeks You know and this dude was like fuck you like anybody came out and he beat the fuck out of him like he was a tough motherfucker, but he was a snitch so eventually the fucking California dudes Usually like in prison for the white boys usually the California dudes are like those toughest dudes it goes with the Spanish to usually like the like they call the serenos The Mexican dudes like they're under the Mexican Mafia. They're usually like the fucking Most throw and usually the California the Mexicans and the whites fucking ally Really the Mexicans the toughest? Yeah, they're the most vicious. Why is that? Because if like they got a scene in there like if if you got a beef with one Mexican and you got to fight all of them That's not like that with any of the other races It can be but you know and not a lot of sometimes you know because sometimes it's like you know supposed to be everything is like Unify like okay, we're white we stand together, but a lot of times you know like I'll have a beef and You'll be like man fuck him. I don't fuck with him or fucking he's a piece of shit You know, or he's like a fucking junkie shit or maybe he fucking owed me money for some heroin so fuck him You know, so it's like shit like that comes into play so eventually with this fucking West Virginia fucking tough guy fucking snitch the fucking California dudes Fucking cornered him out on the fucking yard with weapons and Fucking beat the fuck out of him and you know, but they was like a three-week process So this dude was basically on the yard for three weeks. Wow. Basically like you said Yeah, I'm a fucking snitch fuck you wasn't whitey bulger is snitch Yeah, yeah, why do you bolder was snitch and you got you got killed? He got killed didn't he get killed didn't they put a head-on on him because he had some sort of government Part of some conspiracy right so so what whitey bulger story was he was in a protection there. There's a joint down in Florida It's like it's like a known protection yard So he was he was down there for long. It's a Coleman Coleman that's where Matt Cox went. Yeah, all right So they got two comas they got a Coleman one in Coleman two, but one of those yards is a protection yard That's like any of the dudes it's because it's the highest pin of tintry so any of the dudes that Like can't walk mainline Can't walk mainline that means like a Mainline is like the prison yard. Okay. That's like the mainline like you're walking the mainline Yeah, you know like you're out on the yard. You're in general population. That's what mocking mainline means you're in general population So you know if you can't walk mainline because you know, maybe you're a snitch or You got beefs or people are trying to kill you or you know a gang has marked you for death Then you're you can't walk mainline like the prison authorities won't let you right protect you. Yeah, so they won't let you even if you say you want to You know, they usually don't let you so this is what happened with whitey bulger So whitey bulger is he's in Coleman he's in it's a it's a known protection yards He's in there. He's walking mainline because it's a protection yard. You know, there's a bunch of dudes You know they can't go any other place because they'll probably get killed and And But then he did something like I don't know something He had something with some nurse or you know something that he pissed off the staff Pissed off the warning You know or he got you know, whatever sassy, you know, he's a old motherfucker. You know, whatever he pissed off the staff I don't know who or what might have been from medical So it went up so they were like and he was defined about it You know, he was like, I fuck you whatever. I'm whitey bulger fuck you and so they were like, okay We got something for you mr. Whitey bulger We're gonna transfer you to a fucking Prison where motherfuckers want to kill you Because you're a fucking rat. I mean and none of this is said It's all unspoken. You know, maybe the Be a bureau prison staff like in there You know, whatever meetings or something they might say that shit, but you know, I mean, they're never gonna admit to that shit You know, so um They transfer him and then whitey bulger being whitey bulger You know, even though the you know because when you go to the yard anytime you go to the yard like they asked you They're like, you know, they asked you if you want to they just put you on the yard You like you can go and PC if you want Nobody has to go on any yard If you request PC protective custody They will put you that's your job to protect your life And especially when you're dealing with these penitentiaries because that's where you got the real fucking killers And especially when you got somebody like whitey bulger who's this high profile fucking dude It's been in fucking Movies where he's a fucking informant Everybody fucking knows no, but whitey bulger was a type of dude He was like his whole thing was like I'm not an informant. I paid for information They worked for me But you know anytime with law enforcement or criminals Especially a criminal like whitey bulger that had such a long-range Anybody knows common sense of information is going back and forth He's given the dude information about his enemies because it makes his life easier and in the comp buses You know John Connolly was FBI guy so So whitey bulger goes to this prison. It's it's actually It's a West Virginia prison. I can't think of which one but it I think it was a West Virginia pinitentiary so he goes to this prison and Like they basically tell him you know like You know you fear for your life or whatever you got any beasts with anybody. You know can you go on with the yard And he's like, you know whitey bulger is trying to pull you know He's old, but he's still like I'm whitey bulger. I'm a tough guy He's like yeah, I can go in this fucking yard and so the cops let him You know, but I mean they never should have let him they they knew better But it was like that's why they say that they had the whole thing. It was like a vendetta by the BOP like it's some you know High you know not like the normal cons, but like somewhere like at the regional office or the central office. They were like man Fuck this dude. Let's let him get killed. Yeah Let him fend for himself. That's the conspiracy I mean, but you know you can probably never prove it. I mean they probably had investigations or whatever But so they put him out, but you know, I mean, but whatever. I don't know you think sometimes like these do is they're old They're in bad health. You know, maybe They want to go out like that. I don't know maybe you know They want it in their life. I mean who knows what's going on in his mind You know or maybe he really thought I'm why he bulger Ain't nobody can do nothing to me. You know, he's a fucking wheelchair. I don't know. Maybe he was yeah Fucking crazy. Maybe he did too much LSD. I don't know Yeah, that's so that's the that's what a lot of people say did too much LSD Yeah, so I mean he was in the MK ultra program. Right. You know, I used to know before he killed everybody right Yeah, when when you could his first bit in Alcatraz you know, I wrote I used to write what whitey bulger Did you really? I was trying to get him to do a book Really? When he was in Coleman did he ever respond to you do you fucking wrote me a bunch of letters really? a lot Dude his writing is like fucking chicken scratch like it's like the type of letters like you can barely Fuck and read like you got it like Like it's work to read his letters Yeah, yeah, but I wrote him I actually I did I did a couple articles where I used some of his words from his letters for this a cycle Aussie and I actually I had a dude on my site website gorilla convict dot com He was in the West Virginia prison where whitey bulger got whacked and he wrote an article about it Yeah, it's on it's on my website gorilla comment dot com. What did you and whitey bulger talk about? Did you ask him about the LSD stuff? Yeah, he wrote he wrote some you know told me about that But I mean basically I was getting him I was trying to say like dude Let me write your biography So he was telling me like little things like he was telling me about that MK ultra And he was trying to tell me you know he's not a snitch and he was trying to tell me You know how the prisons fucked up or what they do to him like all his little petty grievances He was like airing out to me. That was mostly what the letters consist of he'd give me some history But mostly you know is how fucked up his case was and they railroaded him you know because a lot of those dudes They get in there especially the older dudes they get life and they they just get obsessed with these like they got like these three or four Trigger things and they just can't let him go. You know and they just eat him up Really and that's all they can talk about I mean I think that happens to people a lot in life anyhow But in there it's it's intensifying like when you're doing a life sentence around a whole bunch of violent people You know in there and there it's like I'm gonna show you like what prison is like like you gotta put this mask on you gotta put this Every day like you gotta wear this mask because it's it's about to keep yourself safe You've got to keep people the way you got to think make people think like you're crazy or you're violent or you're negative So it's like it's like almost like Like you You make shit more than is like you know like shit might happen to you You know are like maybe the fucking they don't give you your transfers or the cop takes your tomato You know write you some bullshit shot. So you fucking you're like really You know like demonstrative You're like fuck you motherfuckers. Maybe there's a fucking bullshit You know cuz you're like you it's like you Iminate fucking like negativity To like keep motherfuckers at bay and keep them arms length keep away from you Because all that shit is based on it's based on built on negativity man in all prison is it's like Really prison it's a lot like long from you. Because all that shit is based on it's based and built on negativity. And all prison is, it's like really prison. It's a lot like law enforcement sometimes, because you just kind of, uh, it's like you try to fucking step up on somebody else's back to make yourself look a bit better. Hmm. You know, that's why I like at the bottom of the prison hierarchy. You got like the snitches, you know, the chomos, you know, and the rapists. And you know, all of us, solid cons, we're better than these motherfuckers. Yeah. So we, if we find out about it, we beat the shit out of him and check him in the hole to make ourselves feel good. Right. You know, so it's, it's, it's just like it's, it's the whole thing. I mean, it's just prison is like fucking like negativity. What are the prison guards? Are there any prison guards who are happy with what they're doing? Are there any of them there to make a difference and enjoy them? So enjoy their jobs or are they just there? No, I want to say that you got, you got the majority of prison guards or I mean, they're pretty laid back man. They, they like tell you straight up. They'll be like, man, just let me do my eight hours, you know, I don't care what you do. Just, you know, don't kill nobody. You know, I'm saying, don't be the fuck out of nobody. Don't make me do no pill. They're, they're job. So that's like nine out of 10 or like that. And then you got like the one out of the 10 is like the super cop. Like he wants to go above and beyond. Yeah. And bust you for fucking petty shit. You know, but a lot of them like a lot of the blocks like look, tattooing is illegal. You can't tattoo, but a lot of cops, they don't give a fuck. They'll fuck right by you. Check out the fucking tattoos and everything. You don't give a fuck. You know, I'm saying a lot of times like even like a like in there, they call it politics. So it's like, you know, any drama or any type of situations, you know, they call it politics. So, you know, like, uh, you know, like if you're a white boy and you do something fucking stupid and then the other white boys, we got a fucking, you know, set you straight, you know, which means we might have to take you in a cell and whip your fucking ass. You know, especially if you did something stupid with some other races. Because then the other races, they come to the white boy shot car or the white boy car. What I mean, the white boy car, that's like the group of white dudes, they call it a car. So they come, you know, to the leader of the white boy car and they're like, Oh, man, you got a fucking, you know, discipline your dude, you know, he stepped out of line. He did this, you know, so then, and what they do, you do like a white dude will punish another white dude just to like avert a race riot, right? You know, because then they'll be like, Okay, yeah, we punished them, you know, he stepped out of line. He did something stupid or you know, whatever, you know, maybe some, you know, stupid new dude in prison, you know, fucking use the inward or something in front of a bunch of black dudes. And they're like, you know, the dudes aren't putting up with that shit. You know what I'm saying? They'll be ready to fucking beat the fuck out of you. But, you know, that's that's like the rules like not in all prisons. I mean, some prison like you can't enjoy it. It's not that. But when you're like on a prison yard, it's like the rules, like, you know, like one race doesn't doesn't put their hands on another race. Because that could cause a race riot, right? You know, because like if a black dude beats up a Spanish dude, even if it's one on one fire, it was fairing everything or whatever, and all the Spanish dudes are gonna be out on the fucking yard dude, it's gonna be fucking, they're gonna be ready, you know, they're gonna be ready to fucking go to war, you know, with shanks and fucking locks and socks and, you know, fucking cans of fucking tuna and fucking, you know, fucking socks, locks on fucking belts. You know, shit can get crazy and they're like real quick. So, I mean, a lot of times you just do stuff, you know, like I'll give you a situation like I told this, I've told this story to a lot of people like, maybe like we're in prison like you're my sally, like we're cool, we're friends like we kick it, we talk shit, we play whatever, we joke around, you know, in the cell when it's just me and you, right? But then, you know, we go out to the yard and like, you know, we're around this dude, he's like fucking, airy and circle, you know, we're around fucking this dude, he's like a dirty white boy, you know, we're around this dude, he's like the leader of the fucking southern boys, you know, and then, you know, and then you want to fucking try to players say something fly, you know, to make yourself look good, you know, to make yourself like you got one up on me or something, you know, in front of these guys, and maybe like when we're in the cell, you're my friend. So I don't say shit, I'm like, okay, whatever dude, cool, shut the fuck up, you know what I'm saying? But you want to say that in front of other people and then, I got a fucking, you know, I don't even say nothing. I just fucking punch you in your fucking mouth, you know, because you can't make me look bad in front of these other people, that's going to like take my fucking respect from them, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. And then you're going to fucking tell me in the later, you can in the cell, you can be like, what the fuck dude, what'd you push me in the mouth? And be like, dude, could you do some stupid shit, you can't jump out there. He's like, why say that shit in the cell? Okay, yeah, that's in the cell, dude, me and you, we're cool. But you don't say that shit in front of these fucking dudes, because then they're going to take that as a cheek in my fucking armor. And then my word isn't going to be shit, you know what I'm saying? So, you know, that's just, that's like politics. That's right. Right. So 21 years total, he said. Yeah, 21 years. How do that change you when you got out? Did it, did it, I mean, shouldn't a different person. I mean, it made me who I am today. I mean, basically, yeah, I would say it changed me. I mean, I would say like when I came in, I mean, I grew up in the suburbs, man. So, um, I mean, I've never been a violent person. I mean, I was, I was never like a violent or malicious person. You know, I never like to get in fights, you know, but I mean, now I mean, like I'm still not a violent person, but I can get violent if I need to get violent, you know, like I tell people all the time, look, I'm too old to fight, but I'm definitely too old to lose a fight. You know, I'm saying so like, like, look, and I don't want to have no problem with anybody. You know, I'm going to try to walk away, whatever, but if a motherfucker shows you that you can't walk away, dude, I'm just going to get, I'm going to get is violent as possible, as quick as possible, and I'm going to inflict as much damage as I can with no warning. And then I'm just going to leave alone. I'm going to bounce. You know what I'm saying? That's all you got to do with situations like that. You know what I'm saying? Like, you know, I'm not a malicious person, so a malicious person, they might do that and get you down and keep trying to fuck you up. You know, that's like a malicious evil person. They get off on shit like that. And there's a lot of people like that. I've seen people like that. But you know, me myself, I've learned if there's a situation like that, you just got inflict as much damage as you can. You don't let anybody know it's coming. And then like I say, then, you know, it's like the fighter fight a lot of times, if you do something real quick, you can like shock a person. And then while they're shocked, you know, laying on the floor or their face is bloody, their nose is broken, then you just fucking, you know, out here, you bounce. I mean, in prison, obviously, you can't bounce. They're just fishbowl. You know, but, you know, still I went with the same premise in there. Like, when I was in there, if there was some type of beef, I would just handle it right there. I didn't care where I didn't care if we were in the child home. I didn't care if Stass around. If you disrespect me or you did something, I would handle it right then and there. I wouldn't ask any questions. And then, you know, it's just better because then like if something, you know, because in there, like stuff, people at stuff, festers, and it'll be like a beef between two people, and then it turns into this big thing, you know, with all these other people involved. And then you might have to end up stabbing somebody or something. Yeah. It's messy fast. Yeah. So, you know, I've always, you know, I learned in there, you know, handle your business, handle it right there, you know, just do it quickly and get it over with. You know what I'm saying? And then like I say, you know, I've got a fight. So, you know, like I say, it's not like I'm some tough dude, I fucking, you know, my nose has been broken five times. You know what I'm saying? My shit got split right here. My shit got split right here. And my shit got split right here. So, you know, I mean, if you fight, you're gonna take some losses, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. Nobody fucking got to take your lumps. You know, whatever, but you know, you just keep it moving. You don't make it too serious, you know, you don't like, you know, just because somebody beat your ass now, you gotta go fucking stab them. I mean, this fucking stupid. Yeah. You know? So, what are you doing now? So now that you're out, you're, uh, you're working on a new, new project. Yeah. So, um, you know, I started writing books in prison. Yeah. How many books did you write? 22. 22 books. Why you were locked up? Yeah. Wow. Gangster books. All in gangsters, nonfiction. True crime. Mostly African American gangsters. You know, I wrote some prison stuff too, but, uh, yeah, I started journalism career. You know, I mean, that's basically I do true crime. I do, uh, like prison gangs, you know, I've done a lot of features like vice, penthouse, a lot of foreign magazines, real crime in UK, you know, in Australia. But all like prison gangs, uh, mafia stuff, um, you know, like, like African American drug lords, you know, mostly like from the 80s from the crack era, you know, kind of the ones that were lionized in the, uh, you know, the annals of hip hop lore, you know, like, especially gangster rap, like in the mid 90s. So I mean, I was actually locked up with a lot of these dudes, but, um, I didn't, I was just like when I was in prison, right? I was like, I start taking college classes, you know, and we take college classes in there. I was taking correspondence mostly. And you can go to roots. It's like business administration or, or kind of like writing, you know, that's the only thing that's offered. It's real limited. So, um, I was just trying to do something for my future. You know, so I started, uh, taking college classes. Um, I got an A degree. I got a BA degree and I got a master's degree. Wow. You know, and did you get a master's grand humanities? Okay. So all my stuff's like liberal arts humanities. And like I said, I didn't this for me. It was like, uh, this was like a 17 year process. You know, I did not like, you know, it's not the typical college. You know, I got these degrees over 17 years. I started in 93. I got my master's green in 2010. You know, I was taking like, you know, sometimes like nine, 12 credits a year because it's correspondence courses. So you got like nine months to do them. You know, so, um, I focused really heavily on the writing. And then, uh, I started writing these stories. You know, I, I was always real athletic. I played a lot of sports. A lot of times I'd be the only white dude. You know, running ball with all the black dudes. I'd be the only white dude playing soccer with all the Mexicans. You know, so that's kind of how I did my time. You know, I played sports. I did college classes. You know, I worked out. And then, um, after I was in about six or seven years, I started thinking, you know, like, what can I do for my future? You know, so I started writing, you know, I started writing these stories. You know, I started writing these books. And, um, I mean, literally like, I was like the white dude in prison, there was writing books about the African American gangsters. So, you know, think about that just on the face of it after everything I've already described to you. You know, just to tell you, you know, because I have relationships we use because I played sports and I played ball with them. But, you know, after I'd been in a while, they knew what type of dude I was in and I, you know, I started writing these books, you know, and, uh, you know, when you write books in there, it's like, I always tell people like, uh, like, you hear people on the media all the time or they write books and, you know, they're all they misquoted me. Like, you can't, you can't afford to misquote anybody in there, especially if you're a white dude, writing books about African American dudes. I mean, you could just imagine. Yeah, it's not going to look good. You could just imagine. But, um, you know, but I, I, I walked that path, you know, I navigated that path, you know, I, I got that respect. And really, the books I wrote were books that I wanted to read, you know what I'm saying? Because when I first got locked up, I, I was locked up on the East Coast for a lot of La Amafia dudes. So, I felt like in red all the mafia books, I was locked up with a lot of Colombian cocaine cartel dudes. I read all the Colombian cocaine card to tell dudes. And then like in the mid 90s when like the gangster wrap is like jumping off, you know, and I'm playing ball with a lot of these dudes. And you know, I'm a hip hop hip hop kid too, you know, you know, I grew up in the 80s. So, you know, that's when hip hop started. So, you know, I was around, you know, I've been a hip hop fan since 1983 when it first came out, you know, or when I first learned about it. But, uh, I would watch, you know, I'd be one of the only white dudes like watching, you know, like these gangster rap videos. And I would hear the dudes, you know, they would like talk about these dudes, you know, the rappers. And then the guys like from New York or the guys from that area, they would start talking about them. And I'd be like, you know, I was like intrigued. And, uh, you know, so I was like looking for books, you know, I'm calling my mom and my girl, I'm like, what are me books on these. And there's like, there's no books. And then, you know, I'd ask about these guys more like these street legends, you know, from the hood and, um, and they'd be like, oh yeah, that dudes on B block. And I'd be like, what? So that's how I first started writing because I started going to these guys. And I started saying, Hey man, like, let me tell your story. Yeah, let me interview you. You know, and, um, so all this, it was, I wrote books that I wanted to read. But at the same time, I was looking for a future for myself. You know, in my end goal, I knew I was getting out. I mean, I had 25 years, but I knew I was young. I was 22. So I knew I was getting out. I knew I had a future. It wasn't like, I had life. You know, or it wasn't like I was winning when I was 40 or 15 had 30 years. You know, I knew I was getting out. I'd still, you know, have my health. I'd still, you know, be young enough to have a career. You know, so, um, my end game, my end game the whole time was film. You know, I mean, I wanted to make film. I just couldn't make film because I was in prison, you know, and saying so I wrote books, you know, and I wrote books, you know, I always think my writing has always kind of been on the cutting edge. But I also think my writing too, it, um, it's changed because like when I first started writing, I was taking these African American gangsters and I was, I was writing about them like, you know, like Billy the kid, Jesse James type figures, you know, and then as I got older and I matured more and I kind of saw how the system was, you know, kind of a lot of some of the stuff we've talked about, you know, my views on the system and the war on drugs and law enforcement and, you know, the, you know, criminal judiciary system or whatnot. I started seeing things different. So my writing kind of changed to more like advocacy type of stuff, you know, from this, you know, romanticizing or glorifying, you know, gangsterism. So, you know, but I think everybody, you know, as you get older, you kind of change and you start to see things different and maybe, you know, what was cool to you at 25 might not be cool to you at 40. Mm-hmm. So, um, you know, my writing kind of changed, but like still the whole time and I'm writing these books and in my head, I'm like, man, I'm going to, when I get out, I'm going to make film. I'm going to do film. This is what I want to do because to me as a writer, film is like, that's like the ultimate evolution, you know, as a writer, that's like the ultimate in game. Like, you know, if you're a writer, you know, to, to actually become like a director of like a film and shape this visual thing because visual stuff just has such a much bigger impact, you know, than written words. You know, I mean, more people are going to watch movie or documentary there and going to read a book. I mean, that's just a given, you know what I'm saying? I mean, because it's shorter. It doesn't take as long, you know, people don't have attention spans or whatever. So, um, yeah, I got out 2015. I had all these books. I started at the publishing house, Grela Convik, while I was in prison. I became like a, you know, basically I was doing columns for vice, you know, like all in the early 2000s. I had a call and call and I'm busted, you know, about prison stuff. I was writing for all these other places and, um, yeah, I just kind of built and then when I got out, you know, I had this idea. I was like, man, I want to make films. So I actually went to this foray for almost like five years where I became like this national true crime journalist, you know, just because, uh, I mean, they just pay me good money. So I was just running with it. You know, like right out of prison. Now I was making pretty good money and they were flying me all these different places. Like dude, like, like, you know, when Apple has like those big unveiling events, yeah, I've been flown to those twice just because I was like a national journalist for vice. You know, like I've covered like Sundance, you know, I like covered all these fucking things. Vice pay pretty good. Yeah, yeah, they pay pretty good. Do they? Where did the pay? You know what I mean? I did like, uh, I was getting like $500 for like 1200 words. Oh, really? You know, back in the 2000s early 2000s? Um, no, I didn't get out till 2015. Oh, this was after you got out. Yeah. When I, when I was in prison, I was getting paid like 350. Oh, okay. 350 for about 900 to 1000 words. That was like my column. I was getting 350. Okay. So, you know, I was getting like 350 a month for a month at column. Like you get $350 in prison. You kind of like live like a king. Yeah, you're doing good. Yeah. So, you know, but then I got out and crazy here. All those stories about those, uh, those vice reporters and producers that don't make shit. Yeah. Why I'm saying, I mean, before they sold out and the big scheme of things, I mean, you know, 350 to $500 a piece is kind of chump change. You know, and especially, you know, vice is notorious for being low budgeted on film stuff. You know, like where something like any or history might have like a 250,000 budget for like, you know, like something like I was a teenage felon. You know, the budget might be like like on an any or history. It might be like a couple hundred thousand like those budgets were like, probably. Well, the whole thing is there, they're a cool company. They were well back in the day. Maybe still a little bit now. They were in cool. So people wanted to work for them for free. Like it looks, it looks cool if you had advice on your resume. So they could pay you nothing. Well, plus what they do, I think a lot of, uh, industry stuff does that. I mean, they get young kids when they come out of college when they can pay them nothing before they prove themselves. Right. You know, I'm saying and paying them. Yeah, for sure. Yeah, pay them $35,000 a year. You know, to work 10 hours a day. I mean, in the media industry. So I mean, I think, I mean, it's a little bit of exploitation, but I mean, I guess that's capitalism, you know, especially in the industry. Yeah. But, uh, it's better than college too. Honestly, when you do that, when you you learn so much more, when you actually go to work for a real company that you do when you're in college, like what the fuck was I doing in college? It's all the time. I mean, dude, I wrote stuff for free while I was in prison. I mean, dude, I got a ton of stuff that's never been published like, wow, I was learning how to write crafting my trade. So I mean, you know, if you got a passion for something you can get paid for, it's all good for sure. You know, but yeah, I mean, it could be an exploitative angle to, you know, I mean, you should always pay people what they, uh, you know, worth or what they deserve. But, um, yeah, I got out. I had the goal to make film. I actually, I'm right when I got out. I made this little, uh, this short series. It's called Easter Bunny Assassin. Like it's on YouTube. You know, I never really took off. I think maybe got like, you know, 20,000, 30,000 views now. But, uh, I made that like right. It's like a little fictional thing. I had like this little character called the Easter Bunny Assassin, you know, like a dude in a James Bond outfit with a bunny head and he was going around like whacking people and, uh, like other holiday crime figures, you know, like he whacked a Santa Claus, Santa Claus crack dealer. There was Jesus Christ junkie, you know, in two fairy mafia dawn. So this was like a little kind of thing that I envisioned and prison. And I got out and that was kind of how I learned. That was like my first foray into film. I just got like some, uh, you know, I convinced some local college students that were, you know, in film school. I'm like, hey, let's go shoot this. You know, I bought some cameras and bought some equipment and they were like, fuck it. Let's do it. So that was, yeah. That was kind of almost like my training, my first training, but then, um, it's on YouTube now. Yeah, it's on YouTube. You can watch it. Yeah. Easter Bunny Assassin. Yeah, Easter Bunny Assassin. A lot to check out. It's kind of like some, it's like some low budget gorilla. Yeah. I think it's like we made, we made the whole thing for like, like $2,000. That was just like the food and the batteries. Yeah. The camera for sure and the media. But, um, then you know, I really got lucky when I got involved with white boy, you know, the documentary is on Netflix now that I wrote and produced. Um, I interviewed this director, Sean wreck. He did this film called Murder in the Part. There was a show time, you know, it was about a wrongful conviction. And Sean wreck had actually cut his teeth. Uh, he did like 200 crime stopper shows for all the networks. And then, you know, this is like 2000, whatever 16 when I first came into contact with him. Like right when true crime is like blowing up right after, uh, you know, making a murder. So, um, he does this, a murder in the park. It's on show time. It gets named time magazine names at like top 15, you know, true crime documentary for the year. So I interviewed him for vice and actually, for whatever reason, vice ended up killing the piece. So the piece never ran. But I, I struck up a relationship with him and he had just finished that film and he was actually looking, you know, for his second film. So we started talking and he found out about my background, you know, he was a true crime dude. So, you know, mostly a lot of people there into true crime. They're going to like my backstory. You know what I'm saying? So we started talking and he was also, uh, you know, he was amazed at all the work, all the writing I've done. He was like, wow, man, that's crazy. You did 21 years and you did all this stuff. So, um, he flew me up to Cleveland and he basically, he's like, man, uh, you know, because I told him, you know, I wasn't shy. I told him I wanted to make film. You know, I told him I did that little Easter bunny. I, I sat something for what it was worth. But I said, you know, I wanted to make docs. I saw myself, you know, doing true crime and eventually features and stuff like that. So he flew me up there and we started talking about ideas, you know, like he was like, well, what I did you have. So I was throwing different ideas at him. You know, about like some prison related stuff or, you know, I think at this time I was like on really this, exposing the prison thing, you know, because I was just out. So I wanted to do this documentary that exposed all the evils of the prison industry. So that was like my big thing that I was pitching to him. But he was kind of like, wow, I don't know. And then, um, you know, then I just casually mentioned, you know, that I had wrote all these articles on the guy white boy Rick for vice, you know, for trying to get him out saying that he should be out. And um, that struck his interest because he knew that they had this Hollywood movie with Matthew McConaughey that he was just going into production called white boy Rick, you know, about the same story. So he found out I knew white boy, you know, he found out, you know, I had the foundations of the story from these articles, you know, I'd written for like the fics and vice and vice news. So, uh, he was basically like, you know, let's do this, you know, and I kind of made a deal with him. I was like, look, um, I go, I want you to basically, you know, mentor me on this film, you know, because I knew how to tell a story, you know, I wrote books, but I didn't know how to make a film. I didn't know the nuts and bolts, you know, how everything went. And when I walked in this dude's office too, I saw, uh, he had nine Emmys, you know, in his office, not national, but regional Emmys that he'd won for all those crime stopper shows all like Ohio Emmys, you know, and I was like, okay, this dude must know what the fuck he's doing. So, you know, we made a deal and he said, you know, so he all the shoots like he would fly me in, you know, he would involve me in the editing process. And really, you know, he taught me, he taught me, uh, you know, how to make a film, you know, documentary film. And this, I mean, this dude is a really good filmmaker. So, um, we made white boy, you know, I wrote and produced that and I learned from him. I peer in that too, you know, as a talking head. And, uh, that was like kind of my initial foray into film. And that actually came out, man, that actually came out on stars, like around 2018. Yeah, and it was weird because I knew it was a real good movie. I knew this movie. It was this crazy story. But I don't know, it never kind of took off. And I don't, maybe it was because when the white boy Rick Hollywood movie came out, I think it kind of bombed. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? So maybe, you know, just whatever the circumstances, yeah, and our doc kind of came out around the same time. So maybe we got buried because of that movie and it bombed so nobody had an interest. So, right. So we were actually on stars for like almost like two years. And, you know, people knew it was cool. I had a documentary stars, but it was, you know, I had other projects that, you know, I wanted to get off, but I wasn't getting any interest. You know, nobody was interested in funding me and my projects. And then, yeah, and then like crazy shit happened. Like, you know, the pandemic, you know, the riots, you know, the Black Lives Matters going national, people talking about, you know, police brutality and police corruption all over the world. You know, I just think the pandemic really slowed everything down in this country. You know, because before I think when it first came out like 2018, it's like just a rat race. Everybody's trying to get money, capitalism. They're not really, I don't think people were open or receptive to the story that we show in White Boy Rick because it's the level corruption or like so fucking crazy. I don't think people believed it. So they just dismissed it. But then, you know, after the pandemic and everything that happened, you know, that I just mentioned through the pandemic and, you know, the last couple years of Trump, which were pretty chaotic. And like I say, I'm not pro Trump or, you know, against Trump, you know, really, I don't like Biden, Biden is the one who made built all the fucking prisons, you know, him and Clinton, but, you know, I'm not, I, I try not to, you know, get politically involved. But I mean, I think anybody would say the last two years of Trump were pretty chaotic in this country. You know, at least in the media, but, um, so I think all those things that happened that I just described kind of made people more receptive to what White Boy's about in the level of police corruption that we're talking about. So then when it went on Netflix, you know, it went off stars and we signed a new streaming deal with Netflix and it went on Netflix in April. You know, right at the, I guess, end of the pandemic. I don't know, maybe the pandemic is still going through the year. Yeah. And, um, yeah, dude, it went on there and it was like it was a brand new movie. Dude, it blew up. It was like the first two weeks it was on. It was like top 10. Really? And it wasn't like, it wasn't like top 10 documentaries. It was like top 10 on the whole site for like movie series, everything for two weeks straight. Right? And then, uh, like they said in April and May, like it had 20 million views, man. Like it just fucking exploded. So I don't know. It's weird how, how things happen because everything that's happened to me now, like film wise, I was ready for the shit to happen. Like in 2018, I really thought it was going to happen in 2018. But for whatever reason, it didn't happen. But, um, you know, so I had like this, whatever, like almost three year fucking delay of my fucking film career. Not to say I was still trying to make sure to happen. But, um, now hard to make sure to happen in that, in that whole world, the whole film industry. Yeah. I mean, it is. I know I've been battling man. I've been trying to make sure to happen. But, you know, now since I got the recognition from white boy and white boy blew up, it's just made people are way more receptive to my ideas because, um, I tell people I equate it to like, you know, like when the New England Patriots win the Super Bowl. All right, everybody knows Tom Brady's like the main dude, right? But then you see like all the support players sign these big contracts without a team's, right? So it's like the same like white boy, like I'm not the main person on white boy, Sean Reck was the main person on white boy. You know, the editor, Brandon Kimmer, he was the second main person on white boy. You know, so if anything, and there's this other producer Scott Bernstein, so maybe me and him might be like the third, fourth, you know, fourth, third, whatever. You know, so, you know, I contributed to it, you know, and I helped shaped it and, and you know, the story, the origin came to me. The access came from me. You know, but, um, you know, I was a supporting player on this document. I'm not going to steal credit from anybody else. You know, I'm saying they deserve their credit for making a real good film, but you know, I helped to make this film. I was a part of it. So it's now like, uh, I got that recognition and so it's like people think like, you know, I'm a part of that magic. So maybe I have that magic. Yeah, you know, I'm saying so it's weird because I always tell people like, I'm the same person, like I haven't really changed, but it's like the way people look at me has changed because that film getting 20. to tell people like, I'm the same person like I haven't really changed, but it's like, the way people look at me has changed because that film getting 20 million views in two months on Netflix. You know what I'm saying? It was weird because I started going to Sundance about four years ago and I started meeting some people on Sundance and I met all these amazing talented filmmakers and they got their films in Sundance and they got their films in cans and tried back in SWSX and I'm just like, I'm like, fuck, this is what I want to do. And white boy blew up and like, none of these dudes have like a top 10 film on Netflix. They're like calling me, they're asking me like, what's a secret? How did I do it? And I'm like, you know, it's just, it was like this shift. You know, so it's weird, man. I mean, I'm still dealing with it now. You know what I mean? I'm getting used to it, you know, so I've got a funding for a lot of my different projects. So I got this film Nightlife. It's about the violence in North City. You know, that's about to come out. You know, I follow this dude around North City, like where the worst parts of St. Louis, we follow him around with cameras for three years. He's basically a violence and a rupture. He's a preacher named Reverend Kenneth McCoy. We follow him around from like 10 p.m. to 1 a.m. in the morning on Thursday, Friday, Saturday nights, like with all the drug addicts that, you know, the pimps, the prostitutes, you know, the drug dealers, the gang bangers, you know, the homeless people, you know, that's what he does that he administers to these people. You know, these are, these are his flock. You know, he takes out sandwiches. I follow him. I follow him with a three camera team. Really? Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy. Like gunshots, people threatened to steal our cameras and smash our cameras and threatened us all crazy. Shit. But that was wild. That was wild. So that dog's almost ready. We're gonna release that dog man. I just took it to a sales agent and I'm thinking maybe you have film festival too. So you know, okay. See, I don't I don't have, you know, I always tell people like you hear a lot of people say, oh, it's gonna be on Netflix. I mean, unless you have some, unless you're like Martin Scorsese and you have like some overall deal with Netflix, you can't say where the shit's gonna end up. You know, I do shit independently. You know, I'm saying I work with private investors. They give me money and I do stuff on spec. When then I finish it, then I go to sales agent and they try to sell it. Right. You know, so that's that's what I'm about right now. So I got that nightlife program project. I got this project. I'm calling it. It's a LSD trade project. I'm calling it the psychedelic revolution right now. It's about the history of the LSD trade. You know, the underground chemists, you know, how they locked up and targeted all the people for LSD like myself in the 80s and 90s and in-pollusin prison for a long time. And how now we've almost gone 360 and they're talking about legalized and psychedelics and decriminalizing it. So that's what that that's my LSD doc I'm working on. I got a humble county doc I'm working on. You know, it tells the history of humble county and the amoral triangle and how these people up in the mountains in northern California became known for growing the best marijuana in the world. And at one time in the 80s and 90s supplied 60% of the domestic product in the US. You know, then it it tells how like, you know how like they were terrorized and where they lived was basically militarized with like helicopters and the military going in, you know, an arrest in them and throw them in jail and you know, cutting down their crops. And then you know, it goes full circle to like leak. You know, I was like that was some of these guys from humble county now they're out now and they have legal farms. You know, yeah, it's easy. Yeah, so you think it's all good. You know, these guys are legal now, but now, you know, with big ag and big pharma coming in the marijuana game in California, you know, a lot of these guys are small farmers, you know, these guys are up in the mountains. They're small farms, you know, they only got, you know, so many spots in like down in southern California, you know, in Santa Rosa, they have these big greenhouses, you know, with these massive operations and these guys are struggling. So, you know, that's what that film is about. It's about the history of humble county. It's about the emerald triangle. It's about why they grow the best marijuana in the world. Why they should be considered like the Napa Valley, Napa Valley of cannabis. But, you know, it's also about the problems that they're facing right now in the marketing California and how a lot of these farmers like the cops couldn't make them stop growing weed. The war on drugs couldn't make them stop growing weed. You know, the droughts and the fires couldn't make them stop growing weed. But now a lot of them might have to stop growing weed. They might give up because, you know, big ag because they're taking over the market and they're driving the price down. Yeah, they can't make no money. So that's my humble county doc. So that's my, I got my LSD doc. I got my cannabis doc. I got an ecstasy doc that is, um, it's about this crew out of Atlanta called the South Side Boys that were like these huge, are these used ecstasy suppliers. They were important from Amsterdam. They were supplying like, you know, all Atlanta, all the Southwest down here in Florida. One of their big hubs was Panama City. And one of their, one of their stopping grounds was the club, uh, the club, uh, the, the club, La Vila, you know, which is famous club in Panama City. It's like the world's base nightclub. It's closed now. It's like, it's like where they had a, uh, you know, like MTV used to film there. A lot of the, the WCW nitro and stuff like that. And I think like girls got wild. But, um, so I'm doing that on the, that extra serene called the South Side, the South Side Boys. And then, uh, I'm working on this other project. It's called Dopeman. It's basically about America's first drug cartel. It goes all the way back to the 20s. And it looks at like, you know, when the mafia started the international global drug trade, you know, because in pop culture, you know, in a lot of movies, there's just thing like the mafia says like, oh, like we don't fuck with heroin. But I mean, they, they, they were the first drug cartel. You know, they, heroin has been their biggest money maker since, you know, before prohibition ended. So that I got that story to this. So that goes all the way back. So that's kind of like, uh, you know, the projects. I'm hoping to get all these projects out, like within the next 12 to 18 months. God damn, Seth, that's a lot of projects. Hey, you're on it, man. You are a busy dude. I don't know if I were going to find an answer to this, uh, the prison industrial complex in this country. But, uh, if anyone could shine light on it, it's probably you. Yeah, I don't know, man. I just, so I, my biggest thing now is, um, that all the nine violent weed people out, man. And they're still like, from the numbers I've read, they're still like 40,000 people locked up nonviolent for cannabis. Let him out, man. You know what I'm saying? You got people making millions of dollars, man. Yeah. You know, so let these people out. Like I said, I've been in prison. Any reasonable person will agree. There's people in prison that belong in prison. And like I say, up, I don't hate law enforcement. You know, that's their job. Lock up those violent people. They don't deserve to be out here. If you, you know, whatever, sometimes you might do something violent and you know, you're, you know, you're, you're less than, and you know, you're okay and you assimilate to site. But these people that are repeat violent offenders, put them in prison, man, that's where they deserve. Man, this is like fucking polite society. You shouldn't have to be walking around. You know, thinking someone's going to threaten you or fucking whip you with a gun or shoot you or take your shit. You know what I'm saying? Right. That's not what this world is about. That's not what America's about. But you know, so those people belong in prison, but you know, all these non violent drug with thinners, especially the marijuana guys. I mean, let them out, man. Lock up the serial killers. Lock up the chomos. Yeah. Make a lies all drugs. And we'll all be fine. I mean, you know, I'm saying drugs is just a commodity, man. Yeah. Cool, man. Well, let everybody know where they can find your projects, your work, whatever you're working on now online. Yeah. Um, why got my website, gorillaconvic.com. Uh, I also got Seth Ferrante.com. And um, like I'm on social media, man, I'm on Instagram, I'm on Facebook, I'm on Twitter. So I post about a lot of my stuff. Like when I do my different shoots, you know, I post like behind the scenes photos, you know, I'm actually I'm going to be in a humble coming up on the 11th of September. I'm doing a two week shoot. There I'll be there from the 11th to the 26th on a 10 day shoot. So I'll be posting, you know, a lot of stuff. You know, if you like cannabis, if you like marijuana, you know, follow me on Instagram, you know, Seth Ferrante, and you'll see all those, you know, images of the emerald triangle, like the mecca of marijuana, you know, that's your thing. But, you know, also, I'll keep all my work current. I got some other books coming out. I got a new book coming out called criminal escapades, which is about a lot of articles I wrote on Mafia guys. You know that I was locked up like famous mafia. So, you know, some other prison gang leaders and stuff like that. It has like 20 chapters. That's coming out on guerrilla convict my my published now. So then I'm doing this other book that's going to come out next spring called Thug Life, the true story of hip hop and organized crime. It's on this boutique publisher called Hamokar. You know, they mostly do, they do a lot of boxing crime stuff, but I'm like one of their first four ways into hip hop. So it's actually, to me, this book is really special because it's going to be my first hardback. Cool, man. Okay. Yeah. So, and hopefully, I've been talking with publisher, but hopefully I want to see it. I want to see in the airport, man. I want to walk through the airport. Every time I, I, you know, I travel a lot now and every time I walk through the airport, I just like, I want to see my fucking book. Hell yeah. In the fucking, to me as a writer, you know, books, that's like the ultimate. You're your fucking book in the airport. You walk by and see it right there. Yeah. I'd be like, yes. Yeah. Take pictures. Yeah. For Instagram. I did it for the green. Yeah. But look, I appreciate you doing this. Yeah. No, thanks for having me, man. Look, I actually, I had some friends in St. Louis that listened to you guys all the time. And right. And they knew, you know, like, my media profile was kind of ticking up, you know, with white boy. And, you know, I'd done a lot of different podcasts, but you know, smaller podcasts and stuff like that. And then, you know, when my, profile started kind of taking up, they, they actually told me, they're like, man, you need to go on concrete. They're like, you need to go on concrete podcasts. I'm like, what the fuck is concrete? They're like, that's like the fucking biggest true crime fucking podcast, man. They're like, you need to go on, you know, and I had like several of my friends in St. Louis, like they listened to you guys religiously. And then, uh, so I already knew concrete, but I didn't know how to get in touch with you guys. And then it was weird. You know, your producer, Tyler, uh, he heard me, I was doing something on clubhouse. Oh, yeah. And he just happened to like, you know, chime in and caught me. And then, yeah, we started talking and like hooked up. It's just weird how shit happens. Yeah, he's got a problem with clubhouse. He's on there hard. Yeah. No, but that's how he found me. But it was weird because it was like right before he reached out to me just like two weeks before. Yeah, I had some of my buddies. They're like, do you need to go and kind of like, what the fuck is concrete? Yeah, that's right. And they were like, they were like breaking down. I mean, because they're like, you're fucking, they're like, you're fucking obsessive fans. They're fucking shot up to you guys. Every move shot out to St. Louis. Jeremy, Jeremy Salvatore, that's your number one fan in St. Louis. Hell yeah. Shout out to Jeremy. Hit us up. We'll send you some merch, man. Hell yeah. Cool, man. Well, thank you again for coming down. I really appreciate it. All right. Thank you for your story. Absolutely. Anytime, cheers. Cheers. Goodbye world.