Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Hey, hey, what's up brother? Oh man, good to see you. Good to see you. This is a good time for you to come in man. Right after this weekend. Holy shit brother. Bro, I mean, everybody's talking about the Sean Strickland Homsaw fight and the debate put before we even talk about that, bro. How fucking good is Joshua Van? And he's only been fighting about five years. That's what's right. Yeah, crazy. Five years crazy. And he has some holes for sure that that certain guys are, you know, exposed. But five you think out. You're not the best on the ground. He's also 24. He's about 24. Yeah, crazy athlete. But his fucking boxing. It might be the best in the UFC. It's up there. It's a hammer. Iliya. Yeah. Well, Iliya. Iliya. The thing about Iliya is Iliya's one punch night night. That's the difference. It's tough at flyway to be an knockout artist. But then also Josh, if a Dave's and Figurato true, true, he was starching people. He was. But with Josh too, again, he's 24. But in Tutsi or Tyra, he also just was blocking punches with his face. Well, that's the other thing. Like his defense was so bad. I think he was that Joshua Van's offense was so good. You know what? I think it's combo of both. Yeah, it's combo. Yeah, for sure. Cause Tyra is primarily a grappler. Yeah, he's obviously a mixed martial arts fighter. And he did strike. I mean, that's why he didn't completely get blown out of the water. He did strike pretty well. It's just that counters came so clean. So sharp. Like I rewatched some of it today and I was like, could, or that's pretty. So good. He looks so good. And again, 2024. And you know, it took all the stink off of the way he won the title. Yeah, but not me. I'm sure not you, but there's a lot of questions that haven't been answered. Oh, for sure. I just pantosha's a motherfucker. Potosha, and look at that straight like that. Okay. How would he do against Pantosha? Hey, man. But again, his stock went up after this fight. I'll tell you that. Look, it was always up. Right. But Tyra was a real threat. Tyra got him on the ground, wasn't able to submit him. Joshua Van's pieced him up on the feet. But again, at 24. So let's say they do the Pantosha rematch, whatever Q4. And let's say Pantosha gets that win. All good. He's 24. Right. He's going to be your champ for a very long time. And how long, how old is Alejandra Pantosha? There's more not young in fly weight years. He's 67. Yeah, fly weight stop 36. 36. Yeah, that's tough. Yeah. That's tough. If he was a middleweight, he'd be like, that's the beginning of the slide. Right? That's the beginning of the slide. Yeah. For Walter weight, you're like, oh, yeah. But it fly weight. Oh, bro. It's crazy. Yeah. Your heavy weight is like, he's in his prime. Oh, we're cooking at every basis. Yeah. Francis is like 38 or something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Francis is in his fucking prime. Like, no, nobody looks at Francis who goes eyes over the hill. Oh, never. No, no, no. There's some old cats at the heavy weight doing the damn thing, especially now that heavy weight divisions. How old Vocal? 59. I honestly, I was telling with both those old is that thing. He is right. He was a Belltorch champion M1 champion. He was a Belltorch champion in the early days of Bellator. Yeah. And remember he had in Bellator. And then when he first got to you, you'll see he had that Moana tattoo on his back. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The sting. Right. And he changed into that Japanese mask. Yeah. I like this. The guy on the one looks dope. The new one looks dope. So dope. I like the thing. I'm the one that kind of bullied him into doing that. because like it's all I ever talked about for like six years. When he thought it comes out just as dope ass Samurai tattooing like. Yeah. Well, sometimes you realize like this ain't making it. I gotta fix this. Yes, especially that people like bro. Why do you have a fucking stingray on your back? Bro, speaking of tattoos, how many tattoos is Sean Brady have? That motherfucker's feet are tattooed because entire bodies tattooed. How good did he look phenomenal? This thing might be phenomenal. I always get stressed out because everyone's asking for betting pigs before the fights. And I am amazed tough dude. I'm amazed tough to fucking pick. So with the walking Buckley fight, the reason I told my brother my literally put your mortgage on Sean Brady. Because walking Buckley did an interview like a week before is like, I'm not working on grappling. I'm not resting or grappling. I'm just going to keep this thing standing knocked this motherfucker out. I was like, oh, buddy. No way. Yeah, you can find it out. But that could have been just a bullshit tactic to try to get Sean Brady because Sean Brady probably saw that interview too. Yeah, it was like, cool. Say last and I just I know, but I mean, 10 seven rounds. Do they have a I know it was nuts. But I mean, you could say that I get I hear you if you were just playing mental games. I get you. But maybe he actually did that and it appeared so it. Well, hard to say because that's how good Sean Brady is. How great. It's just tough when you lose like that. Can you go back to the go back to locker room? You're like, fuck, we're not even in the same ballpark. No, like I'm what am I going to do? You look at your coach staff. You go, what are we going to do? I thought I was a top five guy. Right. I just got beat 10 six three three rounds. Okay. I was going to bring this up. So I have some insight to this. So there was a very strange betting behavior. Um, it says it turns out to be meaningless. Bed online cited abnormal betting patterns as Buckley moved from plus 150 under dog to minus 220 favorite before the fight. So this is what happened. Um, there's money that moved very quickly before the fight and the UFC obviously because they've been through this shit with the guys fixing fights and the FBI investigated it. They got concerned. And so, um, I believe what happened is they minimize the amount that you could bet online. So he couldn't bet big money anymore. I don't know what the, let's find out what the cap they put on it was. Um, but then you, um, they, they were going to go ahead with the fight, but they wanted to make sure that Sean Brady wasn't injured. So this was the fear. The fear was that some inside camp word got out. Sean Brady's got an injury and then all the money jumps up because a lot of times that's what happened. But they, they did it right because I, uh, before they were just canceled the fight. Like we don't know what's going on with seeing can fight. No, just take the fight off the betting sites. Well, they only did that one time. They did that one time with the Alexander Hernandez. I don't remember who he's fighting. I don't remember who Alexander Hernandez was fighting, but they did that with that fight. And I thought that was really crazy. They asked Alexander like, are you okay? He's like, I'm fine. Like I am planning on winning this fight. But for some reason, he became an underdog. Like nothing came out from it either. No. Like I wish they'd be a little more transparent, like K really into it. They just are bad this, you know, but they just canceled the fight. And so everyone, now we just assume something happened. Something happened. Someone's being dirty. Yeah. But then Hernandez fought again and lost his next fight. Um, fuck, who did he fight? He fought someone on a fight night. Was a very good fight. Very close fight. The dude was very good. But I'm glad they're not just pulling the fight. Oh, Michael Jones might be right. It was supposed to be Michael Johnson, but they didn't have that fight. And then who did he fight next instead? So let's just go over this real quick before we figure out who he fought. It made suspicious betting movement. So what is the suspicious betting movement? Like what if you and your boys all go, fuck it, I'm going all in. And you just decided to bet $100,000 on Buckley. Well that changed it that dramatically. I don't think we're talking about it. According to the only thing that they had certain, I think they have certain accounts that they knew. Oh, we're shady. Not shady, but I mean, they might be particular whales or whatever that are certain betters that always were betting, you know, $200,000 a fight or whatever. And maybe one or two of them changed. Oh, I'm saying. Two of the judges score that fight. Try to see it. Yeah, 25. I have no more betting patterns from highly monitored accounts. Interesting. Highly monitored accounts is interesting. Mm-hmm. You better get a new account. They're bigger than that. They're on to you, bitch. But it's just, they called Sean Brady to hear at the bottom. I was in point out, says someone called him to let him know and he's like, I'm fine. I love it. He goes, I'm going to beat the shit out of this guy. What are you talking about? I'm like, yeah, you're good to go. I think that's what Alexander Hernandez said too. Yeah, it's a bummer. Yeah, it is a bummer because that's the fight. We can also understand from the UFC standpoint, because when it happened, especially then, they're like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. No, they're in a bad spot right now with that because until that gets resolved, the, look, the fight game has always been connected to fucking shady people. Oh, that's a Marlon Brando movie on the water. Yeah. I could have been a contender. Yep. Yeah. That's who he lost to. Oh, that's right. Haffa Garcia. Very good fight. Very good fight. Haffa did a phenomenal job. But I, but I think too, back to the betting, I think that's also a reason why now more than ever fighters against so much hate. because if you, you know, you have a nine to five and you make a thousand dollars a week and you put 500 on say, Homzot. Yeah. And he loses that 500. That's why it's so toxic now because yeah, you're guys losing but now it's cost you money. So I think that's why fighters against so much more hate these days than they did. Even when I was fighting betting was the only thing. Oh, yeah. No, I think you're absolutely right. I think it's Raffa Garcia. Is it Raffa or Haffa? Why am I saying it wrong? I feel like it's Raffa. I think so too. I think I want Brazilian on me. I can throw it in there. Yeah. You may a real good point about the betting because that's why people are getting subset because they are betting money on it. It's a big problem with some people. With some people, the ability to just bet on anything anytime you want. And now it's like a poly market and all these different things. You could bet on, you know, fucking anything. Anything. Anything. How about that fucking soldier that got busted? He moved. He bet that Maduro was going to get kidnapped dude. But my thing is, it's like the Pete Rose thing. Lee's Pete Rose is betting on his team to win. Right. This dude was bet on his fucking team to win. Right. Don't discipline him. If you don't think Trump's giving him a pardon, you're at your goddamn mind. Well, I guess, awesome. That's a weird one. That's a weird one. But I mean, why is that bad? But the inside trading in Congress goes unchecked. Oh my God. Like that, bro. That's crazy. Like if you get mad at that, people would have hypocrite. You're also doing that back up. The actual forces guy who is not like they're compensated that. Right. And he was like, oh, I'm going to bet the house that we fucking get this idiot. Right. And by the way, he's betting on himself because it didn't have to happen. That's what I'm not worth. Good of all going to kill. It's like Pete Rose too. It's like keeping on a Hall of Fame. I think they're going to let him in now that he died. Oh, great. Yeah, cool. That helps. Thank you. But it's also like he never bet against his team. It's pretty gangster. I don't know if that's true. I'm pretty sure. I don't know. I don't know. I read something online. He might have bought against his team at least at one on one game. I don't know if that's true. I'm room for Pete Rose. But I just read something. I mean, they might have been a Pete Rose hater. That's what I thought. That's what that's good. It may be only bet a forest team. I feel like that should be legal. That's what I'm saying. That's like this person's guy. What are you trying to win harder? You trying to win harder because you want money? Yeah. That would be good. Especially for us, dude. You're really into this. Yeah. Fuck yeah, dude. I think I'm million bucks right on this. No confirmed evidence that everyone produced that Pete Rose bet. against his own team. There you go. The Cincinnati Reds, though, there's some speculation. All official speculation. I must have read speculation. I mean, what the, say, personally, Pete Rose probably bet against the Reds at some point. John Dowd said. But even he has acknowledged that his investigation did not produce conclusive proof of such bets. So if I feel like you should be able to bet on yourself as a fighter, I feel like you should be able to bet on yourself as a baseball player, why not? We're just betting to win. Now, betting to lose different story, different story. But bet, so if you just say, is that because you can't tell them how to bet? Like if you're going to let them bet, they have to be able to bet on whatever they want. Like, man, I don't know if I'm going to win this one. I'm going to try. But I'm going to try. But I think I might lose. So let me just see if I can make a little extra money. Just in case I lose. See, like, try my hardest. I lost. But still make some money. That's good. Just opens. I can't know what you don't want to deal with. It's a problem. Nobody's bad. Right. Because then what if you want, like I won? Yeah, but I lost money because I fucking bet against myself. I'm getting it. Yeah. Right? You mean, don't money this way. I'm fucking psycho. To try to win. Knowing this could have cost your money. Like your whole camp, paying your fucking traders, your manager, everything. Fucking nape. What's like the the Homsock Street in fight? You and I, right when that fight got announced, we text each other. And I went, good fight, good fight. I know everyone's going to, you know, Homsock's a big favorite, but we both went, I don't know, man. I can see it. I was not riding for Strickland the whole time. I was like, that guy is the fucking captain of the deep water. He knows how to go into deep water, man. And he knows how to survive. He can survive. And the thing about Homsock is if he takes you down, he wants to hold you down and just beat on you and not expand a lot of energy. Like he did with Treckus. That's an issue. You can't do that with Sean. Sean is not going to sit still. He's very hard to hold down. He's got super underrated grappling, super underrated. You know, we saw he almost threw Homsock like later in the fight. You know, and he did wind up on top multiple times. Like it's he ain't easy for anybody far from him. And he had a blown out shoulder. Boom. That's the other thing everyone's like, well, you know, Homsock was compromised because the weight cut it's like, hold on. Sean had won on. Sean had one fucking arm. And when he did throw that right hand in that second round, he wobbled Homsock. No one's talking about that. The most significant punch was in the second round. Yeah. He flashed knocks out Homsock and Homsock. And he probably fucking cholted his shoulder with pain. And still defended it. Notice he was doing this at the beginning of the fight. He before the fight started, he was doing this with his arm. So he's warming up, he's doing this. But he kept doing this with his right arm. I'm like, ooh, that's what I do. If my shoulders hurt, to see how hurt it is, how's it feel? Feel the range. Yeah, how's it feel? And he was only going to here. He was only going to here. He kept doing it, but dead pan killer look on his face. That motherfucker still won. Yeah. Still won? Here's my thing about it. Still fought. When a lot of guys would have pulled out. A lot of guys would have said, I can't use my arm. I'm pulling out. Especially for that magnitude of the fight. I think was Strickland too. Now that he won, people are like, go with the Hall of Famer, 1,000%. 100% he's Hall of Famer. My thing was Strickland too. It's like, he's gonna be a bigger start now more than ever. I think that fight is the one that put him even bigger. The thing about Strickland is he's the guy that's not supposed to be here. Like everyone, when we talk about, you know, Chechnins or Dagestans, wherever these war-toned countries are from and they're like, this is the only way they made it out. Dude, Strickland grew up a poor white kid in America. Disnfranchised, dude had a abusive father. The odds are so against Strickland, so against Strickland. And this motherfucker beat Arglie the best Strick in the weight division of all time when Isley, Alison, beat him at striking, at striking in Australia. And then they give him Arglie the best grappler of all time in their weight division. And he beats him. So he, we're all of you listening. All you guys are closer to Shawn Strickland than you are to LeBron James or Patrick Mahomes. He's just a tough white kid who trains his ass off. He's a blue collar guy. He doesn't run a 40 and a 4-4. Doesn't have a 40-inch vertical. He's, he, he, we got one bad leg from a motorcycle accident. He's almost ruined his whole career. Dude, I get chills talking about, dude. He's the guy, he's that blue collar guy through hard fucking work is a hall of fame, bonified hall of fame and beat two of the greatest mental weights of all time. Right. And all the sites he's an underdog, fluffy underdog. DDP underdog granted he lost when I say one that first like a hums a under massive underdog is he massive underdog second fight with, with DDP. He fucked the shoulder up too driving a dirt bike. Like a fucking psychopath crazy crash dirt bike fucked his shoulder up and they told him he had a fight. So you had to take the fight. So you had to take the fight with a fucked up shoulder. And if one of the things you notice about when he's throwing right hands in particular in this fight, I noticed it was, they were awkward sometimes. Yes. Sometimes they just looked weird. Like he was trying not to use a shoulder or something. You look compromised. Yes, 100%. And I saw some of that in the second, strictly second DDP fight. You know, where it looked like he was kind of throwing his punches weird. You know, which sometimes he does anyway because it goes around the guards. It's awkward. It's strategic. He's throwing shit that you're not going to block correctly. And then he's going to land you clean shots. But when you see him when there's nothing wrong with him, like he had this giant break because he punched somebody and some fucking low level promotion. Sorry, that's right. Got you kids. Yeah. Yeah. So he came to a while. He's a wild boy. So they gave him like eight months of suspension, something like that, six months of suspension, whatever it was. So you see him against Hernandez when he's perfect. And he looks fucking phenomenal. That's a very good. His striking look phenomenal. Everything looked phenomenal. And I'm like, oh, God, he looks like a better version of the guy who beat Izzy. He looked better. Best way better. And then he beats Hums. I was one shoulder. This episode is brought to you by ketone IQ. I don't care who you are. Performance is mental. I talk for a living. So I'm always looking for a way to stay sharp. Ketone IQ is one of the few things that actually feels like a game changer. It came out of a $6 million US military research program on human performance. It's a small shot of ketones. Fuel your body makes when fasting or training and your brain loves it. I use it before long days for a smooth, steady focus, no spikes or crashes. And it's clean. No sugar, no carbs, no preservatives. Go to ketone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order or find ketone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. They're so confident in it. They'll even offer a 60 day money back guarantee. Go ahead and take your shot. And so if you count them out based on that fight, we owe those homes a lot of people did. Look, it's a lot of people that know fighting thought homes aren't one. There's a lot that I think it's split among journalists. I think I was reading something. I don't know how easy I'm reading. I don't really read anything. I really read the headlines. I'm going to move on. You'll be careful with journalists. I'll listen to former fighters. Or people that've been around to get my long, long time. If you have homes that winning, yeah, OK, nobody was robbed. But I can give you a pretty good argument why I strike them on that fight. Yes. I can give you a damn good argument. I think it was like I was talking to him inside the octon before the fight said what do you think? And I said it was really close. It was really close. Because you really never know with judging. We've both seen fights where we were sure that one guy won and the other guy gets it from the judge. So you don't know. So in my opinion, I would have to go over it and watch it again. Because when I call fights, I'm just calling stuff. I'm not really scoring them. Super tough. It's weird. Because what you're trying to do is make some entertainment out of moments and put some weight to it and express maybe to people that don't know exactly what's going on. You're also listening to your other partners in the booth. Well, DC's great at that. DC is the best at explaining shit to people that don't know what's going on when it comes to wrestling. In particular, because he's such a elite wrestler. And there was a lot of wrestling moments in that. So that's what you're doing. So you're not really judging the fight. If you're judging, you'd be silent. Like Eddie Bravo used to judge fights unofficially for the UFC in the early days. And what Eddie would do was he would have a piece of paper and draw a line down the middle for each guy. And then he would have categories. Strikes, kicks, landed, punches, landed, take down submission attempts. He would mark all these different things. Like every time something would happen, he would mark it down. And then he would also go by who landed the most damage. And he was really good at it. Like he was very accurate in terms of like, I never disagreed with him. I was like, that makes sense. But if you're in tension, it's just score the fight. Like you don't have to be entertaining and do the commentating. I can do that. It's like I do come tape for a game bread. And there was a fight, fight of the night. And Jimmy Smith is going, who do you think one? I said, dude, this isn't the time to ask. Because I was entertained by the fight. We're doing our thing. Right, right. I go home and watch it. I'll let you know exactly who won it. It's such a close fight. I don't know, especially wars, especially a crazy war. It's so hard to figure out who won. Some wars, like let's think of like, what if Tyra and Joshua Van had made it to the end? That's tough one. That's a tough one. I mean, Joshua Van definitely did more damage. 100%, which is number one thing they are supposed to. Right, judge it. So I would judge that in favor of, like, could we have a conversation about the Gomez fight? Who was Gomez fighting? Pat Sabatini. So Pat Sabatini was fighting Gomez. And all Pat Sabatini did was clench him and tried to take him down. Took it down a couple of times. But when they were standing up, Gomez, Pat landed a few strikes, definitely. It wasn't like he was completely outclassed on the feet. But Gomez landed more. So I'm like, OK, I know Pat spent the majority of the fight in control. The majority of the fight clenching, the majority of the fight working towards the takedown. That's a bad fight. But it was unsuccessful for the most part. Gomez bounced back up to his feet every time. Never took any damage on the ground. Never got close to being submitted. And then when they stood up, Gomez was the one who was going after him, landing strikes. I don't know if it was enough to win though, because it's like there wasn't a lot of damage. It wasn't like he hit Pat and Pat got rocked and Pat went down. And there was none of that. But Gomez was doing better in the stand-up, which when it comes to damage, that was the only damage of the fight. But the other thing you got to think is considerations. Like I love DCs, one of my favorites. But DC has an extensive wrestling background. So he's usually going to, not that he means to, but because he has such an extensive wrestling background, if you listen to Khmer-Ussman, Henry Suhudo, most of them will score that fight for Hamza because of the wrestling involved. But if you talk to someone else who doesn't have a wrestling background or it's more of a striking background, most of them score it for Strickland. So you always get, I take it with a little bit of grain of salt. When those guys, heavy wrestlers, if there's wrestling, but they're successful, like Tae-Tons are successful, they're like, that's a take down like, he didn't do shit with the thumb. There's also the Strickland factor. There's a lot of people that he rubs the wrong way. Boom. And they don't want him to win because the wild shit that he says offstage. Listen, sometimes he goes too far. He said he went too far. He apologized for going too far. But God damn did he sell some tickets. I like what you said. They said, don't apologize. You're selling a fight. Yeah. That's my thing too. It's like, whoa, don't know. Don't apologize for any of that. Because on Monday, I was so excited again, studio. I was so excited. I felt like for first time in a long time, the UFC's back. I felt back, man. It's like, really think the UFC's gone away? No, no, I'm not saying that. Don't get to it. I'm saying as far as like Connor Kabib, bad blood, big time. Couldn't wait. Like I do it. I was tech day before I'm saying, do I can't fucking wait. It was like I was so hyped for this fucking fight, dude. It just felt like, you know, those Connor day could be days, those are over. But this one, the magnitude of it. And I usually can tell when the fights can be really big. Because I'm always at baseball fields and football fields. And dad's like, dude, do you think Strickland has a chance? I'm like, you watch fighting? I'm like, oh shit. I was like, this can be huge, dude. This can be fucking big, dude. It was huge. And it was huge because of the way Sean sold it, 100%. Not just that Sean has a ton of fans for sure, you know, but it was the way he sold it. The chaos, people love it. They love that and especially casuals. They love the chaos. I love it too. I love it too. He makes things fun, makes things fun. And the people get so mad, you know, some stuff he says, but it's like, there's a lane for that hate to tell you. There's a lane for that. And I think Strickland, you've been around Strickland. He's a good person. You obviously have some crazy thoughts and stuff like that, which is fine. But remember too, people go, you see, they don't have stars. And they get a kid like Strickland, who's building his name. This will be the most watched fight when the third most watched wanes of all time. So he's trying to be a star. So you guys can play in there's no stars. And when he's doing the damn thing, he has a hate in on him. You know, so it's like pick your poison. Well, they're hate in by the way he's doing it, right? That he's making things super personal. And, but this is what Connor did. I mean, that's what Connor did with could be Connor crossed the line many times. It could be buddy. Yeah, it's here. Yeah, it was all the way over here. And there was no more energizing after that. I mean, that was the brawl afterwards where it could be, you know, jumped in the crowd and fucked up Dylan. That was my favorite. That's my favorite picture of all time. I need a frame of my fucking suit when could be literally flying off the fucking cage about the fucking, but remember, before that fight in the fight, Kebee was all professional. He was all good. As soon as that motherfucker ended, he's like, now it's time to get to work. Yeah, dude. That is a crazy motherfucking world champion. Just got done stopping Connor McGregor and he's leaping into the fucking crowd just like his nickname and super humble. Yeah, he goes. His talents are fucking out. I mean, you couldn't come up with a better nickname for that dude. You know how Dan Henderson has that flying punch that he landed on business when he was down? Yeah, like his logo. That should be Kebee's logo. 100% with like wings on it, like a flying leg. Like a fucking animal. Dude, that was guy. I love that guy. I love him. Oh, we, you know, we appreciate him while he's here, but maybe not enough. But with with Hamza too, I also think a couple of factors that went against him on Saturday night. He's been in big fights, but he hasn't been in this big of a fight defending the middle weight title. You have this wild boy talking so much shit. So I just, I don't think he's dealt with that kind of pressure at that level. And then also Hamza's always kind of had a cardio issue because remember when I went to to his camp, I called you my bro. I've never seen someone so fucking, I'm talking vicious fucking everybody up destroying them. I was like, oh my God. So there's an issue with him. And I don't know what it is where that's not translating inside the octave. Well, I can tell you right now, first of all, first part of the issue is the weight cut. He got 100% duty cut 22 kilos. Listen to me, they, he got 40 something pounds. They were making it so that he was going to fight Yuri Projod 205. So he starts bulking up and he's eating like a fucking animal and he's deadlifting and doing all kinds of crazy shoes. He said he was 230 I think. He was above that. Yeah. He was somewhere north of 230. And so then he's 230 whatever. And so then he's got to drop down to 85, which is bananas. That's so hard to do. He never got fat. So what happens? Will your muscle gets eaten away? Yeah. Your body deteriorates. You can't recover. And he had a bad breakdown in the middle of the weight cut. I heard his horror was here. His brother today was like, yes, we thought his body was going to shut down. Yeah. So they took an hour off weight cutting and then they went back and he only had like 1.2 kilos to lose at that point, which is what is that? Was that like five pounds? No, no, I mean two pounds? Two and a half pounds. Right. Two and a half. What is it? It's two point two. Okay. So he was 230. That's a lot though. If you're right away dying, you got to lose two pounds of water. It's a lot of water. Two 16 ounce bottles of water. When he was let's say 230 or maybe 235, how many weeks out was that? Do we know? I don't know. Because when Strickland beat fluffy, they were like, hey, forget this year you fight. You're fine at 85. It's a few months. It's a few months, but you know, when you have muscle and not fat, it is a problem. It's a real problem. It's not the same problem. So if you get big like Strickland gets in between fights, like Strickland, there's a lot of videos of him training where he's got almost like a belly. He's heavy. He makes fun of himself. Yeah. That's a different fat. That's different to lose. You can lose that. You can lose that. That's not a problem to lose. When you're bulked up, your body has decided that now you're 230 pounds and you're still working out all the time. So your body's using those muscles all the time. So if you want those muscles to shrink, they literally have to eat themselves. So you have to fucking starve yourself. Or you do a radical dehydrate. So if you want those muscles to shrink, they literally have to eat themselves. Yeah, so you have to fucking starve yourself or You do a radical dehydration which brings you to the brink of death. That's what it seems like that's what he did Probably a factor but my thing in fact or dude It's a factor for sure there's also a factor, but it's not like in the DDP fight and these other fights Not like he's going in there tenacious finishing guys What are you doing? The fight was just him in control. It was just him grappling him in control And no attack that's my issue with him true. He just wanted to cure the wind I think it's here What could be it could be and that also plays a factor when you deal with a garlic shan who's so durable and has such great cardio And can take the fighting to deep deep waters and always does. Yeah, he always he's always going after you in the final round The final round with Izzy when he's got his hands down he's screaming it is he come on He looks but he gets better as that fight goes on. Yeah, and Izzy had noticeably faded by that final round Part of that because of the beating that he took him the first right. He mean he got dropped him super close to stopped Probably can cussed in the first you know I mean that fucking straight punch that he landed where he spun Izzy's head around and then hit him with how many fucking left hands in a row 15 20 left hands in a row. I mean let's count them. Yeah Let's watch that and count them because it's crazy. He just bang bang bang bang bang If you think you're gonna go and just fight normal after that Your concussed you compromise Probably you have a concussion. Yes Just by the way he went down his head spun around was a was a right hand right wasn't a right hand There's a right hand yeah, and it's picture perfect right hand Picture perfect straight right. I mean it was picture perfect And you don't get a cleaner better right hand and then blast him with all those punches in the clinch You're gone after that. You're a shell of yourself You're gone. I think my thing with homs that too is after again You could chalk it up to the weight cut that second round when he doesn't land that take down falls to his back I'm like oh, he's cooked dude I think six months in the most fucking fight your coach thought body was shutting down and he realized that he went real hard in the first round But doesn't have the gas tank and said let me coast I could survive on the bottom here, but I need to catch my breath if I'm gonna try to finish this guy I might have been a strategy and he got better that third fourth fifth round right because the strategy might have been Listen if I'm on my back no big like he tries for a takedown can't get it He realized like oh Jesus I'm not gonna be able to fight standing up like this for five minutes after that first round Because his body almost shut down 24 hours ago 24 hours ago It is the dumbest fucking thing we do in the sport where we allow these people to pretend that they weigh A certain way Pretend you you oh, it's a 185 pound fight the fuck it is One of those guys Strickland is actually a bigger guy than him. It's tricky. It's a big boy Strickland and that neither in the cage is a bigger dude Well, he definitely looked healthier Yeah, right and I think part of that you could attribute to the fact that homs out is killing himself Well, what homs out say to Dana as soon as you jump out of the cage goes I'm done fighting now. I'm going to two o'clock. But apparently now always talking about as a remat. That's on Back on so my you know, so what he's got to do Love to his he has got to limit his calorie intake and he's got to literally burn the muscle off He can't just keep dehydrating himself like that So you had to talk to someone who's an expert at that But my friend Cam Hanes when he runs these ultra marathons what he does is he gets himself down like 160 pounds and The way he does it is he just limits his fucking calories and keeps working out the exact same way and he looks terrible What he does yeah, he looks so tired all the time, but it's just sheer willpower get some down to that weight But that is slow running for days correct. That's a different thing. We can't do that right what he's doing is exploding and moving quickly and I my personal opinion is you have to be Biologically healthy to do that. Yeah, you have to be a healthy person You you can't just be big right and you're not healthy if you almost died a day ago Correct, cuz that's really what's going on and we think these all these guys can recover But how much do they recover? Well, they fucking for sure don't recover 100% I'm not a hundred. That's why I'm excited for them at 205 like a lot of people like oh, I don't like them like If it's though if the weight is an issue at 205 if he's a hundred percent Hamsa I know you might be a little undersized but a hundred percent hamsa could be a lot better than a That's great. It's gonna do it. He's gonna say you ain't fucking make the way the first time 100% He's gonna talk mad shit. It'll be fun. He's a fucking coward. I beat him with one arm It's gonna get crazy. You got to fight him at midway But he's got to go to some expert in losing weight. Oh, no I'm not saying strictly in hamsa at 205 that no no no no no no no no no no no no no no Stay at fucking 85 in comedy no hamsa he's he's gonna do that rematch and then that's it He's a 205r. Well, I think he's over to your point. He has to maintain a weight that's realistic We can still perform, but he has to figure that out. He's got to stop lifting weights, right? So whatever he was doing that got him up to 230 pounds or whatever whatever he was we're guessing right that's what I'd heard that he was north of two-thirds Whatever he was doing he's got to not do that and he's got to do mad cardio Just just cardio like working out like wrestling hitting the bag hitting pads and cardio. I'm a big proponent of do do your sport get your cardio from your sport like I see it across the board like I get a little Little hesitant when I saw all these videos of hamsa you know hitting the the tire with the hammer and doing all these runs like yeah But I'd rather you get your cardio from actually wrestling against top level guys and fucking get after it dude Because what's Strickland do do you see Strickland doing all this? What rate monitor no? No, why is this card is so good? Because he fucking spars like a madman all the time So the stripland you see in that training camp is the exact same motherfucker You see in the octagon. There's no issues meanwhile You got these guys, you know run their hill sprints and do all that I'd rather you get your cardio in In your actual sport. I see it at the the lower level to With kids I coach football baseball these dads like I don't get it man I'm doing the foot ladder drilled my son five days a week. Can't catch football like cuz because they're we're not trying to see What's the best foot ladder? Fucking who can do it the fastest we're catching footballs do you think I do the balls if you want to get better football a hundred percent But do you think that some of that stuff has a purpose? Yes, but not not close to the fight Interesting because usually what we would do is out like let's say you do have a we camp Before the camp starts we're doing a lot of that stuff And then once we get a camp where the focus was the cardio was getting it in in your training You know who agrees you do algemaine Sterling algebra mean talked about this pretty good Pretty fucking good How good did he look against a law to best back control in the game? So I and I don't why is he so underrated? I don't get it Why doesn't it is pure you know it's fucking crazy. It's the way the victory where he had an injury from a illegal shot People hated on him from then on out You know the thing. I'll get you against evil. Oh, I know he's amazing. That was a fucking split decision some people thought he won Yeah, yeah, he could have easily one of the fact are so good. Yeah, Algem is the man Yeah, but he said that Marab does the same thing now who the fuck has better cardio than Marab I would say nobody nobody alive Ever in any sport. I've ever seen maybe that guy that broke the fucking whatever is four minute mileage on but as far as what He didn't get taken down exactly punched in the face People should just go to Marab's camp like what are you doing? He's a wrestling. I'm fucking wrestling He does run yeah, he does lift some weights every now and then but he don't do any of that crazy garage stuff and One of the guys that spoke out against the garage stuff was cub Swanson I shouldn't say spoke out against it, but what he did say was that when he did that because he did some of the training lab stuff He said he was too broken down He said he was over trained and he said he was just too tired when he was going into Like fight camp. Yeah, like we it's tough to recover you doing all the other stuff too You're you're still boxing. You're still thinking about have to you're still wrestling and he said he did badly in those fights which is interesting because You know the Marab Merendevitch approach was very different with bj pen and that was the best bj pen ever The best bj pen ever but they literally did no fight training What they did is all plyometrics and it's different from the stuff the training lab stuff's doing because the training lab stuff He's doing bicycle work and I was doing because that's what Sam Calvita came from correct came from cycling background what Marab was having him do was all plyometric stuff and just build this fucking insane machine. He's like bj You already know how to fight Fact you're not gonna get better at fighting in eight weeks, right? fact, but what we can do is give you an unstoppable gas tank and One of things that always fuck bj up earlier in his career is that he wasn't when he was training himself or when he had you know It wasn't Kim and his brother. Yeah, it wasn't the most different things Yeah, he's phenomenally talented and freak freak and one of things that won the world the Mundiiles at three years in To jujitsu as a black freak like nobody does that. That's why he's almost a bad example. You know I'm saying yeah, right, but what he the problem with really talented people and I'm sure you'd probably agree with me They tend to not work as hard. Yeah, right like Sean all those world champion He's not a guy where you see like oh my god He is so talented like what he does is like no one can move that way. No one can do what he does Like you know, there's certain guys that alike. That stuff is hard work hard work So the guys that are super talented It comes a little easier for them and sometimes they have a harder time with the hard work Because they're not used to getting beat up. They're not used to getting pressed So when they have to do this drill where you're rotating in new sparring partners over and you're exhausted and when you're doing that Hell They don't like that. No, so some guys avoid that shit They just want to be tuning guys up spot on yeah And so those guys when they're fighting a George St. Pierre or someone of a commensurate skill level They might fade. Yep, because that guy got there and it threw a different path mean George All these a phenomenal athlete one of the best wrestlers in MMA ever and didn't even come from a wrestling background I mean George is one of the all-time greats There's not like one thing that George Would do that would make you think like that guys a freak athlete. There's never been anybody like him like that But far from it to your point far from it because I trained with George forever and when we did They would have to do some stuff like I did in the NFL like sprints and vertical and the the agility drills like nothing Nothing crazy. No, but BJ was BJ was crazy BJ's crazy BJ could do stuff Where you like how the fuck can you do that be gay BJ could jump out of a pool and land easy? Yeah, you know BJ Couldn't he has insane flexibility like the way he moves his legs his balance is nuts There's a video of someone trying to take him down and they have a single and they are driving across the And he's on one like hopping with Zero fear of being taken down like but you're point like the BJ's that talented John's another one. Yep Where it's right right exact exact Perfect self-lucking talent so fucking talented and then the difference being like John always figured out a way to win and John If he had a bad camp for one fight he will come back in the next fight and really fuck it put it to somebody Yeah, right like the Gustafson fight first fights with Gustafson. He doesn't train it all I talked to Craig Jackson He's like he barely showed up at all barely showed up in the gym And then has a Final right of my war and pulls it out in the final two random Crazy, it gets taken down for the first time. We see him get taken down by gust of something like oh my god Gustafson might be the man and John pulls it out So the second fight comes around and John trains hard John fucks him up. I mean fucks him up in a way like this is what would have happened if I tried Yeah, if I prepared the way you prepared this is what you got goes You get a fucking beating, you know and This is the dance of like who's the greatest of all time and that's why they argument in most people's eyes is that John is the greatest of all time Because John Was all those things super talented and when push came to shove and he had to get back in Into work and get here. He would do it and he would pull it off against DC. He would pull it off The steep A fight was I think that was not steep A That was I know that that's when you like when you talk about his resume like all right, you know Steep A is the steep A that you know ran through the heavyweight division the steep A that we got out of Alistair over him that beat for BCR for the title the Francis beat Francis when Francis was Just crushing everybody and I think that took a lot out of his chin that Francis fight a real I changed them forever because DC knocks him out right after that and You know wasn't the biggest punch in the world now it was a big punch, but it mean he had taken bombs from Francis Yeah back to John being the greatest of all time. It's like when you look at his resume. It's just that Phenomenal out for no longer as far as every UFC champion crazy, but as far as like other than Josh Barnett the Josh Barnett winner earlier, no, I think John's the youngest John's the youngest and Josh was the youngest in Joshua Van second now right So Josh Barnett won the heavyweight title what 24 yep and those boys were Well, it's an A strip him for steroids when everyone was doing steroids. That is It's like WWE guys get busted like oh come on like pitch you a test them everybody You just don't like Josh way to get him out. I love Josh the way to get him out But yeah back to John. It's like you look his resume craze to ever do it. Yeah beat the very best in murders row Smurried as well now, you know, it's not even comparable to today's light heavyweight and heavyweight But then you don't think so no, well listen close when Alex yet heavyweight when Alex was the light heavyweight champion It's certainly comparable Alex as the light heavyweight champion the Alex that beat Michael Met off the Alex that knocked out Yuri Projoska the Alex that Starch is everybody that fucked up Jamal Hill like that Alex Pereira and John Jones and his prime would have been insane That would have been insane. Oh man tough to beat the wrestling of John Like John's wrestling was on it totally a rumble. Cheers IQ. I do tough round. We're gonna do the Cheryl gone crazy I mean he avoided the shots She's read him like a book bullied him bullied him got all of his neck and like I'll take that But dude if you if you go back and look at John My fighting is too. You look at that light heavyweight division one through fucking 15 good luck. That's especially heavyweight true But fucking luck, but it light heavyweight. Okay, so not a lot of those guys are ranked on top 10 How do you think you read how well? What's what's the thing about Alex? How do you think Alex would have done against Gustafson? Very tough I for you think so. Yeah, Gustafson is prime. Yeah, I think so. Yeah And you think that based on the to share a fight because he pieced up global remember that fight Yeah, well, that was a video game combination Really knocked out at do share Alex is one of those guys similar DC that when John just rained as Champ, it's like if if Alex was just born at a different time maybe five years before five years after He's our John Jones. He was so fucking talented Huge 667 great wrestling great but world-class boxing good at everything dude. Great cardio division with the goat. You fuck. Yeah, yeah Fuck your mom and dad has had us this side of sex same time John and his parents did look at it Look at what happened with Ilya to pour you think about the guys that he's fighting think about max Holloway think about Charles Oliver think about Alexander Volkodowski and he is Blast all of them into orbit all three of them First guy ever to stop max. It's like you will you you're in that guy's division What are you gonna do especially if 45? I don't know what it's gonna be like at 55 Obviously the Oliver fight was a one punch knockout, but that's such a bad knock out crazy knock out But when you see him and Justin next to each other like whoa Justin is quite a bit bigger just a big cat He's quite a bit bigger That's a tough fight. It's it's a different fight than Oliver It's different but fuck then you see what all of their was able to do to max You like good Lord like all of there is a fucking beast And it couldn't do none of that to Ilya. Yeah, the only thing with all that is like the the 55 division Everyone's no one's in the prime like Charles is in his prime when they beat him Justin's definitely not his prime max is in his prime. They're all good. They're fucking good But not prime prime right the issue is as is Ilya's Just getting to his prime get just getting to his prime and Already one of the greatest of all time. It's a fucking problem. Yeah He's so smart and so disciplined and so like completely focused to do it. I'll then Great it everything great it everything and the crazy thing is didn't even start as a striker Started as a grappler Now his toughest matchup is arm is through again. That's the mother fucking fight hundred percent Oh, but that's what that's what's gonna say with with homicide. He's not active I know I'm jump around a bit with homicide He I think one of his issues with whatever's going on inside that knock on weight cut one 100% Clearly there seems to be a mental block when it comes to finishing fights because we're about gasing out Are AF do take a game? Payed out of fucking through Ginsburg just wrestle all the Suruken I think he's wrestled like eight times this fucking no just fucking dudes up making all the money It makes six figures every time he fucks somebody up, but he's active. He's staying active staying in cheating Yeah, you see he's going yet go ahead and do it. Yeah, so for homicide Yeah, dude because he fights once a fucking year, which is not good dude Right, so it's like stay active over there stay active like like arms through Ginsdon Well, you're way down. Yeah, I don't know if he's interested in doing that I signed with him. Yeah, but what was the fight they signed that he was gonna he was gonna wrestle somebody who was it? Do you remember I think they want to toss them like an Olympian which I which is it that's where it gets dicey Yeah, here's my fear there was a recent event. There was a very weird event I don't know who did it, but it was Kicks to the leg punches to the body and Jiu Jitsu have you seen that? No get the fuck out of my face. It was weird Yeah, so glazed and tea bow was fighting I Paul Jitsu don't remember who he's fighting and he takes this guy down and the guy catches You know trying to avoid the takedown he catches his knee in a weird way and it blows out So that could happen to fucking Anybody Rest a little safer though. I don't know about that because this was in the wrestling exchange that he took him down Yeah, but those those guys aren't exactly like high-level wrestlers true. You know like you're like RAF has it's top tier Oh, yeah, no doubt no doubt. It's so good wrestlers blow their knees out all the time true It's just a part of the craziness of explosive movement and a guy is coming after you It's got to what you sign up for so for some side. It's like do we can't fight fucking once a year And they have weight issues and clearly there seems to be a mental block and you get finishes because your cardio Let's do RAF let's get this rolling keeps your weight down keeps you active also keeps you in the limelight like if Armin has blown the fuck up dude true. He's a massive star now true Especially online. I don't know how much that translates to it's a great general public that is great dorks like us Dorks like us in point. We are some ride in his nuts He beat George Joe twice Lance Palmer the rest of the tech fault which is nuts nuts your eye favorite yeah through over the fuck that was crazy Why'd you do that? What if he both got hurt? What if you hurt you're a bit of a meathead? Well, he's a psychopath. Yeah, he's a full-on psychopath. I mean he's rich Dude, he's literally wealthy. How do you see him on that stream? They go so like if you wanted to like buy a car like 500,000 car. What do you do? I just call my dad. Yeah, yeah What is dad like a billionaire? He's got tons of money, but he's not lazy at all. No, he's like he Flies in the face of this like long-standing belief that we all had that if you come from a rich family You can't be a great fighter. He's Batman. He doesn't matter if he can you come from the ghetto He's gonna fuck you up. He does not give a fuck you some fucking do's like I'm from the favelas You know, I do like good luck cool man good luck with that fucking Armenian psychopath. He's pulling up in a mailbox He gets people's into LA I watch his YouTube videos You know shows him training and all the different stuff that does he he when he lands in LA He goes immediate to exotic rental car place and rents of Lamborghini and drives it to the training lab It's not the way it's supposed to work, but he pulls it off bro. Good luck with that guy Good luck with that guy. Go and make fun of him for being like a Greek god. Yeah Can wrestle like a fucking elite top tier wrestler? Any can strike any can submit you good luck any's angry because he he's denied a shot at the title because he heard his back What he was getting ready to fight you which is the best thing to ever happen to him You think so? Yeah, because look how much because he we were fucking doors and we knew who he was But the general like you switch online no one his profiles so big now I think it's just with dorks. I mean I think but the doors the equal sponsorship. Yeah, money Well, here's the deal there's only one compelling fight look at the fucking build on this cat That is not a guy that grew up with a billionaire dad who could just go buy a fucking Lamborghini with his credit card He wants his Bruce Wayne, but his pants are still alive. It's not there's no reason to be upset Well, I'll tell you what our minions look at the fuck shut the fuck up man Just shut up great body. That's ridiculous Great body that makes me want to just quit and eat fucking potatoes all day Get you in that fucking kind of shape kidding. Yeah, or just get get rip this episode is sponsored by better help We've all been there staying a blade stressed about the future Maybe you're worried about finding a job or a looming deadline whatever you're feeling stressed out about you don't have to work it out on your own No one person has all of life's answers and it's a sign of strength and self-awareness to reach out for help That's why this mental health awareness month We're reminding you to stop going at it alone Get the support you need with a fully licensed therapist from better help They make connecting with a therapist convenient and easy everything is online Literally all you need to do is answer a few questions and better help will take care of the rest They'll come up with a list of recommended therapist that match what you need and with over 10 years of experience They typically get it right the first time so you don't have to be on this journey alone Find support and have someone with you in therapy sign up and get 10% off at better help dot com slash JRE that's better H E L P dot com slash JRE But it's like he's the compelling matchup for Ilia if Ilia gets past Justin if Justin beats Ilia It is not only one of the greatest upsets of all time. It is one of the greatest caps to a career of all time Like if he all through what he's been through wins the interim title wins the BMF title if he does that and caps his career Off you go fuck yeah, dude way to go out brother if he beats Ilia to per you see freedom 250 and from a Donald Trump He's the only American that gets the belt. It's bigger. It's it's beyond just MMA you see yeah Miracle on ice fuck off this is Imagine the headlines. Yes, and it beats that guy Bro in his prime who's knocking everyone to the shadow realm Says to Charles O. Lavera. I'm sorry. It has to be you So has a celebration party the night before the fight at a party at a party was drinking wine and chip No, it wasn't yeah, pretty sure he's drinking. Oh, no, I think it was water. No, I'm pretty sure he's drinking wine Imagine that fucking psycho bat you get stards and he's got that beautiful fucking Spanish accent All box checks all the boxes. It's such a tough fight for Justin, but I'm rooting for Joe I love both of them, but just for the sheer fact of again I like chaos And at that in front of the weird elites watching the fight. You don't know what the fuck's going on It's gonna be great if Justin pulls it off. Yeah, if Justin pulls it off It'd be one of the greatest upsets of all time one of the greatest victories of all time and if he does just retire It's a poorya plans to celebrate before the gait sheet clash at the White House Of course you're gonna celebrate whatever he's doing. That's his move whatever he does doing it again massive celebration dinner The night before his lightweight belt we're gonna celebrate before the fight actually we have everything organized by teams already taking care of that That's a mind fucking a half when you're in your hotel room You know, and you just fucking scrolling on Instagram thinking about 24 hours from now You're gonna be fighting and you like what's what's this asshole doing? Oh, he's fucking standing on top of a table dance That's how sure is he's gonna He's eating spaghetti and fucking doing it salsa dance What the fuck are you talking about man? Yeah, and when did you say when all the fighters at the White House Trump's like I thought you like this guy You know you're like oh fuck because why would you give your friend as tough as test? Yeah Well for gate sheet that's the last fight. I mean if this is really gonna be his last fight that is the last fight And it's smart it's smart because that that that patty fight is you know Entertaining fight for the casuals as far as technical wise. It was so sloppy man It was just so sloppy, but Justin told me that that's what he wanted to do What you should do? He just wanted to just go fuck you and just come at him and just throw caution to the win and just almost fight like He did like back in the PFL days world series of fighting that's what it was. Yes, right. Yeah, that's right Exactly what should we do and that's exactly what should have done in them for patty It was a sloppy fight, but he got the job done, but you can tell like and it's all good This is a knock on Justin all the gears all the wars one of the greatest careers that we've ever seen it catches up with you 100% it has to and now here's Elliot to pour you But again, I bet Justin wouldn't have it any other way you have an opportunity to pull off one of the biggest Not the biggest ups that we've ever seen and Trevor with me in White House the Justin has an awesome series Art of violence. I think it's called it's on YouTube and it's all talking about him preparing It's all videos of him training and Trevor Whitman's in it and Trevor were saying we love being the underdog We love it and he talked about being the underdog with Rose Nama units when she beat You want to know J-check sure when she beat young waley same thing like that they love being the underdog no situations like stopping Waley was nuts crazy, you know that she was the underdog had kicks her yep crazy and that it's a little different But I hear it is different different, but it is It's similar in ways The Jean-waley is because Jean-waley was fucking everybody scary There's no one like her the physicality of her at straw weight. She was a fucking monster like her training was bananas Crazy I'd watch her training to go good Lord who's gonna be there. She's like shoulders and shit But the way she trained she trains like a dude like an angry dude, you know what I mean like women haircut to show It's not and it's not a knock on the way women train I'm not saying that I'm saying like the ferocity was like she's filled with testosterone She's trying to kill somebody probably his joke she might be It might be natural Might have slipped something into her noodles Do you see that one fighter who got busted and she goes oh man I was I took my husband's vitamins. It just had me stare. Oh, yeah, my husband She threw her husband at the bus for taking steroids Is he an active fighter? I don't I don't think so is he too? No, he's probably just on meat and he's like yeah I guess I hope so yeah me too because of his inactive fighter he'd be like what the fuck now we're both fuck yeah Yeah, say somebody gave you the wrong thing. Yeah, but he's back away, and and rose The difference with that is rose was still pretty Enterprise there. Yeah, 100% that's that's good point. That's good point real good point Justin's not in his prime, but damn he didn't look like he lost a step in the patty pimblethite You looked like he just was just being an animal and pimbleth's fucking good man You see what pimbleth did the Bobby green and Granted Bobby green's not quite at the same level although he look fucking good You look good against Jeremy steams keeps doing the damn thing, but also that style is so fun Talking shit point that you man so far my face so far how about at the end of the fight when I'm interviewing him He's like come walk with me and he takes me over to daddy's job data talking shit point next to man so far my face so far how about the end of the fight when i'm interviewing him he's like come walk with me and he takes me over to daddy's job day yeah like that bonus they never do bonus he's just talking about he's one of the most exciting fighters have ever done he's done i'm like everybody knows that he's like why didn't get my fucking bonus yeah but i'm i'm kind of with dana on the bonus dana goes he well we do it also your strength of get your opponent like joe hoover was good dude he beats oh hoover in his last fight one of us did that was fight he should have got a party for that one that's what he was talking about well the but for this last fight right for his last fight you know he's got german steven's great fight great fighter but you know compared to like the other guys have card yeah that's like there's like well well no but he was complaining about not getting a bonus in his last fight that's why he wanted a bonus in this fight he was saying this is a because i even asked him i go you didn't get a bonus for his oh hoover fight he got 25k right because i did think she finished him if you get a finish no matter what you but he wanted the big boy boy boy boy yes yeah i hate i hate all that i hate people that have to ask for bonuses it's you know look the money is there right we know the money's there like they this is a seven billion dollar deal i'm not a businessman i'll say that right now if i was running the UFC the stockholders they would fucking kick me out yeah shareholders we don't have a fire yeah i wouldn't you don't want that you don't want me running no the UFC because i treated like i was a communist i'm also yeah me too i'm also a little more careful the way i talk about too because i don't know their books i don't know how to run a giant company like that i assume with seven point seven billion dollars i'm like i feel like we could give some over here but then if you talk to something another like oh do you well look at this motherfucker i'm like oh my bat okay now this is not a knock on ria manual but it was reported that he made sixty seven million dollars last year they worked very hard i'm sure he did but that was from the UFC for tk oh right that was his payout and he he's got a bunch of other things going on he's a very successful guy but you see the reason they sold for some points of a billion dollars he's a big part of a big one hundred and the big and also he took the big chance in purchasing it for two billion dollars which was a big deal you know the whole thing is like this is why you're in business um i think fighting is different than any other business and the reason why i say this and you could speak to this more than anybody you are putting your health on the line in a way that is not required in any other business other than maybe football and boxing and kickboxing if you're putting your health on the line in a way that's different than any other business you are the only thing that people are tuning in for there's without the fighters there is no UFC it doesn't exist it is the entire product the the thing you're selling is entirely fighters and it's fighters that operate for a short window of their prime they have ten years or whatever they have and and when they get out you know we've all talked about guys that are mumbling now you can't understand what the fuck they say you see like ticks that they have and guys who have neurological problems memory problems it's real so i don't think we should think of it like any other business because the entire business model is these guys bodies and the consequence is their health and it's for the rest of their life and so if you're doing something that is is generating a significant amount of money for a very short amount of time i think you should get a lot of money for that if you're one of those people the amount of money that is left over for the other people the people that are making the money to put the money in they should still get a lot of money which is why they did it in the first place but i don't think the balance is correct now i am biased right because again i'm not a businessman but i have a deep empathy for people who put themselves in front of harm and and try to chase that glory for our entertainment for the sport that we love and i i think they should be compensated more yeah i don't i don't think you're by me obviously we're biased because we love fighters and i was a fighter it's not even about being biased it's it's just fairness it's fairness it's fairness in the marketplace and well the thing is it's such a dicey thing i know people hate when i bring up fighter talk and i get sick of it too because i don't know what you can really do because i i simple well i go it is it though because here's a thing people will go okay they've made some points and billion here's here's their overhead we don't know what's going on but it's like if the you'll see is the only the only sports combat sports promotion to ever make money ever right nobody else has ever done it better or made profit so my thing is like is this is this what it is it's just what it is and i know some people like you're such an idiot they have this left over money i hear you but i'm saying is there's pfl bellator affliction world series we can go through the list one championship none of them are around someone like they're last like no one's ever been able to sustain it so all i'm saying we don't deserve more fucking money all i'm saying is is this just how it goes in the fight business i don't know i'm not businessman i know people are young right now you're fucking it i'm just saying i don't think it's funny it's fighting different where hang man that's just it's not the NFL it's not the NBA it's not MLB in order for us to continue this rise this is what it is it's 18% of the fighters i i don't know Joe okay well that's what i'm saying i don't good points first of all let's just give the UFC it's flowers because without i love the kids say that these days give the flowers yeah good say have you started using buns yet oh yeah they use that yeah i just found it might make my bad buns is bad yeah i didn't know i got to track my sons i have things buns like is that good what's that it's ass yeah no but buns are always like cute buns yeah i know they take it there he goes that's fucking yeah we're young Jamie yeah yeah Jamie but what were you saying um the UFC is the greatest organization in combat sports history period nothing even close the product is so much better than any boxing promotion and my friends that i brought to the UFC that are boxing fans like my friend Josh Dubin he was like the fucking productions incredible he goes it's so much more exciting than any boxing event it's so much better that is 100% true they've also been a consolidated organization forever right i mean it was a different owner was bob my rots back in the day in 1997 when i worked for them but from 2021 on so for the last 25 fucking years it's been zoopa right they sold zoopa now zoopa sold sold to tikari manuole and tk oh and but the same people are running it right it's still day in a while it's still all these people behind the scenes another conversation yeah it's still anac it's still me and dc and michael biz being and all the other people that are doing commentary and you know dominant crews and paul felder and larsanko it's still the the teams the same the team behind the scenes is the same it's so polished there's never a problem when i show up at the UFC everything's so smooth you go in say hi to everybody i show my badge to the fucking security people i say hi we sit down everything is smooth we got a hit in five minutes okay great everybody's there the the sound guys on point everything is on point it's so easy and it's like the production in the truck is so fucking good they always have the right angle it jeered onos always on the case when it comes to like getting the right angle for a submission or getting the right angle for replace if i ask for something i got it right away like like i'll push the button like you know let me hear his corner yeah because it's boom the right on it it's they're the best high level they're the best and you notice that when you see other promotions it's like other promotions the camera works on it's good it's like they use our goods the machine is so good and it's become like the NFL like i know the XFL exists i've never even fuck the herd of a game i've never even heard of a game anyone playing you know once you brought up a game that's gonna happen never i know it's a thing never and the problem with casuals that's the same with the pfl even though the pfl's fucking got really good fighters there's really good fighters in the pfl far cry from the ocb some of them are really good man that cat that just knocked out henna for our the guy who's the the heavyweight that is a fade-horse protege oh yeah the rushing cat roe he's good bro he's good in the UFC's fucking shallow ass heavyweight division we could use that we could use them i'd like to show up but that dude's hotel room and a fucking briefcase for our mind like let's go dog but yeah might my thing with the UFC and when you talk about the staff and you gotta give them their flowers the only one that's figured it out they're the best by first organization by far and they deserve to be rich because of that they've made an incredible product so do the fighters though i think your product is entirely dependent on the fighters now this is my position with my comedy club so my comedy club pays different than every comedy club the fighter the fighters the comedians make most of the money when it comes to the door that's how it should but let me ask you this John if it's too much right dude get the fucking it but is your is the mothership compared to the comedy store the improv or you guys crushing them it's doing really well i mean the comedy store is always going to be one of the great clubs on earth it's a legendary club it's dependent upon who's there the difference between with the comedy store does it in the way we do it is that we bring in national headliners for the weekend like the weekend it might be david tell yeah this week is tony rock is there another club that does that is there because the guy's also a little different she has regular is there another club that does that sure most clubs do that for the weekends but the thing is they don't have the same lineup for the weekdays yeah does the weekdays we've got Shane Gillis Ron why Tony inchcliff kill Tony's there every Monday it's a different stuff that says are anybody doing that because you the comments have to be this is what my whole point is what have you run your business it's like is is the model where you're doing it where the comics are making the majority of the money is that a sustainable business 100% it makes money if we take it is we take Joe Rogan out of it and you in some dude wants to start a club and did the same thing is that can be profitable no you have to have the talent but that's the difference it's like the thing with the pfl versus the UFC you have to have the talent right and the reason why our club works is because everything it's pure luck it's pure luck everything had a lineup we had to hit every green light it had a covid that happened the commie store had to get shut down all the employees from the commie store had to get fired we had to not be able to do stand up in LA I had to be worried about my family and like the crime and the the riots and then the covid shit where everyone is wearing a mask is like this is bananas and then moving to all to Texas or just visiting Texas but you give yourself credit like yeah yeah yeah we were also the guy that had the idea to do it yeah most people wouldn't but that trigger you didn't have to do that that is true but it's all lot of luck because it had to happen at the right time it had to happen in a time in my career where I had a lot of money you know so it happened how to happen when the spot if I deal took place so I had all this money yeah and then it all had a lineup where I was already the number one podcast in the world so I could easily get people become the view job I had the line humble no no no it's I'm just being honest like it had a line up so I could have done it on my own I had to come here and Ron White was already here so Ron White's a big reason why the club I mean he's one of the main reasons why I moved I know because I was like yeah even if I never do comedy again and I was really wondering if we're ever going to do comedy again Ron's here I'll hang out with Ron we'll have laughs yeah so when I moved here and then all sudden Tony moved here and then Thompson Guro moved here and Brian Simpson moved here and a song moved here and brought and Derek posted moved here and there's like oh shit we got something cooking and then Tim Dylan came here and then it was like oh my god then Duck and Truss will move to here I was like holy shit so the roof is your hair I understand but they had to do it before the mothership even opened take a straight they all moved before the mothership opened Shane moved after the mothership opened but they all came in early and trusted me yes and so I was like okay these guys I owe them what they they took a chance with their future I have to throw everything into this and all together we'll do it yeah so it's our club it's really our club but it had to happen in a way where I had this disposable money I disposable income where I could do it and it wouldn't hurt me yeah and then I could set it up in a way where the comics make so much money so that way you encourage people to stay so there's so many people that are there all week long during the week they don't have to go do shows other places they can make money at their home club you're doing it right I guess my example like in the UFC do that because my example for you it's like can these other comic clubs do that and sustain and grow and have money in New York and they might be able to do it in LA so I don't think you could do it in LA right now because the store is open and the store is always going to be the premier club in the world it's always legendary yeah so it's on sunset strip even though LA's falling apart it's still the legendary destination for stand-up comedy it's one of the main reasons why I was excited to move to LA it was Mecca it was when I was a a beginner in an open micro in 1988 they would talk about the store like it was Mecca like you had to go to the store they still do though I don't think that's never going away of course it's you know the store comes and goes in cycles like it always does it always goes in cycles depending on who's in town who's there it's a very it's all comedy clubs are dependent upon what talent is in town during the weekdays and if you don't bring in talent on the weekends that's the difference like so the store doesn't bring in headliners for the weekend like the way our club does and I told Scott Scott sure I was like I think no I was Peter sorry I told Peter sure I was like I think you guys should do that I think you should like but do they have right there because you can still go on a Saturday night and you see you know yes they will big names but you could have those people there still as well like they could also do shows with that person and you have two other rooms that's what you guys you have the OR and you have the belly room you have three rooms in one location like you could still have the OR filled with top talent because they don't give a fuck where they're performing in the big stage of the little stage and in fact most of us prefer the little stage the OR is an amazing room but the thing is it's like you have to have enough talent in town and a lot of people moved out of LA a lot of people don't know the joey dia has moved out of LA like a lot of people moved out of it the O moved out a lot of people moved out so the problem is you would have to have enough talent there and then you'd have to have talent that was there all the time like us like we're at the club all the time I think and going back to if the uc could do this like they're probably in so much now there's no reason to that's the other issue this is the problem you might have my idea though rational you might have idea yeah and you might be like you're out of your fucking mind okay and it's any again I'm not well I can't tie you nothing I cut my fucking wrist right now bubble Riley spells out I fucking bleed in it made my entire career yeah when that paramount deal was announced and y'all I'm a wild boy when that paramount deal was announced what I would have done is and in this is the issue why things will never change I would have talked to all the managers all the fighters and said we're not fighting another fight they just sign a huge deal some points of a million if you guys want to get your equal share nobody's agreeing to a fight bout to a fight card unless we get I don't know someone's gonna figure out 30% so it's 18% right now if we go up 30% which they're still gonna have profit if they agree to that then we'll fight but they there's no deal if we don't fight right those days are over now so you missed the mark now you're gonna say yeah but they can get other guys to do that and I'm saying across the board we all agree as fighters we're not gonna fucking move a inch if you can see fighters to agree to that it would work that's the problem it'll never happen not in a million years that was my idea then here's the other thought that Daniel white has this thought about fighters that when they get paid too much and they get rich their careers end earlier well that's that's the other our mons are ukian and he's right yeah and he's right well there's arm in he's yeah Bruce Wayne but for the most part he's right go go through anybody's current of right he's kind of right but it doesn't cover that's honor that's on them yeah agree that's on them yeah that's fair yeah I mean he's right but you can't protect them for unless you have a bonus that you're gonna pay them out when they retire and they're they're not gonna do that but the other thing I think Sean Shelby said this might be in Mcmanion one of them was like the other shoe we have is when guys get paid a lot and then we offer them fights we're not getting the fights we want to make once once they have that goose egg like I'm not fighting that fucking guy yeah I know but again you can't base it off that cuz I'm sure there's some guys who will do it yeah you fuck with them but it's not reason not to pan listen it's all this is hippie talk but I feel like if I would if I was if I owned the UFC I would not feel good if people didn't feel compensated correctly this is just my feeling and I'm not a good businessman if you want to be a good businessman you got to make the most money I don't know the show you've done pretty fucking well Bubba lot of luck lot of luck you gotta say luck you're driving that job but it drives me nuts a lot if you're harder than anybody else well I work hard when I listen I stick with things and I have a good work ethic that is true but that's half the battle yeah but I'm not like a businessman in the sense of like if I was running a business like that I wouldn't treat it the same way I wouldn't say I'm trying to make the most money possible I would say I got money and let's just make this motherfucker the greatest thing of all time and make everybody feel good about it yeah but again I don't know the in and out I don't know if you can run an organization like that and be profitable I don't know well it'd be profitable but it wouldn't be as profitable and that's the thing when you have shareholders so when you have shareholders you have an obligation to your shareholders to maximize your profits and and this is the only knock on the UCI have is in order to get that 7.7 billion dollar deal you have to put on whatever it is 45 fight cards a year right so like those fight nights so now you don't really have the talent or the stars to fulfill those cards but because you may this deal with paramount now you're getting you're signing these contenders series kids who have three fights four fights where 10 years ago those boys ain't sniffing the UFC it was so hard to get in but now because we have to fulfill those cards you're getting a lower level of talent yeah well here's this interesting so um one of the players in the purchasing of the UFC of the rights the UFC was Netflix they're one of the players they're one of the people that we're thinking about doing it um so there was negotiations with them there's negotiations with ESPN and ultimately paramount was like this wild dark horse they came around with the big money and I like paramount that's great no issues yeah look I love ads are weird but whatever I love my bland I love land I love land land yeah my bland is fucking great everyone's that fuck yeah great shout out he is all six in that don't buy so bad he too I'm sorry convince my never wanted to wagon and I know a Tom Harrison that they're like it's a it's a great show yeah but paramount has awesome shows so it makes sense I already had it great perfect I love the fact there's no pay-per-view but what's interesting about Netflix not doing it because I think Netflix didn't want the I might be talking out of school but I'll just say it I believe what I heard take this is the here's the caveat is that Netflix did not want the small fights they did not want fight night good for them they only wanted a big ones they're like that's yeah well some of the fights are fucking awesome we like him get a degenerate right the public's like who the fuck are these guys apex no one there yeah I love that that's like what take me I love the planning on going to an apex fight card I'm trying to find the right one just to go and watch I would love I just want to go to watch because they'll let you in if you come with me yeah I feel like I'm in here I kind of stood by the fact they didn't want the volume that's it that's how that's that which we understood from the get go Ted Sarandos who I love Bella Bajaria I don't know her we're very upfront with that we're looking for big events so the fact that you could give us one pay-per-view which is just we were just going to put on the platform for free as long as you're subscriber as long as you just give us that we're in we'll pay premium for it but we don't want to carry the other 30 fight nights they say we don't want to bullshit yeah here's a thing but then where would those 30 fight nights go that's the question what but then then that fulfills the fell-delitor or you five five pass yeah fight pass fight pass do that well five pass but to to again the business side of it the Zufa or TKO's going well hold on the reason we get such a a big not some points of billing to offer so much content right you guys are trying to do what our game plan was 15 years ago which are just one big fight every every once a month which for the fans is fucking awesome it makes sense for Zufa and it makes it makes sense for Netflix I get it and all that makes sense it just wasn't a fit but what I was getting at is now it's interesting because Netflix has got a lot of money Netflix throw some money around right Netflix has a tremendous amount of subscribers and now Netflix is in the MMA game I'm glad you brought that up so have you heard it is where you get he talked about it keep going sauce he dorks like you and me keep going no no one in the real world is talking about it to me but that's okay the point is they're going to do it and just because it's on Netflix I guarantee millions of people will watch it I bet they'll have a hard time selling live tickets let's see if it sold out it's definitely not in the tickets are eight eight dollars but this is where it gets tricky because the the more places fighters have to go the better because you'll see has no competition right it's a monopoly all good right NFL is NBA is I have no issues with that right so if fighters big name fighters have a place to go and can get paid I'm all for right the issue of this Netflix and getting MMA it's like my thing would be well what's the plan here mm-hmm you know so Rhonda and Gina fight this week and you got two four year olds fighting the main event it it's going to get good numbers but again and you know this you've been in business with Netflix they're not going to give you the real numbers right when you negotiate don't give you the real numbers like I'm gonna tell you show they don't tell you say you did great they don't tell you but then all of a sudden Jake Paul did 400 million people like really did he so they're gonna say well Jake Paul can say that right did Netflix say that like no no definitely say like 400 million people watch it like that some people have Netflix I don't think they have that many I made a but crazy number but it's a ton of people I was just be articles said that they have over 300 million subscribers so 100 million people were so say 100 million yeah so say how to but so and right now you know and I get Rhonda's being a promoter she learned from Dana she's like we're gonna destroy the White House I disagree I don't think it does but Netflix will tell you they did well here's the thing you even if it gets really good numbers Jake Paul versus Anthony Josh would draw 33 million viewers on Netflix that's really good that's really good I don't know what the Sean Strickland um humsock chime I have numbers were they might not have been 33 million maybe they were I don't know the thing about it being paramount paramount does not have the number of subscribers in Netflix has how many subscribers I'm guessing I might be right I think they have like 60 million right how many subscribers does paramount plus have but but this is what you're not taking consideration paramount and the UFC it's only in America so in Canada and like paramount in Europe there's this not a thing right so what are those views now right you know like when we're out in all the stuff get paramount in other countries I don't think the paramount's in Europe and shit like that they're watching on like Sky Sports I think out there they have a different deal oh and then Australia I think still has pay per view interesting yeah I think you're right I think you're right okay 79 million paid subscribers so that's a big difference between it says globally yeah half more than the US 35 million are in the US are there any countries where paramount is not in let's let's put that into yeah but I still think that UFC deal is just for the US yeah it's just for us yeah okay because you case that's guys words so that means there's only 35 million people that it's reaching period so they'll never get to the Jake Paul number the Jake Paul number the infant Joshua five that's an accurate number three three million they're never gonna get to that but remember the White House is also on CBS that's different how many people are watching regular TV that's why they might 30 more views oh my dad's crumbs my dad's crumbs that's just on channel four and Denver Colorado you need your rabbit ears pick it up this is a regular TV man regular TV is crazy crazy like some people have to fuck it move the internet signals come in bad crazy people there's a people there would regular TV yeah that's wild where they only have the four channels that's crazy and they're just getting their news from like like you know robots box and fucking they don't even get Fox Fox's cable that's right yeah regular TV you ain't getting jack shit and you can swear on Fox can they I believe so because it's it's not cable I think you're a lot of swear I don't know I think so well there's a broadcast version of Fox though right but is it regulated probably if it's broadcast it is that's the whole the fox still right but broadcast and cable so what do you mean but there's a broadcast version so there's a version with over the air what's what's available what's available through the air that's what that so the broadcast version meaning that you could just get it with the regular antenna yeah there's like a local fox okay okay you're right you're right you're right okay came way later that's right I'm so old I remember when Fox was just cable chill 31 I remember we wanted children simpsons and maybe with children yeah simpsons still maybe it was broadcast back then maybe I'm wrong I think I am hard to get it wasn't the strongest of signals in most places okay but it was always okay my I have fucking times changed now because there's like we talked about mob land there's so many dope shows there's so many good shows that yeah but it's like hot for like a week and then something else comes to me there's too much like I don't like there'd never be like game of throwing the soprano's where it's like shut the entire world shuts down right all this kind of binge it when we want true and there's new show here it's not good man true that's fact that's fact um try selling a show right now like that I was talking about that my gearheads gone wild on to be to be as fucking I think 300 million subscribers they're big but trying to sell a show these 300 million subscribers on to be to be so I can massive I didn't know either I didn't know either that's first got the off from like where but again trying to sell a show is fucking talking a car show oh dude I didn't know to be had that many subscribers look that up to make sure I've been so exaggerating because they passed the 100 million monthly active users but how many subscribers do they have total on I know the numbers are a criber thing or is it like a youtube thing we could just like and they have view it imagine it's tiered of it says a free ad supported streaming service right then subscription based model it's free but they they have subscribed and then you can get the non ad paid where you pay I think okay so you can just get it for free yeah like youtube you two bread and right youtube is probably the biggest well like they probably have the most active viewers worldwide hit nyman close yeah no one's but don't remember they tried doing like shows and it just ate shit like you two bread you remember you two bread yeah they're like make it offers I remember youtube over that thing it's crazy it's interesting because just a regular show on youtube can do really well like mr. beast yeah but i think youtube red was like kind of a little before that right they're like right put your shows on here and like they jumped the gun yeah they jumped the gun mr. beast like or i'll just put my shit out and everybody in the world will watch you think about if you put your shit on youtube there's literally an infinite number of options and channels that's the thing and it's completely dependent on what you see like the recommended for you it's completely what you're interested in everything is niche now it's like there's people out there we don't even know like my kids like dad he has 60 million subscribers like what the hell are you all much money he's like yeah it's all niche on this niche there's that but then there's also astroturfing there's a lot of these astroturfing is when you Yeah, it's all niche. Oh, there's niche. There's that. But then there's also astroturfing. There's a lot of these astroturfing is when you have fake downloads, fake views. You have companies that you can hire and they will get you views. But, but here's the thing, that's gonna fuck you. It'll fuck you. But the point is people still do it and they do it because it's, you can do it right now. Right. And so what that means is, like say if you have like millions and millions of subscribers and then you look at the views, the views are hundreds of thousands of views, then you look at the comments like fucking five comments. Six comments like that. It's going on here. But the weird thing to do because in order to make money, YouTube sees the back and so if you're trying to make money off your show, you're not gonna make money, but it'll get bigger because of the number. So here's the thing. So if you go to like bread and chop, if you did that, if you have bread and chops YouTube channel and I looked at it and I'm like, damn, he's got 25 million subscribers. Why should fucking subscribe? People do that. They'll click on it and they'll click on your views or your videos because if you're off. Because if you're like missing out like close to this guy to his self. Of course. It definitely, I'm not saying that's responsible for all the views that you'll get because of that, but it has an impact on how people see you. You look more legitimate. And if you're trying to develop sponsored deals or some sort of a brand endorsement deal, you're like, well, I've got 20 million subscribers on YouTube. Like, oh, this guy's big. That's true. Yeah, it definitely does. But then they're like, there's three comments. Well, there was a, there was scammers that were doing weird stuff in the early days of podcasts where they would rig things to exaggerate downloads back in the early days of audio home. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Exactly. But it's not like we're all in on it. No, no. If someone who was running because we're all kind of using the same audio thing, and I remember telling Brian, I'm like, do we have 30 million fucking audio? 30 millilude this month. And then Tom's like, yeah, I got 60. I'm like, do we're crushing it? And then someone came in. I was like, actually. Yeah. What it was doing was like every time someone clicked on it, it would count. So that like, I'm talking completely. If they started, stop it. Right. It counted over and over as multiple listens. That's right. And I think they do that with other things too. Like, so you have to figure out like who the actual number of people, but people have been accused of making like you can, you could pay to get Instagram accounts. You can get followers. There's companies that will get you followers. I don't know if it's legit or legal, but I know for a fact that some people don't have the background. You too. Don't they try to shut that shit down? They definitely do. Millions of bots over the weekend. 100%. I notice it sometimes. I'll notice it while it was like 100,000. Yeah. I lost 100,000. Yeah. But there are bots. 100% and there's a ton of them and they catch some of them. But some of them are more sophisticated in their approach. And then they adjust. So once they realize what gets them caught, you could run an AI program. Yeah. So if you run an AI program and you have like, if you're in fucking Singapore or wherever you're at doing this, you could run an AI program that controls a bunch of different cell phones that has a bunch of different accounts and you could have them even commenting on things. And you'll notice this sometimes. And they'll be programmed to comment positive or negative or they, and it seems like a fucking person man. Wow. But you'll see that there's like a bunch of numbers after a couple of letters or a name, like Bob 567-254. And then you see like, God, I don't think Bob's a person. And then you go to Bob's account and you're like, there's almost no chance that Bob's person. And you know, I Bob's posting all the time and making comments on things all the time. And most likely what this is, it's paid engagement. So it's not just paid views, but because of AI and because of programs you could run, there's the potential for paid engagement. That'll work. Yes. We talked about before you got here is something. I don't know that you're aware of this, Joe. The streamers paying for. Clippers. Next level of what you're describing. So it's not AI doing it. Have you heard of Clippers? Yes. And I think for thousands of people that are just sitting around at home making a shitload of money, a ton of money, and they're posting. Cause you'll think certain people are bigger than they are. Like, man, I see them everywhere. It's like, that's all by design. And you can pay for that too. So that's probably legal, right? So no. I mean, why would it should it be? Right. I mean, it all depends on what are you doing? Are you getting money from it? Are you getting advertising revenue from it? To your point, it's a false sense of fame. Cause to your point with arm, it's like, yeah, we know him and he's getting views online. But does that equal actual fans? I think it reinforces the fans that already love him. Yes. And a few people are going to hop on board. But as far as like your general casual that will, they're not sitting in for a UFC fight card? No. Not necessarily. But it's also a younger demo, right? Like, have you watched the stream? No. You're older than me. No. No. No, I had to talk with a streaming company the other day. I'm like, do what? Wait, wait, you want me to seven days a week, turn on the camera and air my crazy. Like, breakfast and shit? Like, can't out with my family? Well, the streaming thing is nuts, where people just live online. First of all, how bad is that for your back? And you're just ranting and raving and talking online all day. Can't be good. But then like, you know, we love rampage. Rampage does it making stupid money. Yeah, but you know, it's a good move for rampage. You know, he's not fighting anymore. Yeah. It's a good move. Makes sense. And he's got the Jackson podcast that's doing well. It's good for him to diversify, do a bunch of different things. He's crashing out there. And he's also got a great personality. So he's great. He's perfect for it. Perfect for that. But some people, you know, I think that thing shouldn't be doing that. But streaming is like the biggest thing. Yeah, Jamie? I get me saying, oh, this is fucked back. We're old. Yeah. I'm like, I think that's live. You know, it's also like, what are you doing with your life? I got things to do. I get said for the camera for five hours a day. I don't understand how anybody does it. But also is it that entertaining? Like my life's not fucking lit. They talk about shit on camera. And then they watch a bunch of things and react to things. There's a lot of that. Like for a lot of them, like for our channel, there was a lot of people that were making a living, just going on Twitch and these other channels. These are like streaming things, streaming my show and commenting on it. Like reaction videos. Yeah, getting mad about things. It's a bunch of things that we're doing. But they were doing it through the, they were playing the whole show out. Oh, yeah. It's illegal. Well, it was very shady. It was very weird because they were commenting on it. But it was like your entire content was based on my content and your reaction to my content. But you know, it's weird. You know, you're dunking on me or you're pumping me up or whatever you're doing. It's, there was a lot of that going on. And so then there's a lot of people that are watching, whether it's Mr. B Show and commenting on that or other shows and commenting on that. So they're watching stuff online. Someone will send them a video of a guy getting a street fight, the comment on that. Yeah. And then they're acting videos. And they're interacting with all these people that are in the, in the, they're making money off of it. Yeah. And they're talking to these people that are in the comments. It's like, first of all, if you think that social media is bad for your mental health. Oh my God. Dude, yes, yesterday I was driving down. I dropped my kids off and I was going somewhere, I was going this, uh, this car shot, my truck's in the shop. And I was, I was driving my father in a lost car. And I see a high school bus, like Travis high school, I live right by like Travis, I see a like Travis high school bus pull up. I just look over every single kid. Staring at their phone. Yep. Not talking to each other. Not saying what it, it bum me out so fucking bad. I know. Do you know the fun we used to have on that bus? No. No one's talking to each other. I know. The bus is silent. I'm like, God, you guys are doing it wrong. Well, it's not something to do in the wrong. Listen, I know I'm the old dude. You guys are fucking up right now. Well, you're right, but it is also where human beings are headed. We're headed into this weird world of the digital world and this is the first steps. These are the first steps we're taking by staring into a phone all day. But we know it's not good. Oh yeah. So we're just going to continue going down this shit road. You don't think there's anything we can do. Nope. I'm addicted. They're 100% addicted to their phone. I don't see anything changing. I think if anything, it's going to get more invasive. And then it's probably, I mean, who knows, just guessing what the next technology is going to be. But as this technology moves forward, it's going to get more invasive. It's going to get more, you're going to interact with more people through whatever the fuck it is. However, they're going to do it, whether it's going to be some new tech that lets you communicate with people with a headset and you're reading each other's minds or whether you're hanging out together in augmented reality or virtual reality. And you're talking to any other ways like, man, we're head down there. They're not going to. No one's going to. They're going to keep doing too much money. No, it's just, everyone's addicted and everyone uses it for too many things. It's also primary source of news and information. I get all my ideas about like how the world is working from social media, not social media commentary, but social media stories. Well, someone opposed like this is going on in Iran. This is going on here. I get it off social media. I get it off of X. And be able to pick and choose in what you pay attention to. Right? Yes, Dicy. And you got to find people that are not full of shit and not click engagement because there's a lot of click, a lot of just clickbait bullshit. Yeah, it's a lot of that. But you also find breaking news and you also find things that you wouldn't know about, you know, like certain stories and certain things that are happening in the news and certain really crazy stories are like, how am I not hearing about this? This is, this should be fucking huge. But you don't think it's going to be like, and I know we have to use it. You don't think it's going to be kind of like cigarettes, like in the 60s where everyone is doing it. And then eventually the parents of those kids, I'm sorry, the children of those parents go, what the fuck? It was a substance. If it was a substance, I would agree. But the problem, it is addictive. But the problem is it's all facets of your life. It is your calendar. It is your email. It is how you take pictures and all your memories. It is how you interact with a lot of people. There's a lot of people, I don't even have their phone numbers. I just, they DM me. And I DM them, you know, I have friendships with people that are just DM. So it's, there's that. But that's basically the problem is that it's, it's a giant part of the world now where cigarettes never really were. We were relying on it. Yeah, you could, there was a bunch of people who didn't smoke, even when people smoke cigarettes. Like let's look this up. Throw this into perplexity, young Jamie, please. During the height of smoking in the United States, what percentage of adults smoked? Let's guess. Got back in the back in the day. Whenever it was the nuttiest, like in the 50s or whatever, I think it was 50% that behind, right? Crazy high. 30% 30. I was thinking like 33, but it might be higher because those old days, man, everybody had a cigarette in the hand. Johnny Carson show everyone. Yeah. People walking in the streets, smoke on planes, smoke on buses, smoke on trains. Everybody's walking down the streets, smoking. But what percentage of those people were doing it? Okay. 40 to 45. Wow. Wow. That's in 1960. The height of cigarette use in the US, roughly 40 to 45% of adults smoked, which works out to the order of 80 to 90 million adults. Wow. That's incredible. That's incredible. American Lung Association summary notes that adults smoking is falling to around from around 40 to 43% in 1965 to about 11 to 12% in 2022. I think it's back. I think people are smoking. Really? I feel like it's lower. I think people are smoking. I see it a lot now. I don't know what law didn't San Francisco outside. That's hilarious. That's San Francisco. That makes sense. That's San Francisco tree. Yeah. What you hear with the dude in the UK? If you were born before or after a certain date, you can't buy cigarettes when you turn 21 just to stop people from. Exactly. So people that were born in like fucking whatever year, whatever year they set it at, when they turn 21, they will not be able to buy cigarettes. Just trying to limit it. You'll be able to buy cigarettes because you're born at a different time. They say, oh, you're retarded. You don't know any better. Thank you. You can buy so stupid. It's communism. But they just ran out the fucking with a prime minister or the fuck they don't. He's still there. I thought they ran them out. They're bringing somebody else in it. They probably want to. But they have it. Yeah. But the point is it's like that kind of woke socialism. It's like it's the government telling you what to do. When I say communism, I don't mean like they take all your money because they'll definitely do that eventually too. What they do is they tell you what you can say. Correct. They tell you what you can do. They tell you what medications you have to take. It's all socialized medicine. They tell you what to do and what to say and how to think and they're going to protect you protecting someone from cigarettes while you're selling them alcohol is fucking bananas. So it's bananas. It's dumb. But England's lost their way. They have lost their way to your heart. They're wasting people like crazy for posting on social media about the immigration crisis primarily also other things but criticizing the government. And now they throw away jury trials for those things. So now it's a judge. And so you don't even get people like you, your peers to sit there and go, no, this fucking guy shouldn't go to jail. His daughter got attacked by some immigrants and he said some wild shit about immigrants. And no, he shouldn't be in jail for that. But I think if you like what's the agenda? Just a ruin. We're just ruin the fucking troll. So shrink you down to 15 minutes. They're implementing that in part of the UK. The other thing is a digital credit system. So a digital credit school, a social score and some sort of centralized digital currency, which I think we're probably going to try to move us all into eventually. But if they can attach your social credit score with this digital currency, then you have what they have in China. So in China, if you fuck up and you do something stupid, guess what? Fuck face? You can't buy a plane ticket. That's wild. Yeah, you can't get alone. You can't get this house. And it keeps people in line. And then the government can do its job without protests. Do you think I pass real quick? I pass two fucking energy drinks. We'll be right back folks. Ah, it was so much better. I know it's hard to concentrate when you have to pass. You were talking. I'm gonna go on the hill this month. I'll hit my pants. What were we talking about? What's talking about your show? So we're at the cigar brother. Yeah, dude. Last time I smoked it backwards, I got roasted so hard online. I didn't notice. I didn't notice, but maybe I just smoked them backwards from now on. Switch it up. It is funny though. But it's really the same. It's just where the label is. Yeah, man. What are these? I'm a rebel. I smoked it backwards. You are a rebel. Hmm. I don't feel any smother. Here's the clipper. You know how this works. Let's make sure you clip the right spot. That one. There you go. Yeah. This cigar is different because it's not a torpedo like the other one. So the other one, you can get more confused because both ends were pointy. Do you know how to do that? Yeah. Do you need help? No, I got a big deal. Dude, you know what I mean? The guard's that's not only in here. Oh, you light it. That's right. So your show. So your show is on to be to be. Hey, so light this part, right? The one. No, but this part, which. Yeah, like this part. It's fucking dudes. Tricky, right now? No, light just retarded. Light. Light the part that you didn't cut. What's it called? What's your show called? Gear heads gone wild. Oh, that's right. It's just like girls going wild. Same tax and everything. Is that a problem? No, no, no. I guess I think in fucking on the lamb in Mexico, I think we're good. Is he really? Is he hiding? Yeah, I think so. Either way, we're good. Didn't he get kidnapped and they fucking hear some types of shit? Yeah, yeah. It turned out pretty sad for him. It's a cart. It's shipped with what we would be doing anyways. And then they wanted to make a TV show out of it. So like I went to Calvo, Calvo Vipers. He's got that shit out of me. Calvo Vipers, on to the biggest Porsche collection in Austin. I'm obsessed with Safari Porsches, man. Oh, you like those? God, those are the first. Those are the first ones. I think Russell makes him. Russell, I forget that exactly. But Russell does, I don't know what the fuck it is. When it's an off-road like that, just that vibe, I don't know what it is, dude. I fucking love him, man. Why do you love a off-road one? I don't know. Is there a dirt track where you could take a Porsche off-road car, too? Oh, I'm sure. Where? Especially in California. Like Johnson Valley and all that shit. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. But out here, there's place out here. People have been hit me up about. But when you go off-roading, generally, you're going off-roading with a truck where you can bounce over rocks and shit. You can't really do that in an off-road Porsche. That's like more for those crazy mountain roads that are in the dirt. Yeah, that's a jacar. Russell built Fab. Ooh, that's dope, look. Dude, some dad had one at the base of 993. Yeah. Oh, wow. So they took a 993 and ooh, that's pretty. It's my favorite thing in the world. Wow. Look at the wheel wheels. That's crazy. Wow. Perfect daily driver, too. I don't have to realize that. You know what? I have a fucking problem with those extra headlights. They stick on the hood. I do not like them. I think it fucks up the lines of the car. Agreed, because you could put those on that front there. Oh, just take them off. You can drop it. You can drop it. You can drop it. You can drop it. You ain't really off-road. I mean, you're off-roading, but you're not in the woods. Oh, don't you? I don't get twisted nighttime. Like all my tricks. I have that ramped wave 500 AV. That thing's never seen that dirt. Right, but that's different. That looks rough. That looks fine with the extra lights on it. Yeah, but Stisha. I agree. I think it's like whenever I see those old 911s, like the 1972s, and they have those extra headlights on the hood, I'm like, ew. What are you doing? You're ruining the lines of one of those beautiful creations. You get bats out of fake tents. You're like, what are you doing? No, it's like extra fake tits. It's like you've got two fake tits on your fucking head. Yeah. You get some fucking collarbone tits. Like, get those out of there. They don't belong there. More is not always better. And the shape of a Porsche, especially those long-nose horses. Oh, it's so beautiful. When you have dumb ass fucking headlights on the hood, like, can't just that meant to be. Yeah. Get out of here. I like different shit. I don't like, I agree those head likes do fuck up the lines. But like, the thing, I'm just sitting a different shit. Like, I like when they swap the LSS in the Porsche's too. Oh, yeah, that's dope. Yeah. Just a sip. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. It's shit like that, man. I like those. A lot of people think that's heretics. That's like, oh my god. You should be going to jail for that. Oh, dude, I brought her cool LS engine in a Porsche. This guy's like, he's the head guy for Porsche driving. He's driving around. And I go, man, you ever drew him with those LS porsches? And he was like, what the fuck do you guys say? And I'm like, you don't get down. He's like, fuck. And I'm like, yeah, those are gay. Those are gay. So gay. No, they're awesome. Yeah, I just like different shit, man. Yeah, Rutledge would have had one of those. He had one of those. What's the fucking Japanese cat that does the Y bodies? Oh, I know you're talking about. I saw a WB. Yes. Yeah. He had one of those with an LS in it. That's pretty sick. And there's companies that do that. Yeah. Yeah. They're sick. And it sounds incredible. It sounds like an American muscle car. But yet it's in a car that's like 2,000 pounds. Dude, and all I do is search Facebook marketplace for RSWAP porsches. God, you can get some good deals. Because no one really wants them. You're not crazy. Yeah. Because everybody wants the air cooled. Because the air cooled has that raspy pearl. They are the best. It's a big, great. It's a wild sound. That air cooled sound is a wild sound. As I'm getting older too, it's like, you know, I've had trucks with 14-0 horsepower, I have a car, it's with 11-0 horsepower. And then if you just get an old school Porsche air cooled with 250 horsepower, manual. It's all you need, dude. They're so fun. As you get all you're like, oh, why am I chasing this fucking horsepower? Yeah. Because it's just about driving enjoyment. It's not about, you're not racing it. No. You know, you're not on a track. I knew I had issues when I was driving my kid to his fucking baseball game. And my car was running hot. My t-rex, the 14-0 horsepower is running hot. I converted it to Twin Turbo, Hellcat engine. It's like 14-0, it's running an E85 fuel. There's no E85 out there. I'm in the middle of fucking dripping springs. I have to pull over on the side of the road because the engine was smoking. I just went, what the fuck am I doing, man? Who am I doing this for? It's not like I'm taking it to the track. Who am I doing this for? Well, a Hennessy has 1,000 and you can drive it everywhere. Yeah, that's by the way, you're doing it. Hennessy TRX, more Hennessy Raptor. I almost bought one of those. And then I got that AV RAM and I linked up with these a lot and we're doing a Randy's transmission. I got this freaking stealth bigger turbo on there, fast fuel system. That broke. Let me give my pants up. Oh, yeah, I don't know if you're in that stuff. But I'm picking it up today. It's finally done. Oh, that sounds fun. Oh, dude, I can't fucking wait. That sounds fun. Yeah. So the ideas you just driving around, going to different places, having people do different things with cars. Yeah, and like check out what people are doing. Yeah, different mods. They're doing. Yeah, and it's like that old school car shows that we grew up on. Like it's throw up facts about porches and about the car. It's just pop up with that stuff. And that's like our boys, like Gordon Ryan was on the with his TRX. Oh, nice. Because like 120,000 miles on it. That's really? Dude, that thing so busted up, but he just drives it every day. He off roads it. He just, we go on his car. I'm like, dude, I said, you know, Gordon, I'm going to tell you the same thing I tell everybody when I get in the car with him. I know this is for TV. I don't need to show off. Nobody's trying to get hurt. He's like, I got your man and was just fucking ripping this thing. Dude, I'm like, I flip one of these things, man. It ain't fun, but it ain't fun. But it's, yeah, just shit we like. You know? And this was like, you want to do a TV show with him? Like, yeah, let's ride, man. It's interesting how much that's a male thing. There are women that are into cars, but I don't know any women. I mean, I'm sure they're out there, but I don't know any women that are into cars that we're wearing in the cars. No. No. Some of them, some of them like cars, they're into some, they're like, for me, it's like, that is one of the one things about having some money that is worth it. Like, I always tell people, have it in nice houses. Great. It is great. There's definitely nothing wrong with having a nice house. But after a while, it just becomes your house. Yes. And if you're in a humble house that has a nice kitchen and a big TV and a couch and a nice bed to sleep on, you're set. You're kind of set? Yeah. Like, the difference in the way you feel when you're home versus a nice house is not much different. Okay. The difference in driving a nice car is like, you are taking a ride to work. You are at Disneyland. Yes. You would wait in line to get in that car. And you're bum bum and you're fucking shifting your own gears and blah, blah. Woo, it's fun. And the shit's in how things I lived through you because, you know, I've seen different tax brackets. You know, I got to do my thing on Facebook marketplace and shit. I picked up, it tires the other day. He goes, holy shit, Brent and Shaw by tire, that Facebook marketplace. He goes, yeah, dude, who doesn't want to fucking deal with me? I put those in the back for me, dude. But yeah, you got one of those poor. I think you're a gun thrift poor. Yes. You took a picture and you're like, dude, I'll just sit in my garage and stare at it. I'm like, dude, I've never... I do. I stare at it sometimes. I sit in the garage and look at it. Oh, it's a fucking piece of art. Yeah. All carbon fiber. Yeah, dude. When I see that type of pores like the Guntherwork or I'll see a certain car, I'm just like, I can't even describe the, it's like, fuck, dude. That is so sick. Yeah. I see the Guntherworks made a twin turbo slant nose. I sent it to you. Peter Namsen it to me too. Bro. The owner of the company sent it to me. Oh, you know? Yeah. Well, I bought one off them. Not that. Not the slant nose. I didn't know you were doing like customer service. No, no, I'm not doing a Peter. He's awesome. But that car is insane. They've raced that one against a GT3 RS and it buried it. Buried it. Buried it. Yeah. Buried it. Yeah. It did some rolling race like from 30 miles an hour. And literally it just shot ahead like the other car was powered. 1967 horse fire. It's nothing. It weighs nothing. What is it way? Please search what does the, the, the, the slant nose Guntherworks way. Because they're carbon. The fiber 100%. They're carbon fiber. 2007. Yeah. Yeah. I bet it's about 2,400 pounds. 27. So close. But I believe the engine's probably super heavy. Why don't have it super heavy? But there's a lot of jazz in there. But what an engineer is it the? Um, I think it's a leader twin turbo flat six. Yeah. And it's air cooled, which is so nuts. A thousand horsepower flat six air cooled engine is crazy. And people, everyone like you talked to anyone like I want a thousand horse fire. You think you want a thousand horseback. Now it's not like your ZRX, ZR1 axis, not like that. Like if you buy it or like at my demon one 70, if you get it in the fact from the factory, you're good. When you have a TRX or your Corvette or you know, I've had other trucks about my Ford light. And if you're reaching a thousand horsebar buddy, you think you want those problems. You do not. Right. It's a fucking nightmare. And then also I was in the shop. Call them, but doing something. I'm like, this is exhausted. Well, this won't be like that. Like the Guntherwork ones are reliable. I've never had a problem. No, those are great. But the question is, does that have any traction control? Hopefully not. Like, Jamie, can you please look up whether or not these new Guntherworks portions have traction control? It's got no. I don't know how they can do that now. I know that they can do it. There's like a computer thing that you could buy that's got theirs in California. Where they at? I believe so. Yeah. I'm sure that if you should connect with him because I'd love to an episode with him. A wooden shift knob pays tribute to the Porsche's motorsport carriage. Modern electronics like motorsport's grade ABS and traction control. Oh, okay. Well, that's good. It's nice that it has ABS too. That's dope. You're going to need it. You're going. Yeah, I was in need it. But see if you can find the race between the GT3 RS and the Slant Knows. Bro, it is hilarious. That's crazy. And the sound it makes is orgasmic. I can't imagine how much that thing is. Wonderful. Oh, it's got me a million dollars. Yeah. Here's my problem with Porsche. It is even 20 years ago. When I first got my first car I bought when I had money, I got it from podcast. My sister 15 years ago. I bought just your base 9-11. Went to the Porsche dealer, bought a base 9-11. I could afford it. It was, I don't know, 80 grand. Now Porsche has become, it's almost like what Ferrari was 10 years ago. Where just the base Porsche is so expensive, man. It's pricing out their market. So now it's become, and we've been on Porsche for how long? Like we've always talked about. Forever. It's our ship. Watch this. Oh my God. It's top gear. Oh, it's top gear. Yeah. It's great. Great channel. Yes. So these guys, they do a rolling star. I guess they did a rolling star because they didn't want to dump the clutch on this million dollar car. Way safer to do this. Watch this when they get to 30. And look that interior dude. Watch this. Oh, bro. It's like the fucking clothes. It's not even clothes. It's not even clothes. That's insane. And the GT3 RS is a fast car. It's more the fucking car. But this was not his car. Obviously, this is someone else's car that they're letting him test. And so whoever bought that car and spent a million dollars. How much do they cost? 1.2. 1.2 million dollars. Yeah. Again, that's my only issue with Porsche. I was because if you want a GT3 RS, they're so expensive. And it's like, well, people flip them. Oh, yeah. People flip them because they're really hard to get. Yeah. Yeah. It's just a lot of demand for them. Yeah. Back in the day, even if you're a Porsche, you could start somewhere and you'd be OK. And now it's almost like Ferrari. It's unattainable for a lot of people. Well, you know what a lot of people are doing. 1.6. What's $400,000 more? 1.6 million. You'd start somewhere and you'd be okay. And now it's almost like Ferrari where it's unattainable for a lot of people. Well, you know what a lot of people are doing. What's $400,000 more? 1.6 million. That car is? Yeah. 1.6 is crazy. Worth every penny. If you got that loot, if you got that loot, please buy it. One of the things that people are doing is taking that lighter weight, Porsche 911T, you know, the T. Yep. And they're taking that and juicing it up to like 700 plus horsepower and, you know, putting some mods on it. Now you're talking about my language. Yeah, because you can do that for way less than it would cost you to buy a twin turbo. Yeah. And you're getting the same kind of speed, but you're also getting rear wheel drive. Yep. And you can get them for pretty, I almost say cheap, but cheaper. Cheap, yeah. It's so tough, man. To get some of those, like the GT3 RS is, you gotta be allocated. Or it's like 150 over markup. Like it's tough these days in the Porsche business. They're crushing it. It's good for them. Right. But again, for like my kids, hopefully they're fortunate for them making good money. But it's going to be really tough to get an apportionment. Yeah. It's just a different that the Porsche has become the marquee car. When back in the day, it wasn't that. Yeah. No. You know, it used to be much more affordable. It was the more affordable super car, daily driving super car. But you know, the market and it's also things change, right? Cause now everything is twin turbo. They're all twin turbo. Yep. Unless you buy a GT3, they're twin turbo. Yep. Yeah. You know, I think two, um, one of the reasons I went away from it exotic. Cause I mean, you know, I even modded my GT2 RS like an idiot, but it loses value in it. So what do you mod them when you mod them? Yeah. Fucks them up. And I just can't leave anything alone. So that's why I went so heavy in the American ship because, you know, the C6 is all, all the American stuff, you can mod the fuck out of them. And there's a market there, not losing your ass. Yeah. And they're cheaper to mod. Like when I would mod a Ferrari, buddy. Exhaust, whatever the f-turbo's, it's, if you want to do a tune, it's a fucking nightmare, man. Night. Yeah. Well, it's all, to me, it's all about enjoyment, right? And so like, what do you, what do you get out of it? If you're not like racing it and trying to go around corners sideways and fucking correcting and you're not really doing that with most cars, you just enjoying it when you're driving it. And for me, I love the feel of a V8. Like I have one of those Shelby super snakes. Yeah. It's a six speed. Didn't you get the super snake car? It hasn't got it yet. That's on the way. We. I fucking love that car because it's a modern muscle car. Driving it is like driving an old school muscle car, but it's all modern. And perfect starts every time. Interior is great. Great. And it's just the fun of just driving normal speed, just normal speed, just driving to work, not speeding, just burn, burn. You feel like you're doing something fun. And do you get that same excitement in your ZR1X? No. No, it's not the same. The ZR1X is on another planet. It's a, it's a spaceship. I mean, it's the most capable car I've ever driven by far. Like when I took the ZR1 around the racetrack, we drove it around Coda. I was like, this thing is crazy. It's so fast and it handles so well and it gives you so much confidence. But it's different when you're not, you're not shifting your own gears. You're not using the clutch. It's all about that. The, the driving experience is about engagement. And if you're not using a manual, you're missing, you're going to have fun. Don't have me wrong. You get a Corvette. You're going to have a lot of course great car. But shifting your own, you know, they finally started making a, um, a gear, uh, a manual transmission for the C8. Really? Yeah. So it's not, it's the grand sport coming in, uh, manual. I don't think it's going to be offered by Corvette. I don't know if there are a computer, but you can buy one now. So see what the company is that does that, but it's a famous transmission company that's making a C8 manual transmission. And everybody saw that like, oh, because that's the only knock I've heard on, like actual car guys with ZR1X ago. Fastest fuck. It's great, but it's kind of doing it for like the, the drives different. Like it's so, um, spaceship. It's, it's a spaceship. It's your, your Luke Skywalker. Yes. Does not offer a manual transit, tremic. Okay. Tremic has developed a six speed manual that fits a C8 GM considers it not real for production. Wasn't mean, but tremic makes it make it. Yeah. Trellies selling it is tremic not selling it or did they make it just for fun. These, because tremic made the transmission on my super, it's a great, yeah. Yeah. Tremic's new six speed manual transactional opens the door from manual swap vets and other creations. So you can do it. This is what I would do. What I would do is get a ZO six and put a fucking manual in it. Now we're gonna let go fucking go. Now you have literally the ultimate Corvette. I get that ZO six and I always know word yet on price timeline or who's gonna cook up the software to tell the Corvette to cooperate with three pedal transmission. That is the problem because you're gonna have to end the ECU. Yeah. It's a big problem. Like the biggest problem I've had is with the ECU people don't realize, you know, the guys who do all the mods they do, but it's like I got a 2024 ram and right away I'm like, right. What mods am I going to do? I'm talking to Randy's transmission, bang. Sometimes my boys at diesel are and they're like, you got a 2024. I'm like, yeah, what's up? Low miles man. I'm like, I fucked up like why? Like because 2024 and up, there's no way to unlock that ECU. Like you have, we have to find an ECU from a 2022 or earlier. And I'm like, okay, those can't be expensive. Other blood diamonds because everybody wants that. You're looking at seven grand for unlocked ECU. Wow. And that's just the ECU. That's not at any power. That's just to get it so you can add the power. Oh my God. That's great. And in diesel are they were like, dude, we have one. I'm like, no fucking way. Well, how about this new law that they just passed where your car is going to monitor you and then they're going to have a kill switch in your car. So to keep people from drinking and driving or if maybe they don't like what Brendan Shaw posted on Twitter, they just fucking shut your car down. I think that's even more recent to buy old shit. Yeah. A lot of reason to buy old shit. Put that, please, into perplexity and ask them when this law is being passed and what the law entails because I've been here in a lot of different versions of it. I want to know what these are. It's going to pass for California first. What's passed nationwide and Thomas Massey voted against it. And I think Fatterman might have voted against it too. I'm not sure. Real federal mandate tied to 2027 model your cars. It's about impaired driving detection. Yeah, but this is how it starts. The problem is if it has a kill switch, ask if it has a kill switch. If that's part of it, I mean, it's probably is going to be in here. Right. Okay. Why people call it a kill switch? Because the system may be able to prevent the engine from starting or shut down performance if it decides you're impaired. So that's a kill switch. So that is great. If you're preventing someone from drinking and driving, that is not great. If you are Nick Fuentes and you're in your car and you're, you know, but that's the Trojan horse. Like they get you in with that. It's for safety. That's the thing. Amazing keyword in there. Maybe able. Well, to think about that is I think they already have that with the Corvette. I think with on star if someone steals your car, you can shut it down. Right. So that's a security. If you have a Corvette and Brendan Chavez running from the law and you're trying to get to Canada, but can't they do that with your Teslas? That's problem. It's a computer. It's a computer. Of course they probably can do that. I'm really bummed out the Tesla's canceled the model S. Jamie now we're just talking about it before the show. Oh, they could all go away and I went give to Fox. I know you're boy, but I just don't care. I listen to you. Do you think I drive it all the time? I love it with all the cars you have. I love us. The one thing I'm like, love it. Listen, I love the eight. Look, I drove my Raptor here. You know, Raptors badass. A fanboy would say that it's a computer place by that roadster that they haven't shown yet. So yeah, but the roasters are two cedar. My car is a four seater four door car. They go zero to 60 and under two seconds. But why would they get rid of that? Never had four. Because they're my car. Never had four people at my car. You have. But like, so like the other day I had to pick up my daughter because she was, she was being driven and the car they were driving got a flat and I was on my way home with the exact same time and I picked her up in her friends. Yes, so so I had three friends in the back seat, one in the front. Yeah, I got everybody in my car. No problem. I like having a four door. I have a family. I know you're a single guy. Like for you, a roadster would be fun. That's just a, just a, you know, I know for you. It's a smaller car anyway. I think the X is pretty dope too. They also cancel the X. I know the X is dope. I definitely had one had one and she was a showboy. Dance in the parking lot. You see that? I like this is crazy. You're crazy. I only do full. I don't have anything to do anymore because it's kiddos. Like I just create, try to create the most badass dad way by can. Yeah. It has that four doors. Well, I mean, I have two door cars, but I always have to have a sedan. I like a sedan. Your kids are older than two. If I didn't have a Tesla and I have a sedan, what I would get is the Cadillac, the CT vibe being winged. Let's reach and can get a manual. You can get the new one. The F1 is only in manuals. The highest horsepower, 600 A5. I don't know why I couldn't say that word. 685 horse. I know you do. People suffer from marble mouth. 685 horsepower and it's only manual. But take my fucking mind. I want an automatic. I think so. If it's that manual sounds fun. But if you're driving it all the time, especially where, you know, if you live in a no way. Yeah. Oh, you know, depending on where you live in. Yeah. Jamie, that could be you, but like we were just in New Jersey. Bro, that's you, Jamie. I'm not saying it's a bad car. I'm just like it's I'm going to drive it 10 miles a day. He does. Yeah. It's a awesome 10 mile. No, it's not. The feeling in that car with the torque and the sound of the engine. Go anywhere on a 30 car. Listen to the traffic. Give me some fucking volume and let's be a few days to drive in one in this car. Yeah. Well, Jamie's not really a good car. Well, very, very good. Drive it to the golf course. But like, yeah, once a week, yeah, much better. The sound like that. Oh, no. Carbon around it. Me or drive it. Here it drives. Here it is. Drive it. Bitch. Let's go. How can we access that? And why why would they do this to me? What would you have a video of this and not have? You want to sell cars? Not for me. Please. Um, here it is. Could just just click that though. That's the black. Oh, there we go. Oh, my big Joe's called Hall. And we can spice that up, Jamie. You sent it to me for a day, Bubba. That's fine. The way it comes from the factory is fine. I got to just do this. Do something. I know. You went and did it really loud. But the thing is just down alone. There we go. Come on, dog. Yeah. Yeah. Hey! Yes. Dude, you don't understand. Oh, camped up, baby. I feel, oh, that's a camped up one. That one's nuts. That one's nuts. Oh, there's a lot of mods. Dude, Jack, those up above 1000. Oh, that's an aggregate rob down here then. No. Come on, where's the? Where's the? Where you parked in? You want to be gathered by crack? I don't drive anywhere. Where's you going? Come on. You're going. You're going back. Nice place. Are you buying crack? She got covered parking. You don't need it, but it's fine. I just think of gone 60 seconds. When you've got a dope car, people know you've got a dope car and you're seeing driving that dope car, they're going to follow you and that dope. With our friend, you got followed. What's wrong with you, too? Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's going to happen. I don't even doubt. It's going to happen. Dope Tesla, there's a Dallas buying tacos at three and the more. A million Tesla's all over the road. I tried. He's got him for Rory. I tried for Rory. Rory's shipping in a Cadillac. I've never had any issues. Any issues? I don't know. It's switching out here. No, you can catch an issue every now and then. But the thing about Texas is everybody's armed. Like, you can't just roll up on something and try to take their car. You're risking your fucking life. It happened on Fifth Street, a block away from the club up two long ago. They're down down down down down down down right in front of any of these. People get carjacked in every city. That's fact. That's why I was selling that. That's why I was selling that. That's why I was selling that. Come on to this. Come on over to the burbs, dude. So you think if you have like, one of them cyber truck. So supposedly cyber truck is coming out with an SUV. Maybe. Yeah, I don't know. Allegedly. It'd be cool. Elon will tell me. You won't tell me shit. You know what I'll tell you? I got big fucking mountains. I'm not always online people have showed things, but like, you know what I'm really not going to do. I'm not going to show a potential. Like it looks a little bit like the mix between an X and a cyber truck. See, that would be a smart move for them to make a cyber truck. That's an SUV. It's a smart move because you already have the shape. Just instead of having to pick up truck part where no one's using. Yeah, extend the seats. Yeah, I have the seats back more. And you could even shorten the wheelbase a little bit and make it like, you know, like when the smaller Cadillac SUVs. You could or you could just say fuck all that noise and get a Hellcat Durango. Because still, Atlantis does all the Hellcats back, baby. Pretty dope. Hellcat Durango's back. His Godfather, Hellcat Tim is back running fucking dodge. Yes, that's why I'm thinking. Thank fucking God. Yeah, they got crushing it. They got silly with that electric thing. It's some French guy running it. Is that what it was? Yeah, and killed all. It's America. That's what it was. He wanted it, he wanted to destroy America. That's why I wanted to pull a ton to beat through a gun. Yeah. It was like the most iconic American, like V8 power. In a corner time. We're Dodge. Dodge Viper? Well, that's a V10. Dodge Viper, you had, but just big engines, right? You had gasoline engines. You had of course the Challenger, Challenger, Hellcat, Hellcat, Red Eye, crushed it. Are they gonna discontinue the Challenger? No, they're coming out with a gas Challenger. So they fucked up and came out with a Challenger electric and then a charger. Charger. And a Challenger too. They'd at least they're both, right? You can't change. It seems. Are they coming out with a charger that's gas power? Yeah, the charger's dope. I've seen some reviews. It's pretty cool. It's dope and it's fast. Fast as fuck. Here. Now we're talking Jamie. What do you think of that? Yes. Okay. Twenty-four of an issue. Here we go. Look at that Jamie. Here you go. They're just, yeah, now we're talking. The Durango kept Dodge off engine. That's what you need Jamie. You need a goddamn V8. Like a fucking hellcat. You're gonna come in here with a fucking hairy chest. Oh, damn it. Mark! Yeah. That's what you need. That's it. Forget the Cadillac. We're on to this now. We're on to this. That's what you need. I wasn't, this is all some people of these. This is a robbery car. The track hog. That's why I'm off of that. Track hog took great dude. It's not that many of them young people are right. Okay. How about you get a Hennessy? And tell him to leave the badges off. Hennessy's are so funny. Just have Hennessy do and leave the badges off. Oh, did you just look like a regular one? Sleeper. I just be worried the whole time. Oh, my God. What were you living in? What did you see? Hennessy did a super duty. Hennessy finally got a full super duty. Yeah. I love it. Hennessy does dope shit dude. They do dope Mustangs. They do dope catalogs. They take the black wing and fucking see that. That's why with, with tubie, it was like, let's see how these four episodes go. They do, do you know John? Mean him had a conversation. You should do a show with him. That's right. I want to show with him. I want to go to Gunther. Yeah. But John's great. He's great. I can connect you with him. He's good dude. He's a friend of mine. Mean him had a combo because when I was building my rap to get to 1400 horseback, I called him. Well, I'll hook you up with Gunther too. Yeah. They're great. He's Peter's very cool too. He's a Moses trackhawk. Yeah, dude. Oh, the, the derang with the Hellcat? He's a little fast to be smoked. Yeah. And that's probably not a Hennessy one. Well, those, it doesn't matter. I mean, they put a Hellcat in one of those fucking things. You're dealing with insane horsepower. It's so much horsepower. Awesome, Jamie. And it's the regular one. The regular one. It's fucking awesome. Where were salespeople? We're selling Dodge. Oh, actually might have been the trackhawk on the right. Okay. Whichever one it was. Pick your pay was dope. I would 100% drive one of those. 100%. Yeah. I might get one too if you get one. Like, it's good. You get three. That's good. Charge. How dare you son of a bit. I don't think you know what, man? He's not wrong though with the way gas prices are. I talked to Tim Dylan today. He was on the phone with him when I was getting the student. He told me that gas is $7.90 a gallon in LA right now. And that's down from what it was. I was out there a month. It's really commercial. And there was up to 840 something. Here's what I don't understand. Are we getting oil from Iran? No. That's what maybe three or four percent is from. So they just fucking us in the ass. They just know, oh, Americans know if we go to war, we can increase the gas price. So we are just go along with it. Is that real or is it global prices went up because some of the gas can't get to where it needs to go? And so they need to make that money. So they just fuck you. Isn't it funny? Like they're like, we're going to make money no matter what. The American people are going to lose money. So we make the same amount of money. And also, Valk, you need oil. But well, my whole thing is even like when, you know, when we go to war people like, yeah, they're just doing it for money. It's like, how much fucking money do they need? They're all rich anyway. Some gas prices are rising mainly because crude oils become more expensive due to the war with Iran and disruptions in global oil supply plus normal seasons and cost factors in refining distribution in taxes. Biggest driver, crude oil in the Iran war. But what if we got all our oil from America? Which we can do. Well, if we did that, why would oil go up? Because it goes up. Because it goes up. Because it's like tight, wide oil. But that's, that's stupid. Yeah, yeah. That's good. Yeah, besides their bunch of crooks, their bunch of crooks, they, we should have a national oil company. And only sell in their house. In house. So no matter what right there foul shit we do outside the world. Still sell wherever they want. Yeah. Even though US is the world's largest oil producer companies can sell oil on the global market to whoever pays the highest price. And it sucks us. High world prices still translate into high domestic gas prices. Hey, Mr. President, please fix that. Fuck it. I don't know if he can do that. They'll kill them. They try to kill them three times already. You try to use, you try to fuck with that oil money. Oh, but all sudden, President JD is crying on TV. I'm going to miss. I'm going to miss Donald. He was a great mentor to me and I didn't always agree with everything he said. And I wish he didn't post that picture of him as Jesus. I do do good. Fuck it. I do it. You know, it's crazy to me. Is there's been like three legit assassination attempts and it's in the news two, three days. And we're just like, yeah, it's crazy. And we move on. Well, there was another one that barely made the news where a guy showed up and tried to attack JD. You remember that guy? No. Yes. See, I know this guy from showed up. I think it was at the White House. I think some guy showed up at the White. He's got killed or got shot in Cambridge. So this guy, he had a shootout with the cops three years ago, went to jail for three years, got out and was walking on the street in Cambridge, he just unloading his gun on pass. Oh, I'm passed. Oh, just shooting random people on the street. This guy had gotten a shootout with the cops and only did three years. That's insane, dude. He got a shootout with the cops. I think 20 bullets were exchanged and he only did three years. Bro, there's the other problem is I saw they took a, again, whoever's doing these polls, you have to be an idiot to get stopped on the street and look at this guy. This is wild. He's just walking on the street shooting at cars. Bro, by the way, I'm running that guy. Oh, there are a thousand especially for my my Toyota, my land cruising. Why no, it's not going to mess up my car. That's insane. Meanwhile, in Cambridge, though, I probably go to jail for life. 100% you're fucked. Yeah. But I saw a survey said one in four Americans think the assassination temps on the present are fake. What do I want to put percentage? I say the world's flat. One in four. Yeah. The people that thought that the Butler, Pennsylvania one was staged don't know anything about guns. That's a fact. I don't know anybody who knows anything about guns. It thinks that the president would let some guy nick his ear with a bullet. So dumb. That is in the guy behind him, the firefighter who lost his life. That guy got shot by a bullet that was intended for Trump. And then there's a photo of a bullet whizzing by his face. Anybody that thinks that that staged is out of their fucking mind. Or the guy that the correspondent, who rushed in. Yeah. They think that's fake. And it's like, hold on. So you think this guy who's a teacher educated clearly kind of had a shit together through a his life? Well, Tim Perchett, who I had on the podcast, Congressman. Yeah. That guy was like some sort of an MK ultra type deal. And he says he thinks they still do that. He thinks someone's still doing that. I've always thought that. I'm not trying to steal that. I'm sure he has way better points than me. But if they did MK ultra all those years ago, when you go through the list of Charles Manse and the Unibomber, you think it stopped? Right. And you don't think they've gotten better with it? Exactly. So you just think they're like, okay, the public knows we're going to shut this down. No, dude. Yeah. They just they expand on it gets better and better and better. Sure. They're still doing that. And that could have been Thomas Crooks too. The guy who tried to shoot Trump and Butler, Pennsylvania, that one was weird as fuck. That one's so weird because that guy's house was professionally scrubbed. He didn't even have silverware there. He had no online activity. He had no like. Black rock ties. Black rock ties. Have you heard anything about him? Nope. Gone. How weird is that dude? Vanish like kind of so. What about the Charlie Kirk guy? What about the guy who killed Charlie? Right. We haven't heard. Not weird. It's super weird. Nearly one third of Americans, 30% believe that at least 30%. At least one of the three attempts on Donald President's life over the last two years were staged. Wow. I have to think about that. I attempted assassination. A majority of Americans said either that it was staged or that they were not sure. 54% said they either thought it was staged or not sure. And that's the problem. Only 38% of Americans believe all three assassination attempts were authentic. This is TikTok. That's the prime. That's the prime. That's the fucking prime. Rotten their fucking brains out from inside their heads. I know. It's not good. Meanwhile you go on Chinese TikTok. It's all like traditional dance and martial arts. They built the science projects. Yeah. It shuts down for kids after 10 p.m. Yeah. And like Americans have fun. Yeah. They're doing such a great job. Crushed. And then they sold it, right? So they sold it to that American company. And they're just going to continue doing what the Chinese did and make the most of the amount of money which is rotten people's brains out. Don't give a fuck. What if he dope if this American company that bought it said, hey, there's clearly a problem with how things are emphasized and what your algorithm shows you. And what we're going to do is promote exceptional people doing exceptional things. Don't you think they would get more users? Because as a dad, I'd be like, okay, you guys can have TikTok. They, there's some rules there. It's an educational thing. Now I'm not a fucking chance dude. It wouldn't get more. It would, uh, everyone go right over to Instagram. It would just like, it's to grabs all the zaps. What if they did across the board? You would have to have no one cross that picket line and they all would because people are addicted to watching fucked up street fights and crazy things now. Like my algorithm is all like people fighting and parking lots and there's so much of that. Yeah, mine's just trucks cars and fucking fights on Instagram. Yeah. My problem is me and Seghura every day send each other the worst thing that we find on one. I don't want to start my day like that. And I don't either. I don't either. But it's too late. But that's the only time I'm going to Instagram now. The only time, uh, then I'll check my, you've got an awful bit, right? Yeah. It's so much better. It feels so much better. I go in occasionally and check Twitter to see what the news is, like what's trending, what's what you're not like reading comments and I'm not not. And I don't even go into the news feed because I used to go into the news feed. But every now I find things about me all the time, like I don't want to hear what I do as bad as I am. Like come on. I'm not here for that. I know it sucks. So I can't avoid people getting mad at me or even saying nice things about me. I don't want to read that. No. I think what's better is I go to the trending stuff and find out what the news is. So then I'll click on like what the fuck is going on and I'll check that out. Like that's how I found out about this guy with the gun. You feel so much better. Way better. But I'm also more often than not now not going there for my news and I've kind of curated my Google news feed smart to be much more interested. Like I get more stories and it'll show me stories from X. Yeah. So then I can decide whether or not I want to actually open up X to read the story. And did you stop drinking too? I did. And then I went back. How back are you? Not back crazy. But I'll have a couple of drinks every now and then. I haven't gotten drunk since I've been back. I've been at a number over two years now. That's not almost three. Feel good. Feel great. Never been in better shape. Yeah, it's I feel fucking definitely better for you. But I do like a glass of wine or two with dinner and I do like a drink or two with the boys when we're at the club every now and then. But I just I was doing it too much. Me too. And then I recognized and so I stopped. Yeah. It just it wasn't benefiting me. And then also you know I've a addictive personality. Like if I do something I got to be all in. Like on cars like literally one day I woke up. I'm like I don't need 11 cars and half of them are trucks and they're all the same. You know, it's just like when I get into something I get so into it. But I'm getting as I'm getting all I'm getting better checking myself. Good. It's good. Getting better at that is very important to managing your life. It's really important. It's grown up. Well, it's also just realizing that there's some addictions that are just not beneficial at all. And then other ones that are really beneficial. So just get addicted doing things that are good for you. Yeah. You know, but that's the problem is that a lot of people can't regulate their addictions well. They're just not good at it. And so they just get caught up and you know it could be anything. Oh, you know, yeah, to do preach. That's me. But it's also that same thing is what causes people to get good at stuff. Correct. Which is weird. You know, like if you show me a dude who can't get addicted to anything like not there's not one thing that is taking up too much your time. I probably can hang out with you. And it's not good. Yeah, not good. Yeah, because that same obsession is what led me got me to the UFC or football. Exactly. Exactly. Like being all in on something I think is where that's where obsession can lead. The scary one for me, I think not for me personally, but when I see it is gambling. Super scary. Because I see people that are really rich, not just Dana, but other people that I know that are really rich that gamble big numbers. And it freaks me out like big poker games and crazy amounts of money that gamble and stuff. And I was like, I don't like that. But that doesn't. But you get your rocks off in other ways. I think for those like super rich people, like that's kind of like they can buy any car, they can buy any house or go in a gym in order to get their rocks off. That's how they do it. Yeah, but it has to be it has to be a big number for them to feel it. The juice has to be so high. Yeah, if they've had a hundred bucks on some, then you can note that doesn't mean they might not even cash that ticket. Like they don't feel it. You know how you're similar with obsession. Do your kiddos have that? Do you see it in any? Oh yeah. Yeah, that's super driven. But it's very positive. Kids are going to take the atmosphere that they grow up in. And if your parents have hard work ethic and they're disciplined in their kind, generally speaking, that's how your kids come out. Yeah. I think that's one of the shitty kids. Yeah. I generally genuinely think that it's at least part of it is from the parents. You know, I coach my son's baseball football teams. The crazy parents I deal with. Oh, you buddy, dude. And I try to talk to the dads because most of them respect me. So I'll go, can I give you some advice? Man, you got a back off, dude. But they can't. They can't. And they can't. And they have to change who they are. And I tell them, I'm like, I'm trying to help you out here. You're, you love baseball. Whatever. Your son has told me he wants to quit. Now, the reason why it's a quit is because you've made it not fun. You used to love this game. When I first got here, nothing, he loved more than football. Now he wants to quit because you've made it a job for him. You fucked up, dude. And who's it can affect? Hey, it's going to suck for him because he likes football. You're not going to be able to watch your kid play football too. Could you decide to make it not fun? You're going to fuck up your relationship with your kid. Max, I don't try. It's gonna start for him because he likes football. You're not gonna be able to watch a kid play football, dude. Could you decide to make it not fun? You're gonna fuck up your relationship with your kid. I don't force my kids and do it other than they have to go to school. I don't force my kids and do anything they don't want to do. They're not interested in it. You don't have to do it. But find something you are interested in. That's my thing. Whatever you end to. That's ride. I don't get fucked. What is just so happens. It's baseball football. Cool. That's ride, man. But you have to do it. You have to do it. You're gonna do personality for that and that you're very encouraging you kids. But you're not, it's not you thinking that like your self-worth is not tied up to your kids' performance. No, you just want your kids to have fun. Yep. The problem is with some people, their kid is almost like their racehorse or something. You know what I mean? Like it's like their whole personality gets wrapped around their kid being an elite athlete. And now it's worse because social and bass are right. It's like it's a business now. It's over a billion dollar business. So now it's like there's these travel ball when I was a kid. You have to be really fucking good. Well now every parent wants to say their kids travel ball. So there's the majors and there's two teams of the majors. There's three triple A, three double A, three single A. I just want mice. I don't need the best 10 year old. I just want them playing. So I don't give up. He made the majors team. I don't give a fuck with majors, triple A, rack, word playing, wherever. Have fun. Have fun. Apply yourself to something and apply yourself. And I don't give a fuck. Whether what level we're at, we'll play it all. And some of the parents I'll come back from the tournament, like, oh, you played double A. I'm like, it's baseball. You think you can only play majors? So what I can sit around the coot with a water cooler and brag do you guys? I don't know. A lot of people will like talk down about a kid who's not playing as good as other kids. Oh, it's like, what do you, but you know, that's the, it's like stage moms, you know, there's a thing like that with that. To your point, you're not getting these tied up in them. What they, what they don't realize is they're fucking it all out. Oh, yeah. It's all going to get fucked. I've seen that with a lot of young actors where their parents were like super involved in their career. And then the kid just did not want to do it anymore. And generally, like I've seen it a few times. And one of them that I know really well, where the parents stole money from the kid. Fuck dude. Yeah, it's just like six million dollars. He's just tell you who it is after the show. That's terrible. Oh, it's awful. It's awful. It's like devastated him to find out. But it's like that's what they're doing. They're, they're using the kid as a piggy bank. They quit working. They, they relied entirely on the kid and the kids acting and kids like, oh, I got to afford all this so we can fucking live. And I'm nine. Not only that, but then, you know, the kid starts feeling like, hey, this is my fucking money. Yeah, I can't absolutely. Fuck. He's the boss. Yeah. I mean, he had problems with it too. They all have problems with it. And then on top of that, it's just super unhealthy for your kid to get famous when they're 10 horrible. Also for pretending horrible. Famous for pretending that's what? How's that going to be personality? Yeah. Well, there's a lot of parents out there, man. They just, they don't understand your, your developing a human being. And one of the reasons they don't understand is they're not developed well, correct. They're fucking nuts. Or it, the biggest problems used to the parents who never played. Right. And they're like, man, you'll see just a plant that their son has some talent. And then it's they're the worst. Did you kid into cars? You big time. Oh, that's nice. Big time. Got to teach them how to drive. So they don't do something stupid when they get old. That's what I tell them all the time. All the fucking time. Yeah, don't do that. No, they're going to learn how to drive a manual. It's the easiest way to to cart. Jamie, you want to make sure your car didn't get stolen by manual. The criminals these days, don't have to drive one. Do you know, drive one? Sure. Oh, I was going to burn that clutch. Look at them. I haven't done it in a long time. I could figure it out. I don't know if I can do it right now. Yeah, especially if you're only driving 10 miles a day, perfect candidate. I just don't want to. It's just a morning. You had no like, my kids know their shit. Like there are. Yeah, I mean, there's another other so many other cars in the world. I don't have to be that one. What do you like? I don't, I don't, I don't know driving anywhere. I don't like driving on race. Okay. Okay. Okay. But let's just put all that aside. What would cars do you look at? Well, I like that. Or do you look at a car that you like and go, that's a target? No, it's a, if I it's what I like, it's, it ends up honestly being like, like an X6 somewhere in that range, X5, X8G. And WGLE. Okay. Now we're talking. Yeah, there's somewhere in there. Those are, I'll tell you what, whoever made the new grills on the BMW should be Dick's lap. Into the hospital. Like, like what the fuck did you do to one of the most iconic grills? And they hit like the M4s like, blah, blah. Yeah. What did you do? They just trying to switch it up. You know what I mean? Oh, but they go through. Bring that agreement that. The only one that looks good or looks decent is the seven series. There's something about the proportions of the seven series with that big grill. It doesn't bother me. That M2's fucking tasty too though. Okay. That's dope things. But they didn't get a goofy with the grills. Yeah. Yeah. Fuck on with that. If sort of fixed it as times gone by, but it's still got a big gap like that. Yeah. I don't like it. The earlier ones with the grossest ones. But look at that right there. The lower. I'm sorry. That one's good, but the left one, the white one, the white one. Yeah, that's it. Look at that's perfect. That's perfect. Yeah. That's perfect. Do you still have them five? No, but I do have the E46 M3. Oh, yeah, that was cool. The 2005 that was fucking awesome. That one's fucking great. That was literally a perfect car. That's a great car. Like, like that one, that one's gross. That grill, the lower right one, the bronze color one. Black. Yeah, my brother has that new M2 manual and that thing fucking M2s are amazing. Those are amazing. The BMW to their credit is still making manual transmissions, which is a little better. Do they make a manual in the M5? They don't, right? I don't think so. I think the M5 is only does it make a manual? The M5s are so heavy now. That's their issue. Yeah. It's like manuals. Not the first thing coming up. Yeah. I don't think they make it a manual transmission anymore. See if it says manual transmission. That one's automatic. Yeah. I think they make the M4 manual. Yeah. Oh, six feet, but that's the E60 V10. That's an old one. Those are dull. The V10s are cool. V10s sound amazing. Yeah. They sound amazing. My E46 is not that fast. There it is. That's old. Yeah. So the last, those are the last ones they made in the manual. But my E46 is small. It's what you want to buy. It handles really good. It's got hydraulic steering manual transmission. And you know, it's a dinin. So it has a super charge on it. So it's a little faster. So it's like 400 something horsepower. But monster dude, it's just fun. It's just you feel it while you're driving it. And they look like I'm not weird. And I was trying to track that said that they got two of that were listeners. Only two vehicles here. Was this time? Might be it might be just not an American thing? That's not making it. No, those are old. No, I know. I'll tell you what I saw. Oh, that they so put put in 2026 BMW M5 manual. I just saw that we got two versions of the BMW M5 with a manual that the rest of the world missed out on. That's what I saw was clicking on. When does that though, if you click on it, I think it's 25. Right. But I think they're talking about old cars. I think they're doing a history. But BMW still has two versions. They're talking about older cars. BMW says great interiors too. Oh, yeah. Some manufacturers still fucking do it right. BMW doesn't right. They're really good. It's a solid car. And the new M5, even if it is an a manual is a fucking screamer of a car. They're monsters. Yeah. But they have to make them hybrids now. I know. It's because of all the fucking, all the environmental. Just you jumped out rid of the, the engines, the engines start. You know how when you start? Oh, yeah. You got rid of that. That's good. Yeah. That's, I don't like that. And I don't like that. And some cars I have to press that don't do that. And every red light don't do that. Don't do that. You're not saving anything. All you're doing is cooking my starter. Yeah. Because the starters get a start. How crazy it Trump was like, I'm getting rid of that. I'm so annoying. Parking next to one of these dangerous. That a Marzler. That's that boy. Those are cool in person. They're really nice. That's a beautiful car. Once you get one, I'm Jamie. Well, I don't know. I'm just worried about the attention. I just had a tire problem for letting go that far. Model S tires just fell apart after 10,000 miles. I know that was weird. The way your tires fell apart was weird. It didn't make any sense. He said he had a flat tire and then you got to look at it. And it's like there's the wires around. He'd worn down the, the tread at 10,000 miles. Well, that's the problem with electric trucks. They're so heavy. So they're going through tires faster. But I didn't think it would be that fast. 10,000 miles. I mean, maybe driving like a maniac. That's good nutty. That bet he is. Yeah. It's going so it was higher, dude. You know, ratchet got to be to wear it down to the wire. I think it's the weight. Yes, the weight. Because we looked it up and it was like 15,000 miles. So he's just a little bit more lead foot. A little more lead foot. Lead foot, Jamie. Just a sign to get out of the way. As he gets older, we're talking on lead foot, Jamie. These are dope. Austin Martin's are dope. Fuck. Yeah. That's where it talks about. Jamie. No, I mean, you know, some good shit. I just don't like, okay. Okay. You don't like Cadillac. Okay. That's the Martin's. It's fine. It's fine. Everybody has different tastes. That's fine. So as long as you like that, you like something. Dude, I'll go on Facebook marketplace. We'll get you a track, cocks. We'll get you asked to Martin. He's got to get something. We gotta get him something fun. You let, let us know the budget. Do you see him? He seems a little hesitant. But he does see him open to it. Yeah. Well, you drove race cars before around the track. That's fun. That's I do that all the time. But you could buy a car that you can drive. We don't have a studio at the track or not drive your own race car. That's true. It's not worried about fucking it. That's a good point. So your shows on to be, shows on to be gearheads gone wild. There's four episodes. Um, and are you releasing new ones? You can binge watch all four of them right now. And then if the four do well, they can order a bunch more. And that's where I do Hennessy guns were. I got some. And how long are each show? I think they're like 28 minutes each. Yeah. Okay. Cool. And it's gearheads gone wild. Yes. They're untuned to be. Yep. Because once you're the first time I ever go to to be. I've never been to be. Please do. But I do. I don't heard about it like a year ago. I just found out about it three months ago. I just can't believe it. Is that many fucking when they're like, we got to buy two. Be on like, okay. That's fucking do it. They've been awesome. That's great. It's easy to watch. Yeah. Well, I'll be watching it. There's that many people. Uh, but it sounds awesome, dude. That's what I'm glad you're doing something here. Joy. I love it. Well, yeah, it's our shit. All right, brother. You'll love it, man. Thanks for doing this. I love you. Thank you. Thank you. All right. Goodbye, everybody. See you.