The Jerogan experience. Nobody has any idea how the world works until they plug into a group. And the group has its stories that it tells about how the world works. Every group has its model of what a hero is and its set of beliefs a hero has. And once we've plugged into that group, we orient ourselves towards becoming that person. And cults are interesting because cults are like, all human groups are kind of cults, but looser. So every human group is a status game in the sense that it's a group of people who believe the same things. And it's sort of rules for being part of that group. And the better you become following those rules and becoming its ideal of self, the higher you rise up that status game. The only thing that's been cults in a religion and a business and a political group is it's much tighter. So the rules are much stricter. Like there's a zillion rules. Like, you know, I've written before about what they call the castrated themselves. Heaven's gate. Heaven's gate. And then it rules even about like how much toothpaste you're allowed to put on your food brush. They had a rule about exactly how scrambled eggs for to be cooked and the rule was dry but not burnt. So there was a rule about how much water you put in your bathtub. And was the leader caught, was he castrated as well? No, he wasn't surprisingly enough. Yeah, the book was tea and dough. And that guy used tea. Just imagine you are so low in your life that you think that's the guy that has all the answers. I'm actually just like, is that a tribal thing? This is what I've always assumed. That's just some holdover from when we were a part of groups of 150 people that needed a leader. And generally that leader would be some old warlord. It's probably like 35. Like, you know, back then. But he had gone through a lot and was a strong leader. Was someone that you admired as a leader. And maybe in these tribal times, that's baked into our DNA. And when someone comes along and speaks confidently. Yeah. I am never confident. I'm never confident about it. If you're so confident about all these thoughts and about where, what life is about and where we're going and what awaits us. And if you follow these rules, God, that's so confident. I'm not that confident. So I could get sucked in. Yeah. Any human could get sucked in. But is that what it's from? Is it from tribal times? Yes, so no. So one of the really surprising things about tribes, the tribes in which we evolved, is that the idea of the big man is a bit of a myth. So they were kind of leaderless. Like, leaders would bubble up by consensus when, say, we wanted to solve a particular problem to do with hunting. Then the best hunters would be deferred to. And what do you think? So the big some point in time, they became leaders. I mean, they're leaders for so long. When we settled down. When was it? Yeah, agriculture did. Yeah, so it was about 11,000 years ago. But does it only think that's enough to bake it into our DNA? I don't know. Well, I think what is in our DNA is that idea of A stories. So we're storytelling animals. We're thinking stories. Every tribe has its particular story about the world. And so we've very good at channeling those stories. And as I said, every story has its design of what is a hero. And we try and become that kind of hero. So that's that holdover from the tribal day. But more fundamentally, again, it's that brain question of, who do I have to be? What do I have to do? Tell me what I have to do in order to achieve connection and status. And that's what a cult does. And that's what a charismatic leader does. It tells you that this is what you've got to do. These are the rules. This is who you have to become. And that's really seductive to us subconsciously, because those two things of connection and status are so incredibly important to us. Yeah. It's something you think should be taught very early on. It seems like this is information we should get to kids as young as we can. So they can recognize these patterns that people fall into. Absolutely. I've always thought that there should be a lesson in school about what is a human. What is the operating system, manual for a human? And these are the mistakes that humans make. Because one of the sort of big ideas is that we're not particularly interested in the truth. We don't. The truth is doesn't matter to human brains. What matters is what do I have to believe in order to people to like me and respect me? Well, that's why religions, like even radical religions, are so intoxicating. Like you have to be all in. You're part of a very special group. And you're all love each other like brothers and sisters because you're part of this group. And you can come up with some radical ideas and get people to subscribe to that. Especially if you attach things like death for people who leave. Yeah. You know? Yeah. That's right. You're operating in some red-lined territory. Like that's a wild group. And the religions and the cults will always do that thing of offering amazing rewards. But of course, that's what's happening in the future. You have been a massive spot ever. And the version of heaven differs between how bad the place where you live sucks. Yeah. And it's like, I think there's like 8 and 1 half billion people in the world. And I think there's like 500 million atheists. So that just shows you how many, just how wide we are to believe, basically any old shit we're told to believe. As long as we feel like it's going to get a status and secure connection into a supportive group. We were, I remember during this suicide bomber days when that was something that was in the news all the time. They talked about 72 virgins. And that these gentlemen thought that they were going to get 72 virgins and have it. Like that is so cultural. Like if you offered 72 virgins to a Christian, they'd be like, what the fuck are you talking about? Not fucking you virgins. You crazy psycho. How old are they? What are you saying? I'm not a pedophile, dude. I just like women. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? It's like, yeah. But I'm not sure how, I mean, I don't know if that 72 virgins think it's true. I think it could be like 21 year old virgins that have been saved for this moment by the great one. But I think that term is not real. I think the term 72 virgins is like saying, how many times have you lost your phone? A fucking million. Yeah. It's like that kind of a, you know, it's an exaggeration. But I think the real promise there, though, I mean, the 72 virgins is yeah. But I think the real promise for suicide bombers is again, it's status. It's like, yeah. If you sacrifice your life on behalf of the group's mission, you're a hero, you're like a god. Yeah. And so that's the promise. And again, I think it's a really good example of how human beings value status over their lives. Yeah. I mean, that's how much we value status. With the only animal that kills ourself, which is just a weird thing in itself, an animal would voluntarily end its own life. And very often, the reason that people kill themselves is because it's a sudden drop in status or they feel completely isolated and alone. So they're lacking in those essential kind of psychological resources to such an extent that they, you know, in their own lives. And that's how much we value these things. And suicide bombers are another manifestation of that. Like, if you're going to consider me a hero, and if Muhammad is going to consider me a hero, strap me out, brother, you know, that's how crazy we become about these social rewards. God, that is such an insane belief. It's so insane. And when the most evil thing is when you hear about them talking kids and doing it, a young child, you're getting us. What is the youngest suicide bomber they've ever used? I don't know. Just the idea that you can buy into it so much, that you're willing to look. Your children go do that. Yeah, but it's wild. It's evil, if you think it's this kind of calculating kind of mathematical algorithm of advantage. But they sincerely believe it. They really believe it's true. I mean, as a when a applause in all those are journalists, I've been meeting kind of crazy people, including Nazis as part of my journalistic career. That's one of the things that always strikes me is that they really believe it. This is not even in the sense that they're doing anything calculating by talking their children to being suicide bombers. They think they're doing something heroic. They think they're doing something amazing. As did the Nazis, as did the Communists. As, yeah, as did the KKK. Yeah, people, they can fall into belief structures and they don't necessarily have to make sense. But if they find enough supportive people around them that also believe that then it becomes part of their tribe identity, and it can get, it could be really stupid. We're fucking way more vulnerable than we like to believe. That's one of the things that I was saying, like when I watched those cult documentaries. Part of me was like, thank God. I didn't run into those people. Thank God. Yeah. They would have got me. And when they look at the psychology of people that are vulnerable to falling into cults, it's very often people that have struggled to fit into the status games of ordinary life. So they got, the family hasn't worked, the job hasn't worked. Exactly. So they've got no identity. They've got no tribe. So they're really vulnerable to these cults, which because what cults offer is absolute certainty. If you cook your scampled eggs this way, if you only put two inches of water in your bath, you're going to, the UFO's will come down and they're going to take you to the level above. That's what they were offering to you though. The level above you. Where the Nike's at? I remember you were the purple Nike's. But that's right. Yeah, yeah. And there's this crazy memoir of one of the guys who was in this group. He didn't cut his own bowls off. He left before the bull cutting. But he was jealous. Like he wants it to have his bowls cut. And there was only one person that could have it done in the beginning. And they flipped a coin. And he was really annoyed that he lost the coin flip. Oh my God. But what was interesting about his memoir was he said that people talk about brainwashing in cults. And people talk about how we were forced to follow these rules. But we wanted to follow the rules. Like not following the rules would be like being a NASA astronaut and just not caring about how the space shall work. So they don't consider themselves brainwashed. They consider themselves, what? They're just in the status game. Like any other status game. It's just a very, very strict one. Right. Well, that's why one of the fascinating things about some cults is they use very bizarre language and that they all agree to it. They have specific terms that they say. Like doesn't Scientologists, they'll call people. They have an abbreviation for someone who's like a hostile person. What is it that they do? Because I remember someone was someone was explaining to me someone who left the church was explaining to me how like if someone would be hostile. You have like a very specific way you describe them. And that they all do it in the group. And it's like oppressive person. That's impressive person. Yeah. So you're a suppressor person. Potential trouble source. Do you die ordered Dianetics in like 1994? I had just moved to LA. And I thought it was a self-help book. And I was like, all right, yeah, fucking, look at your brain is going to explode. You're going to get your shit together. Look at all these people that are succeeding on Dianetics. You know, 26 or whatever it was. So I ordered this book and they've never stopped sending me things. I mean, they fucking never stopped sending me things. Was they ever a point when you thought hang on a minute? It's just quite in general. No, no. Once I realized it was Scientologists, I was like, oh, Dianetics is Scientology? Yeah. I was like, OK. But then part of me was like, damn, a lot of these Scientologists are doing really well in Hollywood. I mean, it's a good culture. Yeah. Maybe if they just let me be me. Because it seems like that was part of it. There was a big allure of how many successful people were following that religion. I mean, some of the most successful actors. Tom Cruise is one of the most successful actors of all time. And he's literally the poster boy for that. Yeah, that's right. It's something that's saying to me the other day that they thought that actors were particularly susceptible to Scientology because they've got this weird, they don't really have an identity actors. They were always slipping into everybody at different people's interviews. I thought that was interesting. Special heroes theory. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You probably lose who the fuck you are. Oh, am I? Am I rocking? My mission and possible guy. Well, they're when they're walking around, everybody treats them that way. I'm sure they treats them alone. Like he's rocky. And yeah, you got to give respect to Tom Cruise, though, because Tom Cruise is like 60 years old. And he still does his own stunts, including jumping on motorcycle off a cliff. Yeah. That's how much he believes in this stuff. Yeah. But that's why these groups are kind of functional as well. It's like I kind of have a weak kind of sympathy. Like I grew up in a very strict Catholic household with very strict Catholic parents. And I was very, I hated it. I was very rebellious as a teenager. And I guess in my 20s and 30s, I was very, very atheist. And you know, hated religion. But then I kind of did a lot of this research. And when you want to accept that what humans need to be healthy psychologically and physically is connection and status, you see that that's actually what religion provides people. That's what religion provides my parents is that they're connected into community. And they feel important. They feel they're good Catholics because my dad conducts the choir and this and the other. And so that's invaluable. That's what humans need to survive. And in the current world in the huge populations in which we live, it's very hard to feel securely connected. I mean, as you said, the tribes in which we evolved very small, like 30 to 50 people. So it's quite easy to feel securely connected. It was quite easy in that environment to feel important, like valued by the people. I mean, probably that it was not rare in the tribe to feel invaluable, like you're needed. Because everybody was needed. There wasn't many people around to find the tubers and catch the rabbits or whatever. But in this day and age, and these huge groups in which we belong to it, it's much harder to feel relative status because you're competing with millions of people, especially online. And I think that's a sort of a huge amount of misery in the modern world. The stress, it's sort of an identity anxiety, identity stress. We feel really unsatisfied with the amount of connection and status that we have because we exit into these fucking massive international tribes now.