This episode of the podcast is the last remaining podcast from the Joe Rogan questions everything sci-fi show Will we do another episode of that show? I have no idea. It's up for debate. It's in talks We've tried to figure out another way to do it that doesn't involve driving to weird places or flying in to meet a bunch of shitheads Who are lying to us about whether or not they've been abducted by aliens or seen big foot or that was the primary problem that we had with that television show The big problem that I had with it was I didn't want to do a show where we were just running around debunking things I wanted to do a show where we were talking to people that That brought up questions That I thought was actually that I thought were actually fascinating that people that Really had information that stimulated your curiosity And I really didn't find that too much that we found that with the real subjects We found that with the subjects like transhumanism when we talked to these people that really were interested in pushing the boundaries of technology With those folks we really did have Interesting conversations we really did cover subjects that I thought were worthy of of your time of your energy of your viewing and listening pleasure but far too often What we dealt with was a bunch of lost people that were completely fixated on ideas that were probably nonsense and I didn't want to do that anymore What I did enjoy doing though was doing the podcast aspect of it. I really did enjoy talking to Duncan I really did enjoy hanging out with him and having a good time just goofing on life goofing on the situations that we found ourselves in and One of the situations was when we went to this place called Skinwalker Ranch and Skinwalker Ranch is this place that's out in the middle of Utah and We flew out there and met with this questionable individual who I Think it's safe to say is at least mostly full of shit, but the the trip was still fun and talking about it was fun and Just talking about it was what I found to be the just the not just the most fun part of doing the show for me But the most entertaining part of the show was exploring these ideas with an intelligent guy like Duncan So whether or not the show moves on I will definitely continue to do things like that with Duncan So this is the last podcast and this episode is brought to you by Audible Audible is the leading provider of audio entertainment for the worldwide web if you enjoy books And you haven't listened to books on tape you are doing yourself a disservice It's a fantastic way to continue a book as well if you have the Amazon has this thing called the Kindle Fire HD and they have an app called Whispersink and what Whispersink does it allows you to Read a book you read a book and you get to a certain part of the book and you shut it off and it sinks up with the audio recording of that book that you can listen to in your car or On your mobile phone or what have you and you can listen to it while you're in your car or while you're on the train And while you're on a plane or whatever you're doing it allows you to go back and forth between reading the book and having someone to read the book to you amazing amazing resource if you are curious about Audible audible.com forward slash Joe is where you want to go and they will give you a Free audio book as well as thirty three days of audible service over 150,000 titles to choose from you will run out of time Before you run out of shit to listen to at audible.com. It is an amazing resource if you're looking for audio entertainment if you're looking for books lectures stand up comedy Radio shows they have the opium Anthony radio show you can download a lot of other shows fascinating conversations with people Throughout time they've recorded all sorts of really cool historical things as well as old radio shows as well as great books fiction and nonfiction Audibles just I love it. It's just a tremendous tremendous resource. So audible.com forward slash Joe go there get a free audio Get a free audio book and thirty free days of audible service All right with that said, this is the very last podcast from the Joe Rogan questions Joe Rogan experience Are we rolling we good how smoke is in here all right Looking this is the fog of confusion that's what's in the air Duncan the fog of confusion yeah the smoke of mystery hmm so we went to skin walker branch and We found a lot of crazy. Yes, it was a an interesting place I'll tell you what Mike Miller the gentleman that we talked to that lived with his cool dog and had seen the orbs Yes, that guy I enjoy talking to he seemed like a real down-to-earth guy that had no reason to lie to us He didn't seem like yet any agenda and His story all those sounds in completely crazy While he was saying it did not seem in any way like he was being deceptive It seemed like he was telling us a real account. It's I know he's like I know it sounds crazy Yeah, but you know before I saw yeah, and I believe him I mean I believe that he had this experience what it was Who didn't you know you would have to be there? You'd have to see it even then if you saw what he saw the way he explained it You wouldn't really know and I think that's a real problem with any completely unique experience If you had it and no one else had it what kind of a burden? You know walking around like you've seen these Rainbow colored orbs that are the size of softballs and they're flying on your house and going through walls and your dogs looking at I mean you're shining lights on them and they're avoiding the lights and flying around What do you do? It's over. It's gone. They leave you're back to just sit at home The TV still on yeah your dog's still there. Yeah, and you and also you know you Forced with this decision like what your face with this decision? What do you do you tell your friends about this? Yeah, keep that to yourself What would you do if you saw a bunch of crazy orbs flying around your car and then disappearing off into space and then Virt you know other than your own strange memory of what just happened life is exactly the same Yeah, you do do you tell people yeah, you tell people you got a responsibility to tell people you got to be brave enough to tell people Because if you don't tell people then you're Discrediting your species if there's some kind of grand new thing that's happening that no one's observed before and you see it You've got to have the guts to get out there and tell people sure they're just gonna look at you like oh This is the typical dusty cement laying desert recluse with a filthy dog Who's been huffing paint and hallucinating orbs? That's all anyone's gonna think that's the problem But I think that you must tell people because if you don't then no one's gonna investigate it and if no one investigates it Then these things will remain in the land of the crazy instead of coming into the light and if they come into the light Think of what that would do to all of society if we can prove that there's hyper dimensional orbs that Traverse wormholes to communicate with dusty old cowboys in the middle of Mormon country Wow What a great way of putting it? Yeah, and if they really are some unique thing that we are experiencing for the first time But we'll continue to show itself and eventually become you know factual eventually Be a part of I don't know what we consider reality. Yes, you know you would be so pissed Like I saw that too and I didn't have the balls to speak out That's right and what if Marconi never spoke out when he started discovering radio waves What if Darwin never spoke out when he recognized that there was a process called evolution that was happening in the world What if Edison never spoke out when he was stealing Tesla's ideas Yeah, you know, and it's really interesting because when you stop and think about what you're talking about this flying thing You know why is that any stranger than fish? Why is it any strangers and something that breathes water and does whatever it wants in this three dimensional world under the ocean? Why is that any weirder than birds? Yeah, yeah, why is that any weirder than I saw an eagle the other day when I was in Seattle It's on an eagle yeah flying knife-faced death machine. Yeah, that was a dinosaur. Yeah, that survived Yeah, it survived and figured out how to fly and steal fish from the water Yeah, if someone came out to me and said listen And I'd never seen an eagle and they're like which do you think is real a floating orb that is alive and follows you or a thing That evolved from lizards that has a knife on its face and flies through the sky killing fish Yeah, it has like like like bone cutters Yes, it's even thicker than a knife. It's a pair of scissors. Yeah, it's a flying pair of scissors a giant scissors faced monster from 65 million years ago. Yeah, that carries away your cat your chihuahua Survived a giant five mile wide chunk of stone and metal that slammed into the earth and killed just about everything except these conty flying lizards Yes Exactly and also look go down under the ocean Yeah, go down into the deep deep parts of the ocean where you see those creepy glowing Goblin things that just live down there absolutely there's things that are there self luminescent Or will bio luminescent like they glow they make light underneath the water. Yeah, how crazy is that? Yeah, why is that any crazier that why is a flying orb crazier than that? It's really not especially when you get to what that orb did it's not like that orb stole his cat and flew away with an Eight on top of a rock like an eagle would right an eagle would steal your cat man No problem. He has no problem. You leave a baby alone with an eagle watch what happens. Sure It'll be crazy. Yeah, it's crazy man and but I hear the difference orbs just fly around the baby and take off Nobody gets hurt. We don't know maybe the orbs plant seeds in the baby Oh, I just thought of the baby. Yeah, change the way the mine works hypnotize the baby Maybe the orbs drive the baby insane, but we the difference of course is that there's a million pictures of Eagles yeah, there's very few pictures of orbs. There's a million pictures of undersea death goblins that glow no pictures of UFOs Well, there's photos of orbs there's photos that people put online that they claim to be orbs The problem is they're very much like our guide in in Utah They're you know, I don't know me maybe everything he said was a hundred percent factual But it was so crazy to hear someone who says they've seen bigfoot They've seen orbs and bulletproof wolves They've seen all these things themselves and they're telling you it's just a spot This is a crazy spot. Maybe he's telling the truth, but it's so fantastical and that is the sort of the same thing that comes along with all of these all these tails whether it's orbs or wolves or any of the crazy things that we were told that these people saw If they are real you're dealing with some crazy unique experience that really I commend you for coming out and talking about it Because I might keep my mouth shut, you know, I probably wouldn't I'm pretty stupid I would definitely talk about if I saw you. I would I would I want to me talking about it I would talk about it But some people didn't want to talk to us and I could understand that first couple that we meant that we were supposed to talk And then the day of shooting they got cold feet and they're like, you know what we don't even want to talk about this It's like the last thing I want to do is be that person on TV talking about something nutty and they're like no No, no, no, no, no, we're not not doing it like they just were done with it They thought about it probably kept him up all night wisely so but Mike didn't give a fuck You know what man? Yeah, you didn't give a fuck it didn't give them didn't bother him at all And he told it to us just matter of fact and I was with him every step of the way I Believe that guy was telling us a true encounter. I don't know what it was I don't know what made me who knows he might have had like a Misfiring of like several key elements of his brain and they might start producing hallucinations in front of him Who knows how much whiskey he drank right before he saw these? Yeah, who knows who knows what cold medicines he mixed up? A lot Who knows? But the bottom line is this guy when he was telling us about this I believe them and if you and I just got in to see it man What a world-changing event that would be but that seems to be a part of the narrative of all this really crazy fantastical stuff It's like if you could be there and see it boy What just changed the world but when you go looking nobody finds shit Ever ever ever it doesn't matter if you're looking for a big foot if you're looking for UFOs If you're trying to find the Loch Ness monster you never Fine shit people finance these giant missions they take these huge radar machines and troll the lock and Scotland every couple of years They spend so much money looking for something that's probably never been there But that's that's what we do that's what human beings do is we try to Expand our understanding of the universe and part of that expansion means investigating claims of bizarre creatures and aliens and UFOs We have to investigate it but the difference between Science and these people is science is comfortable with what they call null hypothesis They're comfortable coming back with no results in saying it's not there The thing that these people don't seem capable of or at least the guy who had seen the bulletproof wolf and Bigfoot and everything is He saw everything. I really think it'd be to see he hit the supernatural lottery He saw Bigfoot the first night he went looking yeah, the first night there people up there There people up there for years slowly going crazy under the moon this guy goes out one night Bigfoot shows up Just did some calls that he learned from watching TV. Yeah TV Bigfoot shows So you know man the problem is that those people are an honor super lucky Their problem is they're just lucky super lucky. Just he's a magnet for paranormal Activity yeah, that's that's definitely what it is. That's what he is. He's a magnet for the paranormal I just think that he is that would be hilarious if it was he was just like this guy who is just you know Not that most charismatic guy doesn't seem like you know any different than you or I But yet the aliens just decided this is our guy. This is why you are go-to dude. Don't be an alcoholic Well, maybe this is why don't live around really stupid people because maybe the aliens landed in his town and everybody else is like Barely a monkey. They're just apes apes with a language and him in his town He's the dawn of the town like he's the smartest guy from miles That's a rough town. They'd looked around. They said you know what this is our guy You know they maybe they didn't do a really good Accurate assessment of the entire population and find out who's the smartest guy here? Okay, let's go talk to Neil deGrasse Tyson. He seems to be totally on the ball He seems like the best guy we could communicate with no They showed up in some meth-addled shit hole of a town and this fucking tumbleweeds fly I'm by and people shooting up in the corners and it's just a mess Everybody look gambling addicts or stealing money and everyone's on some fucking former crank Yeah, and they found all Ryan Ryan was Washington's truck and listen to like conservative talk radio Seems like a normal guy. Yeah, and they're like we found the guy. This is the best America has to offer They just didn't they they look at us like we're so stupid like the way we look at champs I mean it takes a long time of studying champs for you figure out what's the bad motherfucker Champs what's the one champ that figured out how to take the stick and whittle the end of it so he can get the ants easier You know what what does the one champ that figured out how to mimic human behavior and do certain things It takes a long time to find that guy So if there's so much more advanced than us Then we are from champs if it's like that much of a leap. Yeah, they probably well They're look at these idiots. They probably look at this is a sea of idiots. Oh, I find this one idiot That's not eating his own poop. Oh, let's grab that guy and scoop him up and let's show him everything Let's show him everything and see if he can you know perhaps help us enlighten this crazy species Man you're I think you're right because I'm by being by the way if I'm studying champs I'm gonna pick the crazy ones Because it's more interesting who are you gonna take the normal champs you're gonna take the champs it's off by himself by a tree drinking many vodka Staring into the sun making weird noises to summon a mythical creature I get that exiting an Indian casino way drunker than any somebody should be and be allowed to walk on their own Screaming expolives because they lost all the money they've ever made ever on a game of chance Exactly, that's the chip you want to stop Maybe aliens don't believe in crazy people and they try to prove the crazy people exist by finding them and taking pictures of them Or maybe aliens are smart enough to avoid credible people and they figure the best way to get the information They need is to find someone who already has a pension for stretching the truth Yes, and abduct that motherfucker. Yeah, and then when you're done with them go go tell your friends Tell everyone go tell your friends as they say they put them in the front door And they go go ahead go tell your friends dude, and he's just sitting there like fuck You dropped your tequila bottle Don't forget your tequila when you leave. Oh don't worry. You've got plenty of meth in your urine You're gonna come up clean get out of here dude So the guy goes to the police department and tells the story pisses in a cop and they go get the fuck out of here What's in here this can get me hot could drink this and get high for a month? Yeah beat it get out of here scram Storyteller. It's really smart. It's genius. It's a genius thing to do Yeah, the last thing you want to do is abduct some botanical. Yeah, Obama What if Obama feels compelled to tell the world and they actually listen people all to their behaviors start looking for UFOs Put on special glasses like and they live Movie you got a body Piper John Carpenter. Oh school. No one's gonna believe Obama How dare you no one believes him now and he talks about anything much as aliens maybe that would be perfect They'll be ultimate cover come straight to Obama And that's the one thing that like everybody's like, you know what this guy we got to get him out of office Like everybody's fine with drones everybody's fine with paint off the banks Everybody's fine with arresting people from medical marijuana everybody's fine with everything But he says he saw UFO diss motherfucker. Good. Get him out of here God that'd be fun to be an alien wouldn't you get to suck anybody into your ship and do anything you want to them No one can call the police just drop mom go go tell your friends Yeah, tell her text friends by the way, we're invisible to everybody but you yeah Yeah, I mean you don't think that they can make you invisible I mean it seems to me that if you can come here from another planet Pretty much you do anything Whatever you can manipulate in our world. Yeah, you know you might be a bulletproof wolf Maybe that's like the best way to show up sure feel wolf that you could go shoot me Ah, you pretend that they hurt you and then you fly away You turn into mist and you vanish Why me? Why would we assume that they're limited in their ability to exist in matter the way we are Just contained by this biological prison. Yeah, maybe they can be missed Maybe they can do it. Maybe they just appear out of nowhere Maybe they don't get in big stupid ships like we do and fly through the air Maybe they're like oh my god. They're still doing that. Do you know that you can just become mist and appear as like a wolf or something? Yes, maybe they do that. I mean why not wouldn't you? No, that's listen if now This is a big if but one of the gentlemen that I talked to To real what's this person rich to real one of the gentlemen that I talked to this guy rich to real from the JPL labs All right, this guy's super smart JPL lab. I don't know what they do there But it's very important very important rocket sciencey type stuff Yeah, well we were talking about simulation theory and one of the things brought up about simulation theory Was if you don't know that you're in a simulation and as you're in that simulation you create another simulation Like wouldn't that sort of mimic the fractal behavior that the whole universe seems to exist or seems to Seems to show that exists everywhere everywhere you look Well, there's the Fibonacci sequence the way it applies itself to for sunflower seeds or just the fact that you go into the Adams themselves and there's so much space there. Yeah, it's almost like the like the universe and if that's the case and if what we're looking at is just a representation of In artificial created world and inside that artificial created world we're working feverishly to create another artificial world If that's the case then maybe alien life is just simply Someone who decides to Present itself as that inside the simulation I mean if we really are completely in a world of ones and zeros we may really be limited by our imagination more than we're limited by Possibilities we just seem to only be capable of Imagining things that someone has already documented whether it's a tiger or a shark or a tornado It's these things are documented so we'll accept them. Yes, but maybe if it's a simulation There's some shit out there that we just haven't seen in the game yet. Yeah There's some new levels to the movie where you know You pass this area and all the sudden you're in a magic land and bulletproof wolves exist and turn out a mist and they land on your porch And they look at you and you shoot them in the vanish. I mean the ability to have wireless communication Existed when people were beating each other's heads in with rocks and worshipping golden cows the same time always been there It's just they hadn't discovered it yet. So it's true no doubt there's some amazing technology or some amazing Law on the universe that we haven't quite discovered yet that eventually we will that will be as disruptive to society is every other Invention or discovery like that, but these discoveries are not made Generally by people who stink of gin And you go wandering drunk through the desert Staring up into space these discoveries are made by people who have an inclination and impulse and have studied a lot of science and know The process that you can uncover these laws which is why it's so important to approach these things from a scientific perspective Because otherwise you end up with an unprovable thing maybe you saw something but the fact that you're not approaching it Scientifically immediately this credits you you said something that was very important and I want to Reassert it you said that the ability to communicate wirelessly always existed We just hadn't figured it out yet. Yes, but it always existed Yeah, we didn't have the technology to unearth it that's such an important point that you made and I don't think people could really wrap their head around that It's really hard to we can sort of see the future like a little bit in the future like we think about it But whenever we've tried to guess really so off. Yeah, you know like do you ever watch space? 1999 now hahaha. It was a great show. It was a great show But it was 14 years ago supposedly right I mean the show is made in the 70s or the 80s or something like it was the 70s And it was supposed to be about the future in 1999 like space 1999 like this is gonna be crazy. We're just gonna be living in the galaxy in 1999 like they're so off Everybody's always off. Yes, but you know what they never saw on space 99 Google right they didn't have all the answers. They didn't know where they were going. They couldn't they didn't have navigation systems Yeah, they didn't have any of that shit. They didn't have cell phones, okay They had they like they talked to you so there was like a walkie-talkie type situation You know like in the enterprise cook out no nobody saw what we have right now that is completely insane That's right I mean we literally have the power of Immortals if we lived a thousand years ago. We would be some strange freak existence Yes, that you know people had never seen a guy with a cell phone never seen a guy in a car pull up with a cell phone Never see a guy step out with sunglasses on and have a machine gun in his hand all the things that we have today That seem like insane Impossible unimaginable things a thousand years ago. They're totally completely 100% commonplace Yeah, you take you pluck someone from a thousand years ago and drop them into any city in the world and they might go crazy or Pluck someone from a thousand years in the future and who knows what kind of shape you can take right who knows what what You know whether or not you you can even teleport consciousness into other objects and ideas You we have no idea what's gonna be possible and once they start figuring out a way to to put technology deeper and deeper into our lives or we ever become part Technology ourselves some form of cyborg. Yeah, anything is fucking possible when that happens That's right anything's possible and it's the people who have the most open minds that end up making the discoveries that Transform history so that's why it's important for people to not be afraid to explore these things It's just the way you explore it has got to be precise right because if you aren't precise Then you end up in a lot of trouble. I mean best case You end up wandering through the desert Maybe you fall into an ants nest because you're a little too drunk and you know you go home with some stings worst case You've got a little bit more charisma than that fell ahead You know and then you start telling other people like you that you can communicate with Bigfoot And they'll say what really yeah, I communicate with Bigfoot And he told me that I should start a church and the next thing you know You've got someone who started a new religion about worshiping Bigfoot surrounded by Equally nutty people who have no interest in proving anything at all and then that's how religion start and then you know What an evilly happens next the person says that Bigfoot came to them in a dream and said that they have to have sex with your wife I don't know why he wants me to do that But he wants me to do that he wants me to do that or the bulletproof wolf will come And that's how religion start that's how it starts man And that's why it's dangerous and that's why people like that have to be held to actual scientific principles because if they're not then they can cause a lot of problems It's also why what we talked about before it's important to hang out with people that are smart If you hang out with a bunch of dumb people Especially if you're that guy if you can just tell them things like that like you met a bulletproof wolf and like whoa Where's wolf? He tell that guy anyway you you start making things up just to keep yourself entertained because you're dealing with an ape You know your friends in ape right completely stupid. There's people out there that'll just like that once You have a person near you who believes that you saw a bulletproof mist wolf You can definitely get them to give you a blowjob Easy easy. Yeah easy. You could tell them that the aliens told them that you have to give them blowjob or everyone will die Yeah, baby's first. Yeah, you gotta do it. I don't I don't want it by the way I don't want you to give me a blowjob. This hurts me last thing I want But if you don't all the babies die. Yeah, it's thing eats babies. That's gonna come from a wormhole All right, where I'm holes are great too because you don't have to show a launch area You don't have to like pretend that there's like a secret spot where you gotta go to All right, you know what it's when it's a wormhole with something as simple as a wormhole just it's there. It's not whatever Yeah, you know what's wrong? Me this on the cable We put it on the side. Me, this? On the cable. On the cable? Yeah. Anytime we move. The cable connecting is packed. OK, here, I'll put it in the front. No problem. OK. Baby, two monsters. Do you want to talk? Where was I? You were talking. Babies. Baby, yeah. Yeah, you're saying you convince these people that the bulletproof wolves eat babies if they don't give you blow jobs? Yeah. It's not likely, but it probably could happen. Not likely. I mean, look at religion. Look at religion. I mean, I was just telling you about this on the phone, but Joseph Smith would tell girls that they had to marry him or they would be damned to hell. Now, what's the difference? It's, see, that's the problem. Someone had gone to him and said, look, you've got to prove this thing telling you that you can have sex with my daughter. Before you have sex with her, I want some proof. Measure it. Show me the tablets. I want to know who this thing is that's telling you that you to stick your penis in my daughter religiously. You know, you have to hold people accountable for stuff like that, or they will hump you. That's the inevitable result of this, man. The slippery slope ends with you laying back in the desert with some guys sitting on your face like a saddle sleeping your mouth kind of doesn't all kind of all go back to what we discovered when we went looking for Bigfoot. It's really, it's kind of there's a similar thing going on because it's all people that are getting very little physical affection. You know, and this is why they have the free time to be out there looking for UFOs. Yeah, so like nobody wants to fuck them. And so because of that, you develop this deficit, this desperate need for mystery. Desperate need to somehow another validate the emptiness that is regular normal life with Bigfoot, or with UFOs, or with Phil in the blank, whatever crazy thing you believe, Jersey Devil. What do you believe in? Lock that monster. UFO abducting. Well, whatever it is. Meditation. All of it. Channeling. Oh, she's a channeler and a healer. Oh, really. It's very Freudian of you, because that's what you, it's like from a Freudian perspective, what you're saying is that the repress sex drive manifests in these kind of hallucinations or wish fulfillment. Delusions. Delusions. And also, I think it puts you in a community of people that are also idiots, or more likely to hump you. And because, because I like more gullible. Yeah. And yeah. Easier to have sex with because they're gullible, because they lack critical thinking skills, and you can tell them crazy stories. They're much more likely to have sex with you. It's not a new idea. It's not a bad idea. Look, if we know that the primary motivation for most males, 18 to 34, or whatever the hell it is, it's spreading down. It's spreading out. It's spreading sexuality, getting into position to have as much sex as possible, as often as possible, with people that are as pretty as possible. We all agree to that. We know that it's the motivation behind flashy cars, and jewelry, and $50,000 watches. If there was only men on the planet, do you think they'd sell any $50,000 watches? No. No one would buy one. We wouldn't give a fuck. No one's going to have sex with you. Unless you're gay, you wouldn't buy that watch. But if you factor in all the reasons why people do all the things they do by the biggest house, where the fancy is closed, he's always sharp. They're setting themselves up to be a primary sexual candidate. And when that no longer applies, where's your motivation for life? Where's your motivation to get up in the morning? What are you doing? What's going on here? There's no more in the veto, and you're not even remotely attractive. So you can either scrape up enough money doing what you do really good and pay for it, which always feels gross, I'm sure. Never done it. Never. Yeah. I mean, you know what I'm saying? Never do that. Even if I did, what I'm saying is, it would be sad, it was sad, to be some 60-year-old dude who worked his whole life to put together a meager bankroll, and every couple of months, he'd blow some of it on an escort. And in between that, he's looking for UFOs. Yes. Just out there, we've got, we're basically locked down. We've got 100% proof now. What we got here is the smoking gun. This guy actually told us and signed an affidavit. We got the gun. We got the smoking gun. That's right here. Look, it's Bud's gun. If you don't believe in UFOs, you're crazy. Okay, because we got it all. We got it here. We got it now. This is a very exciting time. Yeah. I think it releases information is gonna be no denying. We've got top-level people from all areas of the government who come out with amazing stories. Yeah. Once you hear those stories, it will be undeniable. And then they give themselves this sense of excitement along with reciting this stuff and talking about this stuff. These mysteries are gonna go on covered, but they never do. It's a never do. It's a mating dance. It's part of the mating dance. It's like a tail dimension. They pop up the big foot, tail feather, pop up the UFO, tail feather. You do that after a few drinks, you know? And it kind of dark bar. You'd say like, look, I don't tell a lot of people but I had an incredible encounter in the desert a few weeks ago. And look, I probably shouldn't tell you. No, what? What happened? Well, well, first to start off as a mist. I know you're looking to be funny. It turned into a wolf. Then you started a little maybe a little crying, like you're a little upset about it. Next thing you know, you're back of the day's end enjoying a nice role in the hay with somebody that you've probably drugged. You know what's weird about the people that tell these stories too? This is one thing that I've been noticing. There's people that will tell these stories and they'll tell it to you in a way where you feel like they're recounting a memory. You know, like Mike Miller. That's his name, right? Mike Miller? Mike Miller. He felt to me that he was recounting a memory. But the other people that we talked to, just were saying a bunch of words in order. It's like, it was complete, there's a complete flatness to the way they describe these encounters that doesn't register with you at all. Like they talked to you and they're like, well, I went into the woods and we started doing the Sacred Howell. And all of a sudden, we saw the pyramid in the sky open up and from it came this alien craft. And you're just hearing a bunch of words. You don't, there's nothing connected. This person is, there's nothing connecting them with that story and there's nothing connecting you with that story. They're not trying to connect you with that story. They're trying to say the words in order that they think would make sense if you were talking about a crazy incident that happened. But it was clearly an incident that didn't really happen to them. And there's a sense that we all have for that. It's not bulletproof. It's not 100%. But there's a sense that you have when someone's telling you a story where you know they're full of shit. Yes. And that's a weird thing. It's a weird thing to be in front of people when you know they're not telling you the truth. But we all know what it's like. It's not that people can't trick us. People certainly can trick you. But when you know someone's full of shit, you really do know they're full of shit. You know what I'm saying? Sure. It's not 100%. It doesn't work with everyone. And there are people that are sociopaths. There are people that are really good at lying. There are people that are very charismatic and can, you know, they're con people that can, you know, steal your money. Yes. Fill you out there. They're experts at lying. Sure. Actors. I mean, what is being an actor? It's being a liar. You know, I'm not saying that they would use it in their personal life. But Daniel Day Lewis would be the greatest fucking liar in the history of the world. Yes. Think about how good that guy would be at lying to you. You know, did you spill the milk? And he comes in and he looks like he has an eat in a week. He's fucking hobbling. And shit's his pants. Why is talking to you? You know, that guy would, you'd be like, oh, for sure. That guy didn't spill him out. He would be lying. He's talking to the truth. Poor guy's like, he's got terrible palsy or something. Yeah. And we take him in the bathroom, clean him up, and he punches you in the face and rapes you. You know why? Because he was faking it the whole time. He just wanted to get you to where you were alone with him in a bathroom washing his ass. Because he can't wash it himself. And then he just beats this shit out of you. What are you doing? This is like a erotic Daniel Day Lewis's damn fiction. I didn't know what it is. I don't even know what I'm doing. I went down the road. How did he end up in your house? We started talking. I just made all that up. That's the universe giving me a little gift. It's a gift of, it's called creativity. Doug, I love it. I love it. I love the idea. I know where it comes from. I love the idea of like, someone spilled milk. Daniel Day Lewis comes in. Did you spill the milk? He's like, no, suddenly your washing is asshole. He shits all over himself. Because he scared. He scared him. He pretends that he's really sick and feeble. And you yelled at him. So he just defecates all over himself. He's crying. But he can't wash himself. And that's one of the reasons why he's going to be snot coming out of his nose. He's weeping. He can't even breathe. He's doing it so well. You feel terrible. You're like, we'll clean you up. We'll clean you up. Yeah. So as you're cleaning, he just beats the shit out of you and fucks your mouth. He holds you down. Just punches you in the face to your unconscious. And you wake up because you can't breathe out of your mouth because it's filled with cock. 50 shades of Daniel Day Lewis. 50 shades of Daniel Day Lewis. Some air through your nose. What Daniel Day Lewis just fucking your mouth. Ow! Ow! Why? Because he's an awesome liar. He got you, bitch. Again. And I think that's one of the most important things a person can talk about. Points. Points. I think that's the important point is that there is a slippery slope when you're around a liar that will end with that liar's cock in their mouth. Well, I think there's a real slippery slope with human beings if you are around someone who's trying to be deceptive in order to profit on something or trick you into something or something else. Someone who gets really good at figuring out how to pretend that there's something they're not or they've seen something they haven't. Yeah. Just in order to get something from you. Right. Whether it's your attention or whether it's your money, there's a weird thing where people realize like, oh, I don't have to tell the truth. Right. What I have to do is just make up a good story that allows me to get into a situation or I'm on TV telling this story. And so that's what they do. They just sort of like lump together this idea in their head and maybe they rehearse it, maybe they wing it. And in that case, you just keep asking them about it over and over again over a long period of time. And they slowly start twisting that story around because they don't remember what the hell they told you. Listen, there's so much money in it, man. So much money. So much money. If those, look at the Vatican. I mean, my God, the moment you can convince people that you're in contact with a thing you can't take pictures of or prove and they believe you, you are loaded. You can get so rich and religion has shown this again and again and again. I mean, these people take it to the end of the degree. There, you know, the people we ran into in the desert, the guy thinks he saw a wolf that turns into a mist and Bigfoot. If we drive 10 miles in any direction and go to a church, I can sit you down with a person who thinks that there is living in the sky, an invisible man that is going to destroy all of humanity. And it's all going to happen in Israel. Now that's within 15 miles in the difference between the guy wandering drunk in the desert and the person wearing the funny priest outfit is the priest has people who give him money every week to listen to that story. They drop it in the, they drop it in the collections plate and send that thing around and just listen to that story again and again. The man in the sky, if he gives your sins and he comes down, he comes down. If we're all good and ready, he'll come down and take us away from this terrible planet. No more bulletproof wolves, no more bigfoots, just peace and love forever. That's a gigantic business right now. Those people don't even have to pay taxes. They're such good liars. They have convinced the United States government to not take taxes from their multi-billion dollar businesses. Wow, that's amazing. And that's the end of the thing. And that's the end of the thing. So they're the same thing. They're on the spectrum. They're the successful version of it. The non successful version is the guy who stinks of gin, wandering through the forest, pointing at mud puddles and telling you it's bigfoot prints. The successful version of it is the guy wearing robes and gold and sitting in a gold and throwing and telling the planet that they shouldn't wear birth control. Yeah, I think you're right. Totally makes sense. These guys, it's almost like they can't help themselves. Have you noticed that? It's almost like no matter what you talk about, they just have a story. It just comes out. The ones that are telling like a lot of stories, that's why it's always, they don't just see one thing. Oh, they've seen troop of cobras, they've seen Nessie. They were on vacation scott and we saw Nessie it's real. They've seen everything. They can't even help themselves. Oh no. They want to tell you a stig, want to lie to you? Well, I think there's an evolutionary advantage to it and I think that the moment you begin to realize if you're okay with telling lies, you start making tons of money and people will start having sex with you, then you can see out there's like a profound evolutionary advantage to being a liar. The ultimate liar is the liar believes it himself, who's told himself the story so much that he started seeing it. There's a huge evolutionary advantage to this sort of thing. That all being said, the real problem here is that in this sea of horny liars, there's a few people who've seen something real. You think, yes. Okay, if you had to put all your eggs in a basket and pick, I'm going to give you three subjects, ghosts, Bigfoot and aliens. What are those? Which one of those do you think that anybody has ever seen or had a real experience, like actually something actually happened? I think people have seen hyper-dimensional entities that could be classified as ghosts or aliens. Do you think that they've seen these while sober? No. That's the problem, though, isn't it? There's a variety of chemicals that radically affect the way you see reality. And so the real problem is, do we just set as a standard the level of chemicals that exists in a normal human being without any outside help? And we'll call that like the baseline. Do we accept that? Or tweet down their gourd on magic mushrooms? Because that's also a state of consciousness, a human can achieve if they consume the right foods. I mean, that really is what you're experiencing. So if you, under that situation, have a real honest to goodness alien encounter where you exchange information and you come out of it a better person, like enlightened by the face of this experience, even if it didn't really happen, it's still happened in your mind. That's right. It's still something you experienced. That's right. So that could be an entity. This is why we need a NASA for psychedelics because that's when people are experiencing these, these, experiencing these things. Let's explore it. And I think, you know, a lot of people, and you know, I've done this myself when someone tells you a crazy story, like, well, you high like that is credits the person. But what if the mind is an antenna and what if certain chemicals allow you to tune into other frequencies that exist around us at all time? And everyone knows that we're surrounded right now by all kinds of invisible frequencies, ultraviolet light, radio waves, wireless signals, we are in an ocean of information washing around us that our computer is in our technology, we're able to translate, to digitize and put it in the form that the human mind can understand. So in the same way, the human mind, it's a biocompewter and maybe these psychedelics create an upgrade to the operating system that allows a temporary window into the unknown. And when you see that and you come back to this world and talk about it, people think you're nuts because you can't take pictures of something that your mind is seeing after it's gone into a specific state of intoxication. You can only take pictures by describing it. Now also if you believe that psychedelics can rewire the mind to allow us to see the invisible world that exists around us at all times, then maybe people who are a little crazy see these things poking out from behind the lattice of reality. Maybe they do see it in the same way that when a person who isn't crazy for lack of better word, takes psychedelics. So in that way, perhaps the lens of our perception when it's altered in some way, whether because you're a little on the nutty side or because you've taken some mushrooms, maybe when that lens is shifted, it allows us to see so much more. Yeah, that's very possible. It's very possible that that's exactly what's happening in this area in Utah as well, as this area besides having this one spot where everybody claims all these events are happening. You know what else it has around there? Cattle. Cattle all over the place. The guy had a cattle ranch. We drove past several ranches where this cattle. And where this cattle, this cow shit. Yeah. And where this cow shit in a place where it rains all the time. Yes. There's a party. There's a party. They're going to get some magic mushrooms growing on the cow shit. And if that's all you're doing, you're just hanging out in the middle of nowhere in Utah, eating mushrooms, staring at the rocks. You're going to see some shit. Look man, I've told you this story before. I've eaten mushrooms. I've been attacked by elves. I've seen hyper-dimensional entities. I was on mushrooms and I saw it. I'm not going to go around saying the elves are real, but I'll tell you, when I was laying on that lawn chair, the spa with elves swimming through my body and making fun of my thoughts, it seemed very real. And it didn't seem fun at all. It was an unfun, terrifying experience. And if I'd lived 200 years ago and it just been forging for food and happened to eat some food and that had that experience, I would go back to the village and say, there elves in the woods, there elves, they swim through your body, they make fun of your thoughts, their magic. So I think that psychedelics are component in the experiences that people have of this nature, but I don't think that that means that that invalidates the experience. Well it also brings into account the fact that the brain itself produces psychedelic chemicals. Yes. Without any help whatsoever, the brain produces dimethyl-tryptamine, five methoxy dimethyl-tryptamine, dopamine, serotonin. There's a lot of shit going on in that brain. And all of these chemicals, they come out in varying amounts, just like we have varying dick sizes and some people have shitty eyesight and this guy was born with a bad liver. Guess what? Some people also get endogenous dumps of psychedelic chemicals that can't control. And so they start seeing things. Yes. And this is something that's very difficult to measure. They've just recently figured out how to measure the pineal gland of rats to prove that the pineal gland itself is a source of dimethyl-tryptamine. And so really recently it was just a theory. So now they know that for sure, but the way they had to do it, they had to cut open the head of a live rat. You know, you're not going to let a person do that to them. So we're not even going to find out what's going on inside a person's head as far as the production of this stuff. And we certainly are not going to be able to figure out when it's active and when it's not in these big rushes and bursts. Unless we get more advanced medical equipment or unless we can get right to the source of it, cut open someone's brain while they're in the middle of an activity. Maybe one of those events is very likely. So you're not going to be able to tell whether or not someone who had this crazy experience just had this rush of naturally produced psychedelic chemicals that we know exist in the brain. That's it. Exactly, man. And maybe when they have that rush, they're actually perceiving something that is there in some form, something that exists in the same way radio waves exist in the same way that ultraviolet rays exist. And we'll never know that until we stop the prohibition on psychedelics and start studying them again. But that's probably never going to happen. The experience was still fun. I enjoy going to rural places and the scenery there was beautiful. And Mike had all those pieces of petrified wood that he had found in that area. Apparently, he said it's all over the place. He's found petrified wood and it's really, really super common. It's just a very strange place. It's very beautiful. And they said there's a lot of cougars out there. They see not the chicks that are looking for action. They're over 40. That's not what they meant. They meant mountain lions, a lot of mountain lion activity. And what's her name that took us up there? Shannon. That woman Shannon, while we were walking up to the top of that bluff, she told me she heard a cat. Yes. She said she just didn't want to upset us. I go, how do you know that you heard once? She goes, you could tell what they sound like. She goes, but they didn't want to have anything to do with us. So I just didn't want to alarm y'all. I was like, Jesus Christ. We heard a mountain lion right next to us in the bushes. And she's like, no more. Keep it moving. Keep it moving. It's only nighttime when they hunt. You guys have to be careful with this show, man. Yeah, you're telling me, man. Wondering up and cuz we're saying you do weird spots. Yeah, but it's bad. Look, we're up in Cougar country. Who is guiding us? Captain Crazy Face. Yeah, we're guided through herds of cougars by lunatic. This is the first. I prefer to refer to him as the bulletproof wolf wrangler. The orb caller. You know, the horse whisperer. He's the Sasquatch whisperer. He's the Sasquatch whisperer. It's I think it's if only finding bigfoot new about this guy. You know, if we knew about this guy when we were looking for bigfoot, we would have saved a lot of time to be the guys just to magnet for the stuff. Yeah, bring him out there, hang him from a tree like bait. But when we're around, man, even though he's a magnet for paranormal activity, when we're around, we're such losers that we just jinxed it for him. Well, that's what he thinks. That's what he thinks probably. Yeah. And what if he saw some stuff while we were all out there together, but he didn't want to bring it up unless we brought it up because he wasn't sure if it was real. Do you guys see my grandmother? No, good. Just checking. Yeah, I didn't really. That's not Abraham Lincoln there. It's telling me that I should blow up the federal building Abraham Lincoln dressed up like the silver surfer with a swim cap on the area was beautiful though. You know, it's the ranch itself when we were overlooking the ranch. Gorgeous. I would love to have a ranch like that. It looks so badass. You know, that a ranch house and beautiful trees and a beautiful field. I think that's the real gift that hunting for the paranormal gives you is it gets you out in a nature. Yeah. That's one beautiful thing about it. This thing takes recluses out of their basement and into nature unless you're going for ghosts. That one's sex. Yeah, indoor ghost hunting, but still at least you're driving to other houses and a lot of people go to cemeteries and go outside to look for ghosts. This is nice man because people who otherwise would just be sitting and moldering piles of old diapers spraying deodorant in the air to cover the stench of their rotting cat that died three weeks ago while they stare in the internet at conspiracy theory websites. This gets them out into nature and I think that's a beautiful thing about it. It is. That normally in nature just wandering around, they're probably starting getting depressed. They're probably something, what am I doing with my life? But when you're running for your life inside of a graveyard because you know what ghost is chasing you makes things way more interesting. Way more interesting. It gives you a spark of excitement. You in fact live the exact same life even if you imagined that this would be happening. If you pretended that this would be happening and convinced yourself, you would live the exact same life as if an actual ghost was really chasing you. You're goofy, shitty brain decides to throw some chemicals down the hatch. Listen, this guy is barely hanging on. Let's reward him with a little of the good stuff. They open up some valve in your brain and psychedelic chemicals flow. All of a sudden your shitty life that you're barely hanging on and really thinking hard about jumping in front of a train. All of a sudden it's transformed and you're the one who's been haunted by Richard the Yave from another dimension. He comes out of the ground with a fucking turkey leg in his hands. Yes. He's chasing you around the, hey, it's great. Why not? It's better than his real life, his real life sucks a fat one. Yeah man, well I mean right. This is the eternal problem. Do we embrace the fantasma and the invisible to make our lives glow with the light of of lies or do we just deal with the fact that we exist in an impermanent part of the time space continuum and in a matter of time a few cosmic blinks, our atoms are going to go spraying a part into infinity and we're going to be worm food. That's a hard thing for a lot of people to digest. So maybe they create these mythologies to come for them a little bit. But all that being said, I think that there's some people who maybe actually have contact with this stuff just because crazy people believe it doesn't mean it's not real. It's like that old saying just because what it, how does it go? Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean people aren't following you. Well just because you're crazy doesn't mean that there's no Bigfoot out there. It's true. So we can't just say because the sources have all seemed to have burnt antenna. It doesn't necessarily mean that the phenomena doesn't exist. Let me ask you this. Have you experienced any blowback for your willingness to engage in any of these ideas, whether it's UFOs or Bigfoot or anything spectacular like that, anything paranormal, anything out of the realm of normal everyday life? Have you experienced any blowback? Blowback? Yeah, is there any people like people like judging you for being a wacko conspiracy theorist and talking about Harper, Camentrails, or nothing? Not at all. Everybody thinks I'm a very rational, logical person. I think a lot of people think I'm a scientist. I'm actually being nominated for a Nobel Prize, I believe. My research is bulletproof. No, I mean, honestly, I have not gotten very much condescension because I hang out with you. I mean, look, I hang out with men. I don't get a lot of that judgment, but I think actually it's the other way around. I think you tend to get more judgment from people when you're a skeptic than you do if you're a believer. I think skeptics take a lot of heat, man. You know, I took more heat from the Camtrale episode than anything else I've ever done. On Twitter, more people were upset at me because they believe that I'm like contributing to geoengineering by the elites. Oh yeah. The global elites are mixing aluminum in the jet fuel and using it to control the population. Whoa, that it's actually nano particles in the Camtrales that they're heating up with harp and they're using that to control the population. Like, golly. At a certain point in time, we just go, wow, what am I doing even communicating with you, fuckheads? Well, I love the idea of following that all the way through. So this is what I like to imagine as the meeting where you're on an underground laboratory surrounded by federal agents. I listen, Joe. I think that they're catching on that we're spraying aluminum into their playgrounds. You're a charismatic guy. Can you do this show? Calm everything down a little bit. What do you want an island will give you an island immortal life? And by the way, look, I can turn into a lizard. Wow. Then they send you back into the world to do a show on the sci-fi network. That's their answer to the problem. Yeah, that's how you control the problem. You get dirty comedians who also double as cage fighting commentators. And you have them disseminate the information because everybody knows they are so reliable. Yeah. Accurate with their view of the world. Well, it's not like she's fucked up at all. Well, no, it's not like the guys are marijuana advocate. Hey, listen, we need to convince these conspiracy theorists that there is an actually Kim trails. Give me that guy with a DMT molecule tattooed on his arm. And the other guy who's got that YouTube video of him projectile vomiting. Yeah, man. It's a grand conspiracy. He figures out Dick Fox 79 on Twitter. He's silly bitch. Yeah, man. It's a grand conspiracy. You're figuring this out Dick fuck 79 on Twitter Silly bitch. Yeah, there's there's no getting around the fact that because of the internet you get to communicate with a Lot of people that you wouldn't ordinarily There's people that you would gravitate towards and you find them as well But there's also people that somehow another show up at the party and you're like, oh god What is this and you're gonna have to deal with that? That's part of the whole openness of the complete experience of the internet right as you are gonna have to deal with that Well part of the part of the problem part of the fun man And I but again, that's why I think that you have to hold people with extraordinary claims even more to the fire of logic and truth than other people because it's because you got it that I really believe that there is For lack of a better word a supernatural realm there is something outside human perception that is populated that is possibly populated with Sension beings that aren't embodied. I think that that's possible. It's been reported in every religion every mythology It's a story that keeps coming up again and again and again and every then your own personal experiences Yes, so having had these personal experiences It's something that you you you not only Accept it yourself, but you feel compelled to tell other people about it Yes in the history of humanity is one where humans are being led by an invisible being the world religions have controlled society For a long long time in these world religions all have at their root outside of Buddhism the notion of an invisible entity that as an interest in guiding humans and so This is not just some imaginary thing in the sense that That it's something that people talk about who also huff glue. This is something that's been Controlling the flow of history for thousands of years So I think that it's very important to try to get to the truth of it What's the core is it just the brain is the brain just some drug dealer or our brains just a grateful dead parking lot that from time to time Spray hallucinogenics into us The back of the bus explodes and acid flies through the air like confetti and everybody sticks their tongue out Yeah, is that what it is or is it is that all it is? Is it just that the neurons in our brain misfire a little bit like a like a electrical cable in a puddle and it causes us to see these entities or is there another? Universe that exists that we can see if we learn to control our minds in our consciousness and I think it's important to explore those ideas I think also that our life in this dimension of Conscious reality is filled with so much uncertainty and so much confusion and we have such a inclination to follow others to follow smarter people than us to follow the leader to because we're all basically terrified of what we're doing we're all going through life Barely hanging on because you don't really want to think about the entirety of it all because it's too much I just got to get to the work by X time and you know I punch out at six and then I'm gonna go do that like you that's that's filling your time And it's not by any small Coincidence that that's filling your time. It's because if it wasn't if you really were spending all of your time Contemplating your existence. It would almost be overwhelming. It would almost be too much for you to wrap your head around and Because of that we seek to define our universe in very Certain terms this is real that's nonsense. This this is wood You know, there's no elves in space around me You don't know what you're talking and we are like adamant about our version of reality to the point where people get upset at you If you want to escape this version of reality. Oh, you're looking for a way out Where you scan a reality you can't handle reality you got to take drugs Like people will say that time. What are they trying to do? They're terrified of other people escaping reality too They're terrified of reality. They're terrified of different definitions that they have to have to consider Yeah, of reality everyone is it's not something we address but it is subconscious. It is there all the time. Yep. It's true man and I and I think that the Impulse behind skeptics is a is a is a great impulse And it's an impulse that changes the world for the better when I don't I don't know who was the first person to say that there that diseases were called caused by germs. I wish I did but If that person who started figuring out that oh, I think there's invisible entities that crawl into our body and make a sick if that person hadn't explored that in a scientific way then Who knows what could have happened to humanity, you know we all the all the different cures and Antibiotics that we have that wouldn't have happened. I mean eventually it would have happened But if somebody who had that initial impulse I think there's invisible creatures that get as sick when they started saying that everyone around them They thought they were who they were insane. You know the story of the um I can't remember the name as a doctor who ended up in a insane asylum But because he started suggesting that doctors wash their hands before they deliver babies. Yeah, you would say if you're touching a corpse wash your hands and then deliver the baby and doctors at the time said Gentlemen have no need to wash their hands because they didn't know that there was viruses and bacteria Existing in the world because it hadn't been proven So this guy who came up with this idea that doctors to wash their hands He ended up in a minimalist asylum. He went crazy because he knew this was real He went insane because he knew that there was something called germs and nobody believed in it at the time So that's the that's the great problem all the people out there bugling about UFOs bugling about wormholes and bigfoot and missed wolves they have to let Skeptics interrogate them in the most intense way not to disprove them or show that they're crazy But to get to the core truth and sometimes the core truth is just theirs They're the only one who will really have access to it and if it was some sort of a hallucination or Whether it was real to them, but we can't perceive it because we weren't tuned into whatever frequency and radio dial of the universe They were at the time that it happened the bottom line is You got to bring something back in order for me to take it totally seriously. Yeah, I'm listening I'll listen. I'll try to put myself in your footsteps I'll try to put my myself in your head and try to figure out what you possibly could have been experiencing Why I was all going down, but unless it's happening to me. It's all just nonsense You know and That's that's a real part of the reality that these folks are experiencing and it should be it has to be You know less like an experience at myself There's nothing that I've seen that compels me to believe anybody There's nothing I've seen that compels me that this is an actual UFO landing site that this is a Guy who's been aboard a spaceship that this is someone who's been abducted Apparently to some people that tell me that they're gonna tell me the story of what happened to them And I'm gonna believe it and you're gonna meet one of them you're gonna meet this woman named Nicole dome and You're gonna sit down with her and she apparently Has some sort of an alien implant that she claims she got inside of her body. I don't know the full story But you're gonna learn it and I figured be perfect for you That's your type of person. Yeah, this sounds like an e-harmony date for me freaky tattooed up very pretty girl Who's been abducted by aliens? It's my soul mate. That's it. You're on your other path. This is exciting I've never met a person that has been abducted by aliens I've met a couple people that told me they were abducted by aliens, but I'm pretty sure they were bullshit And like I've never met one person who had a story that I was like wow that this some this seems to be real But I'm told that there's a woman her name is Nicole and you're gonna meet her and this woman apparently has an incredibly believable compelling story And people that have talked to her have said you know, wow like you walk away from it and you go I believe her I don't know and I but I trust your judgment and It's she's right up your alley. She's really hot freaky looking covered in tattoos and She's been a border UFO so mean this is my soul mate. She's soul mate. That's amazing So go meet her and talk to her and you know tell us what's up great. I'm there E-harmony date Okay, tell me about Nicole dome. Wow You're right. She's a beautiful woman Tattoos interesting tattoos She seemed very grounded focused She did not seem anything like Captain crazy cake from what did you call Captain crazy face? He's she didn't see anything like Captain crazy face. She was very focused calm Open She definitely experienced something. Okay. What was her story? She's leaving diner With her friend they want to go play pool. It's late at night. This is a small town She's driving down the road and suddenly they witness this hexagonal light above the car and so she they decide to pull over to look at the light because they're experiencing a UFO and Suddenly she's driving down the road. Yeah, she's a mild down the road and She gets to meet her friends at the pool hall and they're pissed off because she's an hour late and she should have been there in four minutes after leaving the cafe So she had the type of The what do they call that the tip not a progression she know and I am not a progression. She had a time-law. She had time-loss and She and her friends seemed drug after the experience so That's that's her Experience her friend seemed drug. Yes when they were driving down the road after having decided to stop to look at this light They're further down the road with no memory of what's happened They have the typical form of amnesia that I've done piece talk about her friend seems like she's drugged her friend seemed like She's been anesthetized or given some kind of drug to knock her out They both she's her friends groggy. I asked if they if her friend was drunk or that they were high She said no and where were they coming from? They were coming from a diner Is it possible that someone dosed them in the diner? Absolutely Right that is possible that they were seen as much more likely someone who's been an asshole Who's working in the kitchen decide to slip some LSD into their Cheerios or whatever the hell they ate I Seems much more likely well, she Yes, definitely that's a possibility now Her story is not that she ended up in somebody's basement tied to a chair on Cheerio laden LSD LSD laden Cheerios she her story is that Psychics started telling her that something on the left side of her body was off and this happened a couple of times and so she went to a UFO convention and Why are you looking at me like that? Be well because here's here's my feeling you know how I feel about psychics and I think you know how I feel about people that find out something really special happened to them All those things are very suspect the psychic thing is incredibly suspect it also a lot of people are Very susceptible to suggestion and a lot of people are very susceptible to attractive girls with tattoos That's you now. So I knew you were gonna have a problem with reality here Whereas if she was a fat guy with three teeth and she smelled like honeykin You would feel like this guy's an asshole He was a board of UFO. He's trying to give me to look at his stomach man. It was gross He kept lifting up his beer gut asking me if I had a black light And I'm like this guy's gonna try to fuck me. I gotta get out of here. That's what you would have said You were hypnotized by the sweet nectar of youth and the reckless indignation of a girl with tattoos on her tits That's what happened with you You got caught up in the tsunami that is the sexuality of that woman and you were willing to like oh, yeah I'm a board UFO to Skype Your implants. I mean, you know the alien one right? It's natural. It's natural. That's why you know, I mean It's impossible. It's very you know, I'm not gonna argue with you the vehicle telling the UFO story if it is a if it happens to be a beautiful young tattooed Girl, then yes, you know what my ears are gonna perk up a little bit more but I will say that I've run into a lot of pretty tattoo girls Who seem bad shit crazy? They seem like they've been staring at the sun snipping blue You know, it's just because you're right, so I will say that and you can review the tape I will say that she seemed very centered focused her she believed her story and the most compelling evidence that she has is that apparently there is a Scar on her stomach that if you put a black light over it you can see it It wasn't there when she showed it to us at the bar the problem is she's getting this information from a psychic The problem is she's getting this information not just from a psychic but someone who says they're a psychic and almost Everyone who says they're a psychic is full of shit Absolutely, it might be a hundred percent of them, but it's at least 99 Okay, so the odds of her finding the one out of a hundred that isn't full of shit those odds Really suck so then you have a person who is a nice person But a person willing to get tattoos on their tits, okay? She's gang she's gangster. She's willing to take some chances here. Look, I've touched myself. She's willing to take some chances Okay, she's wild. She's willing to go with it. She's willing to go with it. She's willing to go with an idea And she might be willing to go with a memory that some crazy fucking fake psychic plants in her brain and it sounds Real and when you convince yourself a shit like that if you're in so inclined especially and I believe she probably is so inclined to believe the fantastic Common for people who have UFO abduction experiences to have like an inclination towards that type of thing They believe in that type of thing. Yes, which aids the experience confirmation bias And she's only talking about memories. That's right. Well, here's the provable part She is going apparently these beings abducted her the memories that she has are of being put on a Steel table and they did something to her ovaries Possibly put an implant inside of her. She's actually going to get tests Within the next few days to see what's going on down there and to see if there's some kind of implant there and also It's an IED she forgot about You put in what she's in high school. It's just fuck with that thing. Go. I look She has no she has no evidence Right now to prove of course. She doesn't have any evidence But she's going to get it. No, she's not gonna happen She's not gonna happen. How about that? How about hold your breath? It's never gonna appear there's gonna be no evidence. It doesn't exist You're never gonna find it. It lives inside the imagination only I'm gonna scan her with a black light It might be a real experience now Okay, as far as memories go her memory might be as real as my memories of some stuff I did just a couple of weeks ago Which are very shady at best if you asked me about my trip to the mall to get my laptop fixed two weeks ago And I had to recount everything that happened if you could see inside my memory about how shitty it really is And how little I really remember about my trip to the mall I remember almost nothing if you told me I had to pick out where I was parked or the ones I couldn't drive home I'd be like shit. I don't know where I parked. I have no idea where I parked the mall two weeks ago And that was me and that was real. Wow is awake So these memories of this woman has that are pulled out of a dream state Okay, hold out of a hypnotic state suggested to her by a psychic don't they don't even live in her conscious memory A memory that she's piecing together from something that someone told her about some dreams Maybe yeah, that might as well meet my trip to the mall, okay? Because so it's her it is real so when she's telling you that it's real she does feel it's real and when she looks down First of all why is this freak looking at herself with black lights? Well, that's the whoever looks at themselves with a black light. You is at a UFO convention naked No, you're a belly button. No, this is the story for real UFO convention. It shows up under black light Loves They do they show up like ghosts. This is a cut. It does take you and take you a little woman and have a little party on a rubber midsection and then then flash and Blacklight close shut the lights off close the shades use a black light you like oh now I get it Yeah, that's a scar honey. She got caught with a gunshot of load. That's what it is She got caught in the crossfire and some of it was still stuck on her side. Can you please not talk about Nicole? Just Joe it wasn't really Nicole. I never met her. She's it to me. She's an imaginary person But I need to tell you where the black light thing happened because then you can really start making fun of her okay? the So how did she find out about the scar she found out about the scar at a UFO convention? She said that there was a booth where someone had written in black sharpie scans for alien implants and You go into the booth and they make you take your clothes off and they run a black light over your body and they tell you They tell you if you have an airplane or not Life is beautiful It's really beautiful Life is a beautiful thing because it's a play it's it's we're watching it all play out It's really a grand piece of artwork that's constructed for our amusement. There's no other way The way that could be real there's no other way that someone could have a booth at a UFO conference where you have to take your clothes off And they look at you with a black light which oh just so happens to show loads all the loads on you All the loads on you glow like one of those Panther paintings that you had in high school remember those black light posters that you had the Panther had like yellow teeth and claws Yellow eyes and little little red with his mouth. We tried dealer headline. Those are the shit That's what they're looking The idea is so hilarious that that's how she found out about this that it really feels like we're in the middle of a Cohen brothers movie yeah We're this this is that this is a real person And this is really happening in today in 2013 in the modern era of smart phones Pressing Google asking it where to go. It gives you directions in this world Someone finds themselves naked With a black light going over their body while some white guy with dreadlocks is telling them about scars that they got because they were picked up by aliens She said the guy worked at NASA Porsy dick He's a clean-up guy clean-up of spoons. He's a NASA clean-up booth guy They have a they have a peep booth at NASA. It's very you know a lot of those astronauts They're a very stressful job. They need unwind. They like peep booths. This guy. He's the official mapper Well Shows up with a black light apart. He's Thank you for everything rocking It's fucking guys got his own black light Jesus Christ. I've got glow sticks to the dickhead. I Agree man. It's this so you believe this woman. I believe This is a part that's gonna get on TV People don't think these are real podcasts now. You know you folks. Okay. I believe that she Experienced you believe that she's hot and hypnotic. Let's start with that. She's hot. She's hypnotic and you and I both know The you've always had a thing for tattooed-up girls Especially girls with good work. Let's be honest who doesn't that's a dangerous woman willing to take chances and if you're a stand-up Comedians, that's a kind of person you need in your life. Yes, right? Okay, okay, that's all she's gangster Yes, okay, so you like that right? Yes, me too. All right, go ahead So you're infatuated you're intoxicated this beautiful woman. You got you're so close to you can smell her and she's showing you her little scars And you're like wow yeah, I can totally see it Yeah, we maybe we can get a black light, you know, we can look at each other's bodies We need it's cool. I mean, I'd like you know, why I have one shit in a beauty. Maybe I do too Next you know, she's wearing your fedora your both naked You still got your socks on Black lights going back and forth in a dressing room somewhere Yes, yeah easily man. I can see it Okay, you're not really gonna give me an accurate assessment of what really went down I would I need to be there with you. I need to be there with you to watch your chemical makeup to watch your body shift like a giant human mood ring I All the sudden you just green with horniness is you're glowing like the Hulk You're a mood ring it would start cracking at the seams you would be able to take the g-force of Green that's pumping into the size of this poor fucking mood ring. Here's the thing like a big aquarium trying to hold in sharks Explodes takes your finger off with it just because okay, so just because a pretty girl is Talking about aliens doesn't mean that a person's showing your skin lifting up her clothes. She's going this Seven inches from my pussy if you went from my pussy up with your fingers you And a bill like seven inches look man all of what you're saying is accurate It doesn't mean she wasn't abducted exactly exactly. It's like you said earlier Just because your paranoid doesn't mean enough following yes Just because you're a beautiful tattooed girl with an invisible scar Doesn't mean that you didn't get abducted by aliens just because you're a crazy liar It doesn't mean you haven't really been a board of UFO. That's right. That's right. That's exactly right So you know that's why I'm looking forward to getting the results of her tests You guys gonna stay in touch I'm gonna send her an email you're not gonna believe this is the way they just came out with a new type of black light That works best on naked girls. It's amazing. I'm an Amazon prime member and it's Already here look it's here. Well, you can come over and try if you want. I mean, I'm totally cool with it Which is dark out she has a boyfriend. Okay. I'm sure these are just jokes folks. We don't mean anything We're saying not at all, but okay, but what I am saying is that I'm not entirely sure That you were the hard-nosed private eye that I would have liked on the case No way man Of course not of course not god man Hey, man, even if it was a charismatic man, okay, I have often wondered if Tom Cruise is trying to convince me of something I've seen Tom Cruise give interviews. Yeah, he's incredibly convincing. Yes, okay I've seen Tom Cruise argue with people but stuff you don't want to be an argument with Tom Cruise now And if Tom Cruise is telling you about his UFO abduction You might be might be inclined to believe it man Might be inclined to believe it. He might be so charismatic that he could just hit every note exactly the right way with the right amount of Pause the right amount of sincere emotional content You know man, I have no proof of this and I'd say if this goes on the show You're all getting huge lawsuit But I heard that Tom Cruise pays guys to come into his gym when he's working on the rape him Let's head it that out Okay All right, we wrapped up Nicole dumb Start with a question We don't know okay, okay, okay, okay, okay, okay, okay So what were your impressions of Nicole? She was a very focused For more information about this much with this conversation you're not gonna get all of it, okay Sorry sci-fi dot com. They're not gonna. They're not gonna show all this shit But for more information go to sci-fi dot com. We have a lot more of this up there. We had to edit this. It's a 44-minute show folks. Yes Okay, and then What it's all right to say the camera Yeah, yeah, yeah, it doesn't matter Okay What do you think would happen we good we good? Have you ever thought about what you would do if you were abducted? Yes What do you think would happen? I'd scry and scream and try to keep whatever I could out of my asshole? Would you or would you worry that if you didn't give up? They would just you know paralyze you and do horrible things to you. Maybe maybe even kill you Yeah, I mean I think that that is what happens is they end up paralyzing you do you think the people have ever been killed by UFOs Yeah, I don't think so. I don't know man. I mean killed by UFOs. Yeah, no I don't think people have been killed by UFOs, but plenty of people say that they've gotten sucked up onto these ships and Some people think that it's you have us some people say it could just be government agents by the way if you're a Here's a thing if you're an inventor, but you're also a perv all you have to do is have a levitating craft that can suck people into Cool getting pop. You have to be so ahead of the curve though and you fund that thing You have to sell it you have to sell them to fund it and then it would go public And then it would get out and then people would be careful and where special Tim foil hats don't allow them get sucked into your giant Rapeshamp people talk about it if you get sucked up into a UFO and you get probed as they call it People talk about it. Yes, it's essentially violating experience You get taken into some guys trailer like if that happened to you or you're just walking down the street and somehow you got hypnotized by like a spiral Right in a trailer park and you ended up getting like Probed by some red nak good wanted to shove his water bomb inside of you right you wouldn't talk about that Right that's not a story you share But somehow if you get taken up into a silver trailer in space and get probed by a thing It's like hey, I got probed. Well, it's always a medical experiment. It's never sexual in nature So aliens are creeps okay, so if you were abducted, but are they who's creepier in the alien or the zookeep The alien why because they do it to people how about the guy works to see world? Tells dolphins they have to flip or they don't get fish Who's creepier? I say that aliens are less creepy because they seem to leave us in the wild They don't seem to keep us they don't seem to be like kidnapping people left and right and sucking them up in a giant space Zeus I say the aliens are less creepy than the zookeeper Let me ask you this if I told you that I drove around in my car and from time to time picked up stray dogs and shoved my fingers into And then put him back out in the street Would you think I was creepy? Oh Look, I love you man, so I'm not the best person to judge. I'd forgive you. I'd say these probably shouldn't do that man It's probably bad karma But it's not like I would write you out for something like that Friends dude But I think that I mean I don't know that like I said I don't know anyone who I legitimately believe they're alien abduction experience But I think that I mean I don't know that like I said I don't know anyone who I legitimately believe they're alien abduction experience so I don't know what's happening I don't know if it is just in fact the memory that someone has introduced into their mind and they the related is if it was a fact but much like my real memories they're very sketchy I've had some beautiful moments in my life and I look back on them and they're just flashes and trying to try to piece it together you know try to piece together some of the most memorable spectacular events in your life and they still they come off like weird slide shows of blurry images and a narrative that you can follow in your head because you know it because you remember it and also because you said it a bunch of times you told people about the experience but the reality of your memories they're terrible so it's so hard to say what exactly is going on well you know what those gray aliens look like right they look like and I think someone else has posited this theory but if you look at the gray aliens and you take a doctor with them with a medical mask on and you look at him delivering a baby the first thing a lot of people see is this that kind of shape that kind of thing and when you're taken out of the womb and suddenly they're running medical tests on you which is what happens when you're born they weigh you they do all this weird shit to you I don't know exactly what then that is a very traumatic experience and some people say that alien abductees are actually reliving the trauma of birth that's what they're experiencing is the trauma of being yanked out of a very warm safe place and being poked and prodded by beings that you can't possibly understand because you've never seen another human being in your life it totally makes sense and also it's sort of makes sense why there's such a clinical nature to all these experiences it's always these cold tables and poaks and no one's talking you know it's loving and warm and comforting it's always just medical and cold and sanitary and very dark and bleak and the room seems impossibly large and bright yes it's exactly what it is yeah it's probably just an implanted memory that's distorted radically over the years and added to with dreams and all sorts of other paranoia is that you gather up and stew together of the course of a lifetime yeah and then while you sleep and they all come boiling together my ship yeah me while you're just a baby yeah you're just a baby shit all over yourself screaming for the first time staring at a fluorescent life when you've been inside of a pussy for the last nine months you don't have a fucking clues to what you're saying now you're not remember that there's a big question why would we assume the kids don't remember them because some people say you try to block it out of your memory because it's so traumatic it's a horrible thing especially if you get circumcised you know spraying out of that thing and they snip the tip of your cock off exactly exactly and how but if it's done in North of Doc's Jewish way where the the oil has to suck on it stuff the bleeding I try to forget it yeah they'll you remember that you don't want it I don't even want to think about it happening to other people will you answer my question for me well how I feel about being abducted I was gonna turn the same question myself what would you do exactly try to stop stop from going to my butt that's it that's what you do so what you do because it probably doesn't really happen you know what I don't think it really happens and if it does really happen I don't think it happens physically I might be wrong I might be wrong but I don't think it happens just not enough no no videos it's not a single like security video of a guy like leaving his body and flying through the walls and aliens come and taking him away and how the wife getting up to pee in the middle of the night and the husband's gone she calls 911 and 10 minutes later he just appears magically underneath the covers there's no there's none of that there's no video there's no nothing help there's a bunch of weird people that are telling weird stories and that's all you get and that's all you're gonna get bank on it put it all in the bank bed it all on black you don't have a fucking chance no one's pulling anything back no one's gonna get a picture no one's gonna have an implant that's worth it shit no one's gonna have a single photograph that doesn't look like bullshit no one there'll be nothing there'll be no evidence until there is there'll be no evidence I think that we never get to that point how about that I think human beings get lodged into a simulation long before we ever figure out how to really leave this planet and I think that probably happens exactly the same all throughout the universe I bet the only space travel that people do is inside of simulations I bet no one ever gets past it this is what life does life creates an artificial reality as soon as it knows how to and jumps in there they create an artificial version of what they would like when they figure out that the the human synapses are just a bunch of ones and zeros need a boil it down and copy it and duplicate it yes I think they just that's what we do no one ever gets anywhere it's a well I mean it's so much more economical to it is I mean it's easier to go into the depths of your mind than it is to build some kind of ship and go flying to a dead planet yeah look at dirt look I could be wrong but I don't think anybody ever goes anywhere I could be wrong but I don't think any of these abductees have ever left their bed I don't think that anybody that's telling you these stories is ever really experienced anything in a physical sense doesn't mean it didn't really happen but I think that if you could put a camera over them while they slept and when they woke up in the morning with this fantastic story about you and see nothing I'm afraid that you may be right it could just be a subjective experience it could be some kind of traumatic memory it could be a lot of things that are in the subconscious mind but one thing's for certain a lot of people have had this experience now why they're having it who knows but yeah you would think with the number of people are having this experience you drive down the road and look to the side and see people getting sucked up into the sky and so clouds coming back down confused people have things Duncan they have seen things Duncan you just don't know the stories you know you're sitting here all smug but if it happened to you man imagine imagine if it happened to you and no one wants to believe your story you're worried about telling people at work they might think you're crazy you use your job you can't feed your family right you can't say bro because you're sitting here all smug must be nice must be nice to be a stand-up comedian living in Los Angeles I'm in a trailer parking Oklahoma someone suck me out of the sky and now I can't tell my boss the cold monitor I might lose my fucking kids my wife's doing meth my fucking tires flat okay what do you want me heard you're not kind of an asshole Duncan you know that hold you talking a lot of shit about people that have actually had unique experiences I'm sorry about you know my life Duncan you don't know what I have what happened to me that night changed me forever yeah I bet you're like the worst of the you ever think out I'm the aliens are when they abduct back oh god he's playing golf drunk in the middle of the night they scoop him up put him back you guys are dicks okay if I was super fucking advanced I wouldn't just be stealing people why they play golf spit in their face and shit but that's that you know that is one thing man that like what do you you know what if you could just like overpower the aliens like you get you never hear about people getting abducted and then wrestling the aliens to the ground these are apparently these frail little beings what if you could fight them I think that the idea is that they've reached this point where they control matter with their mind that's where they have these giant heads at a way bigger than ours that's why they don't seem to talk with their mouths yes look at me I'm like adding to the folklore I'm just making shit up I don't know what if any of this has ever happened ever but I'm like culminating a bunch of different idiot stories well they communicate with their minds yes they do Duncan what they do is basically implant ideas in your brain by the way JPL you mentioned JPL you know where that comes from right that's John Parsons laboratory you know John Parsons was right John Parsons was at the rifle man John Parsons was the devotee of Alice Parth Parsons Parsons was a devotee of Alice to Crowley who that's his laboratory so that Parsons he believed in extra dimensional entities and he would say prayers before he did any of his tests with rocket fuel and stuff and Eloron Hubbard the founder of Scientology stole his girlfriend because they used to hang out you can look that stuff up it's all 100% true there's a crater on the moon named after him now Alice to Crowley he once tried to summon an entity this is way before people were talking about aliens and the drawing that he drew of the entity looks exactly like the gray aliens you can look that up exactly like a gray alien so follow that weird maze maybe it's Jack Parsons I can't remember which Parsons that's the rabbit hole son that's the right hole we're done anything else we good