The general can experience. But this is another one of the really big realizations I had doing DMT. So we should talk about that. So since doing DMT, which I did it two weeks ago, I did it twice in two weeks, I had this overwhelming sense of like some people do DMT and then they start seeing people as NPCs. I've heard that talked about like they start seeing people as like these are not real people with souls and like that's strange to me. Who's of them? They see it all the time. People like I've had friends who do it and they start seeing people as NPCs based on what kind of trip they had. Like if they saw the elves or didn't, if they just saw cool colors or didn't. And for me, I'm like, so you're saying that if people have a DMT trip and they didn't see the elves and they think of that person who had that DMT trip as an NPC, like you don't have like a soul because you didn't really connect with like any beings, you just saw pretty color. Like a very simple experience. You know what I mean? I had the opposite from after doing a DMT. I see so much more humanity and everyone I'm around. Like I feel very changed after doing DMT. The very profound experience. And like I'm just noticing more things about people and being more aware of like their body language and they talk to me and it's, I think it was a very positive thing doing DMT. My experience was the closest thing to a spiritual experience that we've ever had because I've never been a person that's been terribly connected to like anything larger than me. I've never been religious and I've never been spiritual and I'd say it was the closest to like a spiritual thing for me. I think it is a spiritual thing. I think it's an undeniably spiritual thing. That's the thing about it is that it forces you to think about love and connection and the bonds that people have with each other in a way that you don't get from anything else. The powerful experience of a transcendent psychedelic moment is, it's not like anything anything else you experience in life other than maybe like a near death experience. But you could argue that the same thing. I know people that have had near death experiences that swear that it was like a DMT trip. I'm sure. And I think, I don't think it's confirmed but people say that it's what happens when you legally die or medically die. It's like you have a DMT trip. And I could see that. But it's not confirmed but there's a lot of it. There's a lot of evidence of points to that. I could see that. And in a way made me less fearful of death because I was like, it doesn't what happens at the end. It's a great feeling. I'm okay with it going out like that. You just get this for me at least when I first was hitting it. And then you start to leave the planet. I felt like this intense set of rings going around my body. I've just warmth and happiness and love. And then all of a sudden I'm in space. And I did see an elf, which is what people call them. What did it look like? Kind of like a court jester and it had like squinky long arms. And it sounds like crackhead shit if you'd ever know. I know not to use it. I know not to use it. A lot of people have a shared like physical description of what these things look like. One of my most profound experiences, there was a bunch of court gestures give me the finger. This flipping you off. They're like fuck you openly mocking me. And I was like what? Killing your ego. Well, I realized I take myself too seriously. Like as they were doing it, I was like I know what you're saying. And they went like this. Like chill out. That's it. Like I got it. Like while they were doing it, I was like, oh, I get it. I got it. Yeah. That's the thing is like they come and experience people who meet the elves or the gestures or whatever you want to call them. They have like something to like teach you. So for me, it was kind of similar to learning not to take myself seriously, but it was more so don't take life so fucking seriously. Trust the process of life because I'm someone who even though I'd like to think I have my life pretty together, I still worry about everything so much all the time. I'm always stressed out. And the elf was telling me like does everything have to be a fight player? Is everything a war? Are you worried about everything? Like kind of clowning me a little bit. It was kind of clownish. Like really is everything that serious? Yeah. And I was like yeah, I'll just chill out. Yeah. And it was like that simple. Like okay, I'll chill. It's good that you can grasp that and have that experience and learn from it because a lot of people can't and that's when they have bad trips because they try to fight it and they try to resist. No, no, no, no, no. No, anything. You know, I'm not all sudden you're in this fucking death spiral. That was my mistake with shrooms. I did shrooms about a year ago. It was actually when I was evacuating LA because the riots went open some friends in the mountains. Let's do shrooms. And it was my first time doing it. And the person who was supplying said shrooms basically gave me a huge plate like this big stacked it covered it in shrooms and said eat all of them, which is very irresponsible for so many first times. I don't know. I just know it was a plate covered in shrooms. Show me your size of the plate. Give me an example. Oh my God. So this is like a dinner plate. Like when you go to like Ruth's Crest and have a steak. Yes. Yes. But it was shrooms. And I have never done shrooms in my life. Because until you do a psychedelic, you have no concept of like an aleck. Right. Like we doesn't anything close to it. And I have no same planet. So I ate all of it. We walked down to the water and then the whole world changed. But the difference between shrooms and DMT is like to me with shrooms, you're still on earth, even though earth heavily distorted. And that's because you have your eyes open and you're walking around. That's true. DMT, you leave earth. If you were in silent darkness, if you were alone by yourself in the dark. And you were laying down on mushrooms and just closed your eyes. It'd be very similar. Oh, okay. That makes sense to me. Yeah. We were walking around and there's something about doing it. Like we were in this neighborhood in Big Bear with all these like cabins and like I was started getting so freaked out that everyone was just watching from their houses. And it was me and five people. And so we were all tripping, walking back to the cabin from the water, holding hands, walking slowly. Oh my God. And I was like are people looking at people? They probably are. Look at these freaks holding hands. No, yeah. And we were all like social media people or whatever. We were like, we're going to film this. It's going to be on YouTube tomorrow. Wow. We fun. Yeah. I wouldn't have been ashamed. It's not the best idea to do that publicly. A lot of people wind up doing that. They do it publicly and they trip balls and they walk around. Or to eat a whole fucking plate. Yeah. I should have had one little room. That's a good way to start. Yeah. The good way to start is like one and you get like a little feeling. Maybe like like a do a gram. You know, nothing crazy. Before you want to get into like the three to five gram, like yikes. I think it's also very important to do it when you're maybe in a good place in life. Like I would never want to do it if I wasn't a bad place. Like when I did shrooms, half of my trip was really, really scary and really bad because I wasn't a bad mindset. Like LA was on fire. I was escaping. I felt unsure about the world. Right before we tripped, it was like a news report like Trump going into a bunker as protesters, a send-up on the White House. And I was like, let me escape this. I don't think it's good to use it like as a scapism. Shrooms. Did you have to go to a bunker? Is that real? I think they, I think he denied it after that. But I remember in DC when it was the riots happening and I think they moved Trump to a safe place. I'm sure he would deny it. But when I did GMT, I did it very recently. And I'm in like one of the best places of my life recently. Like I'm in a new city that I'm actually really enjoying. Even though it was a tough transition at first, been through a couple of those. But I'm just very happy. So I wasn't escaping anything. I was like, teach me what you have to teach me. Right. Yeah. And then the second time it went even farther. It's very bizarre that it's so there. It's so easy to get to. It's just 15 seconds away. It's one of the most insane experiences that a human being could possibly encounter. Yeah. If that was a thing that you could like a ride at Disneyland, it would be a mile long. Mile long line to get into that fucking thing. Right. Everybody would be like, I want to go on that ride. Right. Because it's so fucking crazy. Yeah. And just the fact that I don't know. So I had a lot of resistance towards ever trying psychedelics for a while because I did grow up in a household where everyone was addicted to drugs and my brother was in prison for selling drugs and heroin and all that kind of shit. Right. So I was like, I'm never going to do drugs. But then like, I just see psychedelics a bit different. It's not meth. It's not any of that shit. It's not. They are very, very, very different. Yeah. It's a whole different thing. And like, it's really hard to even articulate what the trip is with DMG specifically without ever doing it. So like people were telling about the elves and I was like, y'all are crackheads. Don't tell me about some fucking hell. It was about to meet. The problem with the term drug is it's a blanket term that you could use for caffeine. I used for nicotine, use for alcohol. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of drugs. Yeah. A adrenaline's a drug. And while I'm sure it's possible, I can't imagine after now doing DMG twice. I can't imagine someone becoming addicted to it. Oh, I mean. I mean, I know about that. I know a guy was a tattoo artist that was doing DMT every fucking day, more than a time of the day. And then finally the entities had to sit him down and go, hey motherfucker, stop. Stop. Like you're going to lose your grip on this world. Wow. It literally told him to stop doing it. And he said, see, it's such an intense experience for me that I couldn't imagine why not every day. It's kind of like I did it and I'm good for a while. This guy's an intense guy. That's fucking nuts. He's a wild dude. He's an artist who does bio mech tattoos, you know that bio mech type of art. You know what I'm talking about? Bio mech. See the Google like bio mech art. My buddy has a sleeve done by this dude. His art's incredible. Oh, okay. That makes sense here. But his is more like that, like that, exactly like that. So it's like almost like alien. That's cool. Yeah. Like that kind of shit. It's a certain style of tattooing called bio mech. And this dude was fucking, he still is, it lead at it. That's a cool thing to specialize in that type of tattoo. Yeah, that's a little different. That's more like it. That's more like it. That's kind of, it's all this weird sort of alien looking fucking. I would imagine you have to be an intense guy to even know how to do that. So yeah. Well, it's also to specialize in that one particular style of art. It's like his vision of life was like all fucked up and distorted and twisted. One of the people I did DMT with wasn't told to like not do DMT anymore by the hours, but was told like, you know, you don't have to come back anymore. I'm also in a gentle way. We came out of our trips and the friend was like, they told me I don't have to come back anymore. I don't know if you know it. He's like nine. I'm like, maybe take a break then. I'm done at nine. I've done it more than nine. Yeah. Yeah. I think I haven't done it a couple years though. So maybe I could get back in there and have a conversation. But the, like I said, the last time that I did it was probably the most intense and the most weird because when they were giving me the finger. But it was like, I've never like, but it's just, I think sometimes what we, what people do and what I've certainly done is you protect yourself from criticism or your protect yourself from your own analysis of your, your correct and incorrect thoughts and actions by bullshitting yourself. And one of the, the ways that you realize if you're bullshitting yourself is like, how do you react to satire? How do you react to being mocked? How do you react to people not taking you seriously? Do you go, huh? As their prerogative good luck or do you go, fuck them? I'm going to fucking make a response video. Oh, right. You know, and the, the aliens or the, whatever they were, the gestures and they all had the little bells, the little hats. Yeah, it's so crazy. They look like little courtyard. It's not. They, they, but they were going like this. Fuck you. And they were like openly mocking me and my initial response was, hey, and then I realized like, oh, they were like, ah, that's it. You got it. I was like, they're kind of sarcastic. Oh, yeah. Well, they know you're bullshitting. No, all of your nonsense. They know all of your thoughts. They know, I mean, whatever the fuck they are, whether they're a part of your consciousness or whether these are intelligent entities in another dimension that you're interacting with. See, that is what I've been questioning since doing this. So I was told by a friend who's done DMT a lot that after you do DMT, pay attention to the real world. And if you believe that the elves are real beings that are independent of something created in your own brain due to the DMT, don't like send you a sign, right? And I was like, again, crack at shit. No, I'm not going to meet the elves in real life, right? So one of the things in my first trip that they kept telling me was this is not the end. This is not the end. They kept telling me that because I think I was asking them like, is this what happens when you die? Like, what is this? They said the phrase, this is not the end multiple times. Directly after the trip, we go to a restaurant. And I wasn't liking the inner, like those are like a glow after DMT that you kind of want to maintain. And I didn't like the energy in the first restaurant. So I was like, let's leave. Went to another restaurant. What was wrong with the energy? The people were just weird. I don't know. It's like, you create like a bubble when you do it with like friends and you're like, I don't like what they might do to our bubble. So then we go to another restaurant. And there is a huge sign that just says, this is not the end on the thing. And I'm like, whoa. What? And then I looked at my friend who told me to look for signs and he's like, told you. So I'm like, I mean, I'm not saying that I think that they really are beings. I'm going back and forth between that.