The general gonna experience. Do you know the wacky conspiracy theory? And this is wacky about the South Pole, the South Pole is some sort of a direct energy weapon. Weapon that there's like some station down there that they've pretended is just for receiving, but it's actually for transmitting. I have no idea if any of this is nonsense. It's just fun. It's fun when people talk crazy. But this guy was on the Sean Ryan show and he is a air quotes whistleblower. And he's explaining how he went down there and he read the operating manual for this device and this device caused the earthquakes and Christ Church, New Zealand. And I was like, what? What is this? It's so hard to know if you're just a comic and Austin. I don't know what's going down on the South Pole. I mean, like I said, whenever somebody sends him, wow shit to me, I start asking him, what other shit do you believe? So I can know how believable you are. Because if you believe, because you might be one of the people that just believe is bullshit easily. Everybody says give us a volume. And every single door in the facility, I had complete access to every compartment they manufactured. What do you know in the West Lawn? That there are technologies at the South Pole station that people can't even consider that exist on this planet. Directed energy weapon systems is something that people need to get in the aerocadulary fast. The Ice Cube Neutrino Detector is not simply a passive listening device as presented for the science that they're claiming it to do. It also has the capacity to transmit. There are embedded in the ice, what are called digital optical modules, doms. They're about the size of a basketball. The array embedded in the ice is one kilometer by one kilometer by one kilometer. It is the world's largest telescope and now because we have proven that it can transmit, it's the world's largest direct energy weapon system. It is responsible for the earthquakes in Christchurch New Zealand. I physically... Okay, when he says one kilometer by one kilometer by one kilometer. Does he mean it's one kilometer? High? It's one kilometer. Long and one kilometer. Wide? I think that. A whole kilometer into the ground. Yeah, he could have just had a cube kilometer. Well, it can... It kind of... I mean, it's more impressive, I guess. Just to think about, it goes a kilometer into the ground. He's a former firefighter contractor. Great deal. I'm exposed to companies, a ledge ability to create earthquakes worldwide, linking to hidden, directed energy weapon systems at South Pole Station. So what is this... How would being a... How would a firefighter contract to have access to that? I don't know how any of this is real. I have no idea. I don't know what his job was. What's his name, Eric Hecker? Yeah, I was trying to look at my... I don't know, man. It's a nice patch as on his jacket, though. Yeah, yeah. I mean, you full of shit until I see some proof. You know, because you were extraordinary claims... Like, required... ...are required. ...are required for evidence. You're saying some wild shit? You gotta at least show me something. Yes. Good point. Yeah, you were... Because you were a firefighter contractor, I don't feel like you would have keys to the secret death rate. You know? Well, I think what he was saying was that he was reading the documents of the owner's manual. And that's when he realized that it's capable of transmitting. I believe he says that in the show. Yeah, but how would... Again, how would a firefighter have access to manuals and shit? I don't know. Yeah, that's crazy. And why he's still alive. This is what the thing he's talking about is when I Google it. Antarctic, move on and neutrino detector array is what it's called. And it goes... Let me see what it looks like. The neutrino detector is real. Right. But that's... But the facility on top of it and... Whoa, look what happens under the ground. Yeah. Holy shit. But the reason it has to be so deep under the ground is... So it's protected from solar... From like extra shit. So they know when it gets hit that it was neutrino. Right. So it's real like a lot of the stuff he said was real. But here's the thing we also know, Joe, is that the best place to hide the lies between two truths. The best bullshit is, they say a lot of true shit. And they sneak the bullshit in there. Right. He's like, oh yeah, the neutrino detector is this and this and this and this and that. Yeah. And did you know it can make you gay? And Arctic move on a neutrino detector array. The shield provided by looking for only upward going neutrinos that must have passed through Earth. Something no other known particle can do. Oh, wow. So it's through Earth. Right. Neutrinos don't interact with matter almost at all. So that neutrino detector is way, way, way, way down and they're waiting to see like sparks of light. So they know that was a neutrino. But if they put it on the surface, I think they can't tell the difference between one that came. Because they're pouring out of the sun. Right. So they're looking for ones that have passed through the Earth that have come from other places. Wow. So they know for sure. So every now and then it's so unlikely that one will interact with matter that like it doesn't happen that often. You know, isn't it crazy that they spent that much money to build that thing to find that out? Yeah. So and also the so that's the thing is guys saying I don't even understand how that would work. How could it be both things? Right. How could it be a detector and also a trans... Yeah. Because I think it's just a pool full of some special kind of water, with some special kind of liquid that you know that it's enough where it makes a neutrino more likely to like hit it. But I don't know if we could hit a nucleus or something. But so I don't understand how that's gathering power that it can transmit. I don't know. I don't know. The thing about people like that, and I'm not saying this guy's not telling the truth. But I'm saying when I see stories about like someone talking about like some alien base that's underground and just aliens down there. And one of them shot at me with a laser beam. You were hiding some shit. Like one of the best ways to make it seem ridiculous that you're hiding some shit is get some guys out of his fucking mind to go tell some wacky ass story. Fill and full of lies. Tell them. Yeah. You know we started the earthquake in Christ Church, New Zealand. It was started with this thing. And then you tell him. Yeah. It's actually a transmitter. And then you have the guy go down. And now everybody's like, oh, if that's kooky, the idea of doing that is kooky. It directed energy weapon. It's kooky. When me, Ron, it wasn't even that. They got a real one somewhere. So now they've discredited the whole idea of directed energy weapons. I mean, they got some shit out in the desert in Nevada that's real. The government loves conspiracy. I mean, why wouldn't they? If I was running some top secret program like a directed energy weapon, I would have someone give them bad information, give them fake stories and then have them go expose it. Like have someone who's like most likely to blab. And then have that person give them this knucklehead story. And then he goes out and says it. And then everybody researches it. You just tell Roseanne. You just tell Roseanne. Tell Roseanne of the secret. Tell her right before she goes on stage. There's a direct energy weapon. Yeah, it's one of those things, man. It's like, I don't have no fucking idea with their capable of doing. See that right there. That's the rear flag to me. Let's just let's say this is a little red flaggy. A self-educated research investigator. Fuck out of there. That's worse than homeschooling. That takes from as many odd life experiences and connects with others. Eric was raised on Long Island. Okay. Yep. Part of the Stargate project run by the CIA and the DIA. What his childhood included being part of the Stargate project run by the CIA. I.A. Later on, he experiences in the submarine service following that. He became a plumber for some of the wealthiest people in the world back on Long Island. What? That's weird to turn to events. Oh, oh. In 2010, Eric took a contract to work at the South Pole Station for a year. Oh, so he took it. He went from being an amazing plumber to being a firefighter in the South Pole. That's what he's saying. Yeah. Okay. Always the avid researcher. It was not until Eric began working remotely throughout the state of Alaska. They started making connections that his own life may not have been what he thought it was. Now he's trying to help others see that things may not be as we were told three exclamation points. Yeah. See, this is the thing, man. That feels a little red flaggy. Yeah. That feels real work. What the fuck is that? Yeah. You can donate support on Patreon and shop his CBD products. Yeah. What is the stuff that we're going to have to eat? Yeah. Yeah. Well, the thing is, it's like maybe he's telling the truth. No, I mean. But it's like, would you trust the self-educated doctor? But if I wanted to obscure the truth, I would tell everything to a whacky dude. That's what's going to kill us. It's the death of truth. Yeah. We can't tell what's true. Look, maybe that guy's honest. Maybe he's telling the absolute truth. And maybe it's so crazy that we think that he's alone because the story sounds impossible. Story sounds impossible that they would hide some sort of a directed energy weapon in some beautiful project to try to detect neutrinos. Right? You'd think that that would be a really good way. Yeah. But at the same time, what could they do both things? What would you choose to with it? Why would you have to hide anything in the South Pole? I mean, ain't nobody going down here? But he's looking. That's a good place to do it.