Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. We're trying to get it, man. Did you see it? Yeah, you see it. I don't know if that microphone is, sir. All right. Um, you were fucking great at that McConaughey thing last year. I really enjoyed that. That was my first time seeing you perform live. It was really great. That was very cool. You're so relaxed up there, man. So it was like you brought everybody into a nice, like comfortable chill vibe. It was cool. I'm glad you guys felt that way sometimes. It takes me a minute to get into the groove. You know, yeah, but it felt like that, you know, it felt like you were in it, like it brought the whole crowd into it too. That event that he does the two events, the one, the singer songwriter one, and then the other one with the auction and everything. They're so cool. Such good events. Yeah, they're good people too. Yeah. It's really grown to it just to appreciate the community around here Austin and the Hill Country area and all of that stuff. I definitely wouldn't have the career. I don't think it would have been for the community around here that this support and songwriters and music and the way that they do. It's pretty incredible. You know, when they get behind anything, it's just like it just feels so good to see that many people come together and have that support. It's a really good place, man. Austin is a really good community. It really is. Very positive place in a lot of ways. Yeah. I mean, nothing's perfect. There's no perfect places. But it's really good. I like it so much better than when I was living in California. It just feels like real people. I'm just I miss it now. I mean, I'm in the process and moving back to Texas as well. Where are you at right now? Outside of Dallas, Texas out by Tyler. Okay. I've been in a to paying you Canyon and LA for years. Yeah. So I've been in the middle of it and. It's not Hollywood thing. Every time I get across a state line, it's just like that weight comes off and you're like, oh man, I'm home, you know. So yeah, did you have the coolest fucking character on Yellowstone? It must be so fun to play. It was so much fun, man. I had that I laugh. I always talk about it. I felt like I had like one of the easiest jobs there, you know, it's because my character was kind of a smaller role. And you know, most of the time I'd work like one or two days a week. And then the rest of the time I'd just be like fly fish and then get lost really. And just disappear out there. Yeah. It was awesome. God, Montana's awesome. That show made so many people move out there though. I know you're going to take your license plate off your car before you go. Right. You better not have a California plate. They were fucking right things on your hood. Run you off the road. Yeah, they get upset. It's very interesting. It's very proud to be from Montana. Yeah. You want to keep it to themselves like let it go, motherfucker. We're all Americans. All right. If you got a good spot, you should be happy that people from California figure it out. Yeah. Don't be a dick. Like you're American. Yeah. But you're not the United States of Montana. Shut the fuck up. I guess it's kind of anywhere, right? Not that much here. Yeah. Here's pretty inviting. I've never had that experience here. Yeah. Not really. Texas is a pretty friendly place. Yeah. And there's so many different walks of life that have been here for so long. Yeah. I think I'm good. Yeah. And Montana and stuff. And if you're tough enough to survive those winners and stake a claim up there back in the day, you had to fight for it. And they're still fighting for it now. Yeah. That does make sense. I mean, that's also one of the things that's highlighted by the whole series. All the different yells don't series. Yeah. The older ones with Harrison Ford. Yeah. And you know, they really do explain. And a lot. I mean, it's kind of a cool chunk of history to see like how this all got started. How the kind of people that had to survive out there when, you know, all you got is a fireplace. Yeah. That's it. You got a fireplace. All those mountain and stories, you know, Jim Bridger and all that stuff. It's just like man. And there is something. You get up there in those mountains. They get into your get into your mountains, get into your bones. It gets into your blood. And it's a it's a different thing. And it's a spiritual place. It is. And it's also it's like the most potent art. It's it's nature's art. And you don't think if it is art, but God, it's so beautiful. It's like stunt like sometimes when you're up there, you just have to stop and look like God, this is gorgeous. And overwhelming if you have that. It gives you a feeling. It's like it's a almost like a drug that hits you because of the beauty of it all. Like you take it in with the blue sky and you see the clouds and the mountain. And maybe there's a lake below you in the canyon. And you're like, God, this is gorgeous. It's like you feel it and you're your DNA, man. It's like your body knows like this is a fertile, beautiful place that's filled with life. And this should excite you. So all your natural human reward instincts are all like this is the place I should be. Yeah. Like look at the sky. Look at the lake. Look at the mountains. This is fertile. This is like life giving. Yeah. Yes, several years ago, I went to a guide school up there like a hot and guy. Got a gun. Mm-hmm. And it was a whole packed swab. Part of it, I grew up cowboy and in ranching, but I've never really been up there in those mountains like that. And my dad have always fantasized about that. We'd talk, you know, one day we're going to go in like a pack trip up in Montana. And you know, we'd watch all those moves like lonesome dove and all of that stuff. So it was always just kind of a daydream. And years ago, I was just kind of overwhelmed with music stuff and all that. And didn't know what I was going to do. And I ended up I just wanted to go up there for a trip, you know, maybe going a packed trip. And I started looking up places. And I found this place called Royal Time Outfitters. And they're like, yeah, you know, we come up and you can take you on a packed trip, but we also have like this six week school. You know, that you can train to be a guy that's all mule pack and all kinds of stuff. And I was like, man, I'm going to sign up for that. And it was life changing. There's only six of us in the class. And you know, spent weeks back in the back country packing mules and horses. And oh, wow. We just tie a rope between two trees with a tarp for sleeping at night and always post up a couple of the guys to watch over the horses at night. And I remember one morning, I woke up and it was in June, you know, but we were way back in there. And I woke up and the snow was coming down. And I just kind of raised my head up and I was looking out at the horses and the snow was just falling down on their backs. And there was that moment and me I was like, I don't know if I'm ever going back. You know, it's like, God, this is right where this is where where I need to be. Right. And it was tough to come back to a civilization after that. I think we're doing something with ourselves, to ourselves with civilization that we can't really fully appreciate because we're wrapped in it. And it's not until you get to nature where all that weight just gets lifted off of you. And he's feel more normal. And you're like, oh, this is where people are supposed to be. Yeah, you know, no phones. There's no nothing no distractions. And it's just like, you all your senses heightened, your eyesight, your hearing, your sense of smell, like all of that stuff. And you know, I remember going into it. You know, I didn't know what to expect really. I've done some camping and things like that and grew up ranching and all that. This was a way different deal. And I remember I just had this like backpack full of gear. You know, by the time I got out of there, like I just felt like all I needed was a pair of scissors and some way to start some fire. You know, that's about it. Yeah, I follow this one dude. God, I'm trying to remember his name. Clay. Let me pull it up because I really enjoy his videos. But this dude, he lives, I believe he lives in Alaska, but he does a lot of trips in America, like all over America in the lower 48. And he goes and like lives by himself in some kind of harsh environment. Like he's done it in the swamps, clays. That's it. Does he like take his kid out there? He has, he's taking his dog. But a lot of times he just goes entirely by himself. And they're very, very interesting. Like he starts his own fire, he'll figure out how to get food. He figures out how to purify water. He's taking salt water and made his own thing that kind of distills it into fresh water and removes the salt. Yeah. Like very slowly by using a piece of bamboo and fire and boiling the water in the bamboo so that like the water evaporates and then drips down and it doesn't have salt in it apparently. Yeah, I love that stuff. I love it. And just to have those skills, just to know how to do it, like whether you'll ever need it or not. Just to know how to do that. It's just so cool. I remember in that, that guide school, there's a lot of different parts to it which was so cool. It was like we did a whole week of like back country like wilderness first aid. You know, he had a permanent and teach us all this stuff and then it was a whole week of just like a leather work. There's a whole week of shoe and horses. There was fly fishing and entomology and all these kind of little skills. But one thing that really stuck with me was a fire building kind of drill when we started. It was kind of right when we first got there. And it was pretty wet and it had been snowing and there's only six of us. You know, and we're guys from kind of all over the country. And I grew up in New Mexico and West Texas. It's where it's pretty dry, you know, and you kind of build a fire. You can kind of just take some little small twigs and get a little flutter going, you know. And so because all right, you got two minutes to build a fire and you need to have, you know, like a flame to be three or four feet high. And man, I'm running around grabbing like little sticks and twigs that I'm just, and we have a lighter too. I'm just struggling. It's just smoking and the can't get it going. I look over and there's a kid from Alaska and the class and he just runs over to this big dead pine tree. And this breaks off the biggest branch of dead pine needles and takes his lighter and just pull it in like five seconds as this massive fire going. I was like, okay, that's how you do that. And it was so just the littlest things, you know, to have that knowledge. And part of it was, you know, he was explaining to us the instructors like, yeah, you know, if you're out here with your guidance somebody that's hunting, maybe he's an elderly guy or somebody gets hurt and you get caught back in the mountains and it's snowing. It was like, you better get a fire going to keep a warm real quick. You know, it was always a, you know, a reason and a purpose behind it, which is really cool. And I'll never, other than some of the things I'll never forget. Did they teach how to start fires with like a piece of metal and like a flint, like, you know, with a striking rod. Yeah, we did do that stuff. And with like the pitchwood from some old pine trees, you know, you find that pitchwood and we did some bone wood drill stuff. Not a whole lot of it. That fucking changed heart. That's hard. So hard. I did end the Boy Scouts and it took like hours to start a fire. Yeah. You have to fucking keep sawn out. And if you're doing it with your hand, you're going to blow your hands up. Yeah, you better get your technique down. You know, you're probably out of the stick on the top and the stick that goes all the way to the base thing and you cut a little hole in the base thing so that like all the little embers can fall into your kindling and you got to saw the shit out of the fucker. And imagine trying to do that in the snow or it's wet inside. Man, it's just very unlikely. You know what's really good for kindling? Fritos. Really. Those chills. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's kind of shocking. We were in Alaska and it was raining all the time and there was one day where it stopped. I was with my friend Steve Rinalo took me up there with my friend Brian Cowan. So we went up there and when we got one day like a 10 hour stretch where it was not raining. We're like, we got to start a fucking fire because it was raining every day for like five days it'll roll. And we couldn't find any deer. It was a nightmare. It was tough hunting. Yeah. So we this one day and we were trying to figure out things to light on fire because everything's so can wet. And so we got some pieces of wood from like underneath the bottom of trees and shit and dead trees that were covered by other things. We're kind of sort of a little bit dry and we used fritos and fritos when you light them. Man, it's crazy how much oil is in those things. Yeah. They just, and they stay lit for a long time like your candle. Yeah. And so we started like piling little things. And we got that fire. I was like the happiest I've ever been in my life. I bet. And I could have left this cannot get once you get that kind of cold too. It's just like there's almost, you know, nothing to get you out bad. Cold wise. It was like in the 50s and 60s. Yeah. It was just the wetness. The wetness was impossible to get away from. I thought once you get in your tent you'd be dry. Mm hmm. You get in your sleeping bag you'd be dry. But I had to take a piss in the middle of the night and I had to turn on my headlamp and the tent. And what I did it was all just missed. Yeah. Everywhere it was conversation. It was like, oh my god. I'm never going to be dry. I had to just accept like there's no drying here. How long were you guys back in there? About six days. Yeah. We had to leave. We were supposed to be there for seven. We had to leave on the six day because the storm was coming in. I was like, I could get stuck. Because you can get stuck up there. Yeah. And we're on, I guess Prince Edwards is that what they're all in this? Yeah. You get stuck up there. And I was like, I got to get back home. I got to work. Did y'all get fly in on a puddle jumper? The bush playing. Yeah. We landed in the pond. We had to drink right now. We could get in and out of there. Yeah. Exactly. And you could drink right out of the pond. Like the pond was all rain water and there was no, it was too high for beavers. So you didn't have to worry about Jardia or anything in the water. You could just drink right out of the pond. Like this is crazy. Yeah. It's the best. I've never been. I've been to Alaska only like in the winter on a skiing thing, but I've always wanted to go up there to hunt and fish. The people are extraordinary. Those are rugged people. When I did a gig with my friend Ari and Anchorage and one of the things and it was weird because you get there at 11 p.m. It's bright out. Like this is weird. One of the things that we talked about after was like, those people were fucking cool. Like there's something about living up there. Like where you could die going outside like a good six months out of the air. This fucking bears everywhere. If you look sideways at a moose, it'll stomp you to death in the fucking Walmart parking lot. It's better. It's shit together. It's bald eagles everywhere. The salmon are as big as your thigh. I mean, the people there are, they work together. They're very friendly, but they're very rugged. But they're also like, they realize you need each other. Like there's a sense of like, community cools. Yeah. You need each other. If you fucking car breaks down the side of the road, you could die. Like someone's not going to let you die. They're going to pull over. In California, they're like, someone will get them. They just keep driving. So you just lose this sense of community. Yeah, you're not calling it here. You're not, that's who you're calling for help in times of need is your neighbor. Exactly. And even if like the bridge washes out, it's like it comes your neighbor with the back code and the tractor and like to do it yourselves. And that makes a cool friendship when your friend helps you out or when you help your friend out. I thought I missed about living in Texas too. Just some of the small things or whatever. It's even up at my place in Topanga. You want to build some fans or whatever. I do have a feel lucky. I've got a couple of really good friends up there and neighbors that love to come work with their hands and get their hands dirty and build stuff. But like man in Texas, you want to weld something. You need something with a tractor or some heavy equipment thing. You're not getting that done in California. Right. You've lost you. You know, get someone with a skid steer up to your house to help you move some dirt around. You know, but here in Texas, it's like, oh man, just call Frank down the road. He's gone. There's people that have a long tradition of doing stuff. You know, it's like, it's a real place. I grew up like that too. You know, people cut and hay and stuff like that. Especially when you're young. Like now we would go stack hay for everybody around. You know, it's like that was the summer job. You know, it's like, this is go. That makes a strong person. People that throw hay around, those are strong motherfucker. Like that term like farmer strength. That shit's real. Yeah, you better say I was always a little guy too. So I had to use and learn how to use leverage real quick. Yeah, it rolls bells up on your knee. I think one of the last times I did that, I remember, I was going to school in Steven Bill, Texas and had a good friend over in Glen Rose and it was a middle of July. And he's an older man and asked us to come help in stack hay in his barn. And it was, you know, we're stacking it in the barn, you know. So it's just like your inside the money. It's just hot. I could have 110 degrees in there, you know. And we're talking hundreds of bills of hay. And it was just all we could do. And of course we're hung over. We're sitting here calling you. We're chatting. We were stacking hay. And I was like, I think this is my last hay haul and job right now. Yeah, those jobs, those are good for letting you know that this is not the life you want. Yeah. Like get a good rugged manual labor job. And you're going to have to do a little knock some fucking sense of, yeah. I got the guitar, man. I learned pretty quick that the guitar felt a lot better in my hands and that shovel did. Yeah. I know that feeling. I spent once some were doing insulation in an attic. It was all that fire last night. I had it in all my skin. And you're sweating. Yeah, you're sweating because it's hot. It's a summer. So it's getting into your pores. And you're always itchy. You feel like it's on you all the time. Also, like it's got to be terrible to be breathing that shit in. Oh, the worst. Yeah. And I don't even think we were using equipment. I don't think we used any safety equipment. Heck, no, you didn't have a mask on or anything. I don't believe so. I think we just installed it just on and rolled that shit and stumped it into the rafters. Using paint with lead in it. I like that. And then like back then the gasoline had lead too. So drinking out of the water hose. Right. Oh, yeah. I think it makes a resilient person to drink out of water hose. Yeah, yeah, you get tough or die. You get extra minerals. The fucking copper on the faucet. Yeah, it's those jobs are really important. Like for a young person to figure out what they don't want to do. Teachers your work ethic. Teachers you like, hey, like this is you can get some satisfaction out of a hard days work. And a hard week like you did it. You put it in. You feel good about yourself. You know it was difficult to do, but don't keep doing that. Yeah, figure out a way out of this. You got to understand it. You understand it. You got to feel for it. You know what hard labor is. But don't ruin your life. Yeah, I feel real grateful. My granddad was always a real hard worker. And even when I was 12 and 13, you know, in the summers or I spent a lot of time living with them. And he always had a job lined up for me. You know, I was like, yeah, you're going to go over here and we're going to most of them. So it was long this morning. We're going to go over here. We're going to send you out to kids and you're going to build some fence this weekend. And I always enjoyed it. I enjoyed those guys. I was around. And you know, I'd work all day. And then we'd sit around and they'd drink beer in the afternoon and tell me stories. And you know, even now, like I'm on place, you know, it's like I don't want to be building somebody else's fence. And I'm glad I know how to build my own. Right. And I'll work things like that and have those skills. I still love working around the house and doing little projects and things like that. I need a lot of younger guys and kids that sometimes I, I guess I have an expectation that they know how to do that kind of stuff. You know, I want to come over to the house and help us in projects and stuff. And I'm like, oh, yeah, cool. We'll just, you know, I dug those holes and set up a string line and we'll set these these posts and they're like, okay. And then after about a half hour I look over on there just kind of looking up the ground. I'm like, what do we do here? You know, they're like, I don't have a clue what you want me to do. You know, that's hilarious. That's hilarious. But yeah, it's wild. It's changed, man. Kids ain't out there mowing lawns and no more, that's for sure. No. Well, there's something about that kind of work, like putting in fences and all the stuff that you see the cowboys doing on Yellowstone and then hanging out together afterwards that's so like viscerally appealing to people. There's something about watching that life. Like it's, you would say it's like a simple, difficult life. Maybe I don't know what it is, but whatever it is, it's like, it's so appealing. Like so many people want it to be cowboys after they watch your show. I think if something goes to like your tongue with that guy living off the land and stuff like that, it's just something that's been ingrained in us over thousands of years of survival. And we all have that in us still today. And we just unfortunately lose in touch with it because we're not doing it as much. And so when you get the opportunity to even just go plan a garden or something like that, I think that's it's in us. And it wakes up something within that's just been a little bit dormant for a while. You know, and I think you're right. You know, I think that's exactly what it is. I think it is like it's in our memory, like the memory of our genes that this is like a pleasing life. This is a satisfying life. It's like that mama bear energy, you know, kids come. It's just like, oh, man, you know, yeah, yeah, it's there. You know, it's just like, I realize that having kids is just like, oh man, it wakes something up within you. That's always been there. Right. And it's important to have, you know, that that survival instinct and all of those things. And I still, that's what I still love about it. Like I even at home being on the road and being in big cities all the time. And you're just surrounded with information and screens. And as soon as I get home or get outside or get into the nature, it just weights that stuff back up in it. I feel like it puts that spark back in my eye, you know, try to stay in tune with as much as I can. Well, it's clearly so appealing to people that don't experience it. And how many people that are watching shows like Yellowstone never go into those areas. But they're watching like, oh, I want to live like that. We see the like prices of horses. It just skyrocketed like five grand in now. I'm sure like 50,000 bucks for a trail horse, you know, which is cool. You know, I hope people are enjoying that and getting something out of it. I mean, I'm not running a bunch of cows these days, but I keep a few horses around and especially for the kids. You know, and whether they want anything to do with them or not, like we enjoy so much in after names, go out and feed them some carrots or brushing their tails and just being around that energy. My youngest little boy, he's just got, he's got some kind of mojo with animals. You know, and I've got this old mule in her name's honey. She's got these big ears and she's massive. I remember when he was like three or four, I'd be looking around for him in the backyard and I'd look out in the pasture and he'd be out there with that mule and she'd have her head down and he's just out there petting her ears. And just like his connection with those animals and then, you know, getting kids up to the house or from the city that aren't around those animals the first time around horses or maybe even dogs and stuff like that. And you can see they're so anxious or you know, maybe it's so scared, but this is nervous. You know, this is big animals and stuff. And within like 20 minutes of just sitting them on their back or petting on them and they you see them relax and you see that energy kind of slow down and I love that. And I think it's so magical to watch. Yeah, that's another relationship that's like primal, the relationship between people and horses. They do that with attics. They do equine therapy where they just have like people that are like heavy anxiety and depression. They have them hang out with horses. I think even me, I still do. I mean, I have get depressed and stuff like that or now and then and I love being around them. I can walk out to the barn and just being around them laying on your back. And it's just like, yeah, all right, here we go. Just touching their head makes you feel better. Like, hey, how are you honey? What's happening? Hey, look at me. Yeah. Yeah, I get eye contact with that. I think it's looking into your soul. An ancient thing. I mean, they helped us survive. We, you know, and we took care of them. It's like this ancient relationship and then when you're around them, that connection, like immediately rebounds, re-stavishes. I think it's an idea. I mean, just think about like how many generations of humans had to survive on horseback before anybody invented anything else. It's like if you wanted to travel faster than you can run, it had to be a fucking horse. And so that was probably thousands and thousands and thousands of years just cooked into our DNA. And when you're around them, it's like, oh, my friend, this is my friend. It's waking it back up. Yeah, it's weird. It's weird. Yeah. It's weird that stuff is in you. Mm-hmm. Is that nature stuff is in you? I mean, that's why we like watching shows like this clay guy. I love that too. I love that Steve Renaud was showing that meat eater. I like watching that in my kids. Aren't you friends with Remy Warren? Oh, yeah. Handed up being my neighbor when I was in Montana working on Yellowstone. Oh, really? Yeah. That's crazy. You know, what I really liked up there was where they filmed the show. You know, it was kind of way out there south of Western Montana. And a lot of folks that were working on the show would go back to Missoula in the cities. But I was like, man, I want to go get as far away out there as I can. And so I kind of went down this West Fork area that's on the right on the edge of the most massive wilderness areas out there that goes into Idaho. And the road I was on, you know, was paved dirt, then it dead in it. And it turned into dirt road. And then I got this cabin. It was just way back up. And there was no wife. I know nothing. You know, I just just disappeared out there. And and ended up meeting some folks in Remy was just right down the road going towards Sue. And so I got the chance to just go there and hang out with him and go stomp around the mountains with him. It's such a cool dude. It's like, Remy's the most just you know, like you're talking about going to Alaska. and I love going into those places. But like you want somebody like that with you when you go. For sure. Yeah. Yeah, he knows how to get around. Yeah. And he used to have a great show. Well, first of all, he had solo hunter where he'd go and film everything himself, which is so much more difficult than just hunting. Yeah. He set up the keep it carried tripods with him and shit and set it up and make sure the cameras on the animal before he would shoot it and then film himself, film himself moving up to their set of different cameras that could show them executing the shot. Oh, that's so complicated. And he's a beast man. Just trying to keep up with him. Yeah, just walk around the mountains with that guy. Oh man. Way to a Bobby. I've come it. Yeah, they get that mountain cardio. Yeah. He's like a mountain goat. Well, you know, he hunts probably 200 plus days a year. Yeah. And on top of that, he does a lot of guiding. And when he's doing guiding, he's like always in the mountains, always hiking. And so you just get conditioned to it. He's fit. I went to Hawaii with him and did a axis hunt over there. Cool. It's one of the coolest things I ever did. And I got this buck and we're loading up in the truck and all that. And he was like man, I'm going to, I'll meet you guys back at camp. You know, those are dark already. And like I know, you know, during the day we were hunting, we're just on the steep mountains up and down. And so you're just going to meet us back. He's like, yeah, I'll meet you back. And he just put on his back back and just took off running. And we drove down this mountain road to go back. He beat us there, but like a half an hour. And that was his workout. And he's like, yeah, I've sparked my workout. I'll meet you guys back there. I was like, oh, you're an animal. That's funny. Access to your in Hawaii is very interesting because they were given to King Kamea maya in like, I don't remember what year it was. I know what year they're going to introduce there, but they're everywhere now. I've gone to Linae a bunch of times. Where we went. Yeah. It was wild. There are thousands of them. And you're trying to sneak up on a group of 10. And then you don't even realize there's like a hundred right here land down that you didn't even see. And then they get up and spooked the rest and stand. Well, you know, you've been there. Okay. It was in the 1800s. A gift to King Kamea maya from India. And there's 30,000 of them in Linae and only 3,000 people. Yeah. It's crazy. It's the only place where you can go hunting, bow hunting and you stay at the four seasons. Right. I think Rhea said he got kicked down there because he was hunting so much. And you know, they all that red clay there, you know, on your boots and stuff. He said so. The whole hotel was just like red clay everywhere. The fridge is just full of meat, you know, like blood dripping out. The kids are mad. I don't know if they'd kicked me about that. Like he's like, well, maybe we ought to go find somewhere else to stay. Well, just take off your boots before you come in. Yeah, it's that weird red clay and it all used to be part of the dull pineapple plantation. So when you're around there, when the things you notice is like there's layers of dirt, but then there's like almost like plastic bag underneath it. Like a hefty bag from all the farms. So when you're around there, when the things you notice is like there's layers of dirt But then there's like almost like plastic bag underneath it like a garlic a hefty bag from all the farm and yeah So I guess they had a layer of like that kind of whatever the fuck a hefty bag is made out of whatever the plastic is And then the dirt was on top of that somehow and then the pineapples would grow up through it I just keep moist here and stuff like that in the ground. Yeah, I would imagine But it's it's disconcerting because it doesn't feel like nature feels weird. It's like it's weird. There's plastic everywhere in the ground Yeah, and then you get in the mountains and like those old World War II turrets and stuff that are up there And across any of that I mean, it's just like first of all like hunting access deer in Linae And like you get up on the top and you're just frowned about the ocean. I mean what a trip, you know I know you see and that and then coming across all those old relics and just all the history there It's just something to take into and We are laughing because obviously they're trying to like control the population of the access deer there and I think somebody Somebody mentioned like man. Just get a couple of bangled tigers out here I don't thin out the population The population of people too unfortunately Yeah, the thing about them is that they did evolve around tigers. That's why they're so fast Like they'll jump a string faster than any animal I've ever seen in my life I have a video of me shooting at an access deer at 80 yards and it's we have a slow mo of the arrow So as the the arrows coming is a perfect shot within 10 yards of him. He hears it and He's gone It's the craziest thing like you look at it. You like how the fuck did he move that fast? This thing's going at least from the actual like leaving the bow It's going 275 feet per second. Yeah, and he get out here with come 10 yards within 10 yards He's hearing it coming and he's like say yeah Yeah, and nowhere near him like it he was a foot in front of it was the arrow landed a foot behind his ass Geez, that's how fast they move. Yeah. It's crazy How long did you go there for a while or just kind of like a few times trips? Yeah We found that the best time to hunt is actually in the afternoon because in the afternoon It's really windy and when it's really windy it covers your sound a little bit. Okay, the morning's rough. Yeah The morning's rough like the morning I got a couple of them in the morning a couple of times morning hunting. I got a deer, but it's a Lot of blown stocks you got to walk super slow You got to be real cautious and again, there's a lot of high brush and you don't know where the fuck they're hiding Yeah, you got to kind of find a pinch point. Yeah, you jump one in the rest of it Sound off the way they barking on of that's pretty crazy Yeah, we're as weird noise what you got to kind of do is like find where they're going to be and just wait Because they travel so much they do so much moving you think I'm just gonna go You know still hunt and spot and stalk and I'll find one and look you almost better off just stay and put Yeah, just stay and put and wait for them because they're moving all over the place. They're so fucking many of them It's crazy. Yeah, but It's amazing how unsuccessful people are bow hunting them Rifle it's a done deal. Yeah, if you want meat and it's the best meat in the world So do it's great for the people that live there. It's incredible I mean they have access to the best meat in the world 100% they're gonna be here and so if you have a rut, but if you have a boat We went there and then so I went with Remy I went with John Dudley Cam Hanes and Adam Green Tree like all seasoned bow hunters everybody Everybody got a deer and we made a podcast about it. We had a good old time They had a hundred and fifty people go over the next year and one was successful with a boat That's it take chances. Yeah, that's how hard it is Because it's like these fuckers are they're dialed in man and they move a lot of people chasing them too Yeah, I know the game right 365 days a year they get hunted there's no season And then they have snipers that are after them at night because you know They use it for meat for the restaurants and meat for people and and they just have to control the population Yeah, there's so many of them and no predators. Yeah, and still can't thin them out right? I know it's crazy I think they got a good head start they eradicated them from the big island. Oh did that Yeah, so many try to reintroduce them or introduce I should say to the big island and they're like no no no no no We know what is going on. He's gonna destroy people's crops destroy people's Gardens take over and they already have plenty of wild pigs on the big island so they just mm-hmm They whacked them all unfortunately. It's kind of like the pigs here in Texas, right? They've gone wild. I don't know you know growing up here when I was younger and never Remembrance on being like how they are now they don't stop They have three or four liters a year and each litter has I think they can have as many as six piglets It's crazy. They just and they can get pregnant six months old at six months old they can get pregnant They're ready to rock and they just spit now pigs and just tearing tearing shit up. Yeah We have a lease out here for hunting land me and some of my friends and The amount of pigs is disturbing It's like you hear them everyone You hear them in the bushes. They're all over the fucking place. It's like most of Texas Probably that's not like city has wild pigs in it Taking over man and it's all came over on boats. Yeah, that's how it all got here Important to man. Yeah guys from Europe to brought boats and in the boats some of them brought pigs and then they let them loose It's crazy man Taring stuff up. Yeah, I don't ever remember them being as bad as they were no Last 15 years or so. It's actually bad in California too and California has them from William Randolph First, but didn't they take didn't they like eradicate them up the Channel Islands out there? I think so they I think the islands and they had mule deer on some of the islands out there too, right? I forget which island had mule deer But apparently they had like What you could go hunt on one of these islands? Yeah, I think you think you might still be able to like on Catalina or a couple But maybe do they really want to create they did because I know my My buddy Matt he did it like maybe the last year of the year before But I think they're trying to put a stop to it and you know and kind of stop it I was let's Channel Islands are pretty interesting. I remember first moving out there even just going out there 15 years ago and Seen the islands out there, you know and I'd ask people all around. I was like man What's the deal with these islands out there and half the people that I would talk to like what are you talking about? And I'm like that island right out there. They're like oh, I thought that was long beach, you know Really I was like if you looked at a map, you know I love maps so I started you know doing some research and figuring out about it and They're really cool and over the years. I've met some really Cool guys got their lot spearfish and just to go out there to him and besides Catalina like Santa Cruz and Sam McGill and you know, they're all like nature preserves and protected So it's like going back in time when you get out there and Love it out there. It's such a cool spot Did they try to are they trying to eradicate deer from Catalina? I think I've read something about that See if that's true I think they're trying to remove the deer because they said the deer were non native to the island. Yeah I think that's what they did with With the hogs and I don't know there's like an a specific island fox out there Yeah, here it is as of early 2026 California officials have approved a controversial plan to fully eradicate the Non native Mule deer population on Santa Catalina Island to restore the ecosystem around 2000 deer Introduced in the 1930s for hunting will be removed by ground-based hunters to protect native biodiversity Come on That sounds crazy. How about just let people hunt them? Fox wrong with you So the issue is Catalina Island Conservancy considers the Mule deer and invasive species that disrupts the ecosystem as they consume native plants and seedlings while spreading fire prone Invasive grasses Really? I have I just always worry about Conservancy's and their their judgments on things like that because there's a lot of they want to eradicate all the pigs from Texas or from California rather they think of them as non native and they want them out too, but You're not going to they want to eradicate the there's like elk in California that are yellow stone elk that were brought there and like the 1950s They want to eradicate like that too like the to the elk no, they're actually they're actually Rocky Mountain. Oh, okay. Yeah, but they're there were a larger breed of Rocky Mountain elk They're they call yellow apparently like in the sieras or down and on along the coast and so touch be Yeah, I'm not here on those mountains Big fucking elk like 400 inch elk like a couple of those elk out there. They're in front. That's what they're from There's that's that's not a massive massive yeah to home ranch. Okay. Yeah, and oh yeah It's like going up over the grapevines. Exactly. That's where you got there. Uh-huh. Wow. I had no idea They were that big out there. It's all it's the biggest private ranch in California. It's like 270,000 acres I've heard of the ranch, but I didn't know what else like that up there. Yeah Yeah, one of the rare places gorge is fucking place, but they also go out. It's kind of funny. They go up to there's a golfing community higher up and touch be and The elk just hang on on the golf court Just so like giant elk like 400 inch elk just chilling hanging out together on the golf course and dudes are playing golf That's why while they're lying down next to them like 20 yards away. It's crazy. I seen it Saw some one time. I was driving up the coast. I think I was going up the San Francisco to play gig and Maybe they're the two-leel come on through what they were, but it was along the coast there And I looked over in the field and it was like 30 head of them just laying down over there Oh, man, I didn't even know they were held down here. It's just I love seeing Wildlife that in unexpected places, you know. Yeah, they recently just found a wolf on a scinj. Anyway Really? Yeah See see we can find the story about that wolf that they just discovered in Los Angeles. There's a mama mama bear bike bear with three cubs Now running around in Topanga. Oh, yeah, there's a lot of those lines running around There's a lot of a lot of bears. I've seen them in Pasadena and people's pools I knew there's a bunch out in Pasadena and like look at this Linda wolf detected in Los Angeles County for the first time in more than a century crazy And then nuts yeah, those guys can fucking travel. I had a lady on who was a wolf biologist and She was talking about like the you know, they'd call her some of these wolves and they would track them They would go five hundred miles. Yeah, like it's kind of insane. I didn't know that. Yeah, that's incredible Well, that's how they learned about them. It's really the only way to tell us to like put a collar on them and track them by GPS Mm-hmm and you know, they mean they're extraordinary animals like where were where were they originating from and Montana wildman and how where were they going the ones that they're tracking? I think the ones that they were tracking were the part of the group that was brought in You know in the 1990s, you know, so there was that pack in the Subsequent packs that came after that there were all the reintroduce wolves and so they would you know Dart and call or some of them and when they would do that they just track their motion. They're like Jesus Covering some ground They're coming with some ground and it's interesting too that they actually make mountain lions kill more deer Good competing with them. Yeah, because the mountain lions kill a deer and then the wolves will steal it So they come up on the mountain lion in this surround them and the mountain lion will go fuck this I'm out of here. Yeah, he's going to kill another deer So he doesn't even get a chance to eat his deer because the wolves keep stealing his deer keep tracking the lion It's probably just falling around. They're smart. I mean dirty work. Yeah, they do they let up the dirty work They steal their smarter no harder Since what does it say the wolf that they found? Yeah, this is from in February when they first spotted him So the wolf was born 2023 plumus counties. Where's plumus county? It's traveled more than 370 miles Wow Including crossing state route 50 dying near tachopee. There you go. Yeah, they had one up in tachopee too that a buddy mind It was actually closer to The city that's down there. What's that fucking city makersfield. Yeah, exactly while that officials now estimated at least 60 wolves live in the state One crossed over in 2011 Wow from California from Oregon So so they find them in the tachopee mountains interesting Biologist told newspaper Well that biologist told newspapers that she could encounter a mate in the nearby region such as tachopee mountains Potentially forming a new pack or continued to roam. What was that picture? You just had of the elk? Yeah, that's that golf course. Look at that Fucking elk chill it on the golf course. Oh, my flag. Yeah, look how beautiful that is. God so pretty out there Massive elk oak tree country club perfect sanctuary for him, right? Oh, yeah, man It's just it adds to the coolness of playing golf. I mean you're playing golf around giant beautiful animals. I bet those greenskeepers love them Probably fuck up all kinds of things Yeah, it's uh The wolf thing is interesting because they they just brought him back to aspen and they did a really stupid thing They brought him into an area where it has a lot of livestock and they brought him in from a place in Oregon where these Wolves had all been captured because they were killing agriculture. Yeah, so what did they do? They captured him and they dropped him off in Colorado where they started killing And that's the mark. They just do it well. It's on people's my friends ranch one of them They dropped three wolves off on my friends ranch. That's tough. I think so I mean with the bears and stuff, you know you get some problem bears or whatever and then they go and drop them out Where the farmers and ranches are living, you know, man. How's that gonna work? Well, it's the people in charge of these things that making these decisions They don't understand what they're doing. They're monkeying around with wildlife nature biology and you don't know what you're doing You don't you have no idea also like how how the fuck you in good conscience take a wolf That's used to killing cows and put them around other people's cows. Yeah, that's a Sorry program. They're in a dinner bell three. It knows exactly how to do it and knows it's easy. They're all fenced in They taste delicious. Why would it stop or why would yeah, why would you chase Chase tougher prey right so now these poor ranchers have to have people Monitoring their cows 24 7 they have to have cowboys up all night They're wandering around and on horseback and just looking for wolves I mean, it's a disaster they've done dozens cows Those are folks that you know have been like we've to survive and on this land for generations and dealing with that and You know Have a history with managing that stuff. You know it would probably be the folks I'd want to ask Yes, I'd handle it, you know Well, they would certainly tell you don't let the wolves in if you do kill them You know, but now it's gotten to the point where I think they're gonna have to do something about them Well, they've said a honey limit on them. I think honestly That would Probably do something, but really what you should do is hire someone to recapture them and Don't drop them off there. Don't drop them off and fucking it has been you yeah Because they're gonna eat people's poodles too Under they don't give a shit if they run out of cows of somehow another rancher scare them away from the cows And they make it into the town of Aspen You know think they're gonna eat your golden retriever they're gonna eat all kinds of dogs Yeah dogs in Alaska all the time. Yeah Yeah, I hear with a lot of like the lions and stuff man. He's coming after your kids Yeah, you know, there's been a stuff that Malibu Creek park, you know for a couple of incidents there, you know hits like man there They're gonna go eat something especially when they're old. Yeah when they get old You know they can't catch a deer anymore They're hungry and they have an eat in a few days, then they see a kid hanging around a little too close to the outside of the woods I got a big one that comes right by my house. I got a little game trail cameras set up and I got a little fountain Right in the front it doesn't come around when I'm there because we got the dogs, you know a lot But whenever I'm out of town for weeks at a time I'll come back and that sucker just laying on my front porch Just massive and then the other day friend of mine was taking the trash out and that's like I Rump lunchtime and it jumped over the fence into the driveway and had a dead rabbits in it dead rabbit and it's not Just looking at her, you know, and she's like holy shit. They're there. You know So every time I'm even walking around by myself or with the dogs, you're just like, no sucker Just being a tree looking at me right now. Yeah, you just live in monsters. Yeah There California spent more than a hundred million dollars trying to make a bridge Over I forget which freeway it is Is it the one-on-one? I think you're right So they spent over a hundred million dollars and it's still not done For a bridge a bridge for the mountain lions like you fucking dorks It's like this idea of like it's gonna be a bridge, but it's gonna have dirt and grass on it So it'll merge them to walk across so they don't have to go over the highway and die It's a nicer than the roads we're driving on yeah 110 million dollars is crazy and it's still not even done It's so crazy So that's it 26 it's like going to been true right yeah So they want to have this This big dirt mound and this bridge so the animals can get across the highway But it's just like it's so goofy and They never want people to do anything about the population of mountain lions regardless of how out of control They are they don't do anything about it. They have to hire people the state has to hire people to go and get the bad mountain lions And ones that are problems. Yeah, and when they capture them one of the things they find out is they're when they actually kill them Right so one of the things they find out when they examine their diet. It's like 50% pets Yeah 50% dogs and cats. That's what your mountain lions are eating. That's crazy. Yeah And they spend money like a lot of money Going after these mountain lions and instead they could make money by letting people hunt these mountain lions and giving them tags and Control the numbers in that place to home ranch one of my buddies works there and they have a trail camera set up on a pond and they found 16 different cats that were drinking out of that pond. Oh my gosh That's insane Always I had like what I first started going out there to the coyotes, you know and even around like in Hollywood and stuff Where I just saw a coyote running down the street with a pair of sunglasses on Eating better than any of this When I went there in 94 those are first time ever saw a coyote. I couldn't believe it Staying at the you know they have those furnished apartments the Oakwood furnished apartments No, not really like for people that are like don't have a house yet And you got to move to California quick. They have this place called Oakwoods Okay, it's already got a couch. It's already got a TV. It's already got a bed You're like okay, I can't be in beats. I was like just move in and I was driving up to the entrance to the place and I see these little dogs on the street. I was like fuck's going on He's done That ain't no dog at check with that I was like oh my god. They're coyotes Like this is weird and this is like 94. I had never seen a fucking coyote And they've heard of a coyote being out just wandering in the street. I just couldn't believe it that they just wander around on the concrete I've man. It's there everywhere. I feel like I've seen more there than anywhere you see a more in town And you do anywhere else. Yeah, they well they have large populations of them in downtown Where they know where they den up they den up in certain warehouse buildings. Okay, abandoned buildings and under bridges and we free-waves and stuff Yeah, they lived there They probably keep the nature. It'll take back over one day. You want it? Exactly. Yeah, yeah I think they probably keep the rap population in check though. Yeah If you think about it, yeah, I keep a lot other things in check too. Right Well, there's a terrible video from woodland hills a few years back where a guy Was unloading his car and his toddler was out there in in the grass And he grabbed his toddler to run away with his kid. Yeah, I saw that man. I you know I'm always watching around for stuff and With my art kiddos or just people around the neighborhood and stuff you got to remind you remind yourself You know, they're there and they're not scared of you. You know, they're not afraid of I'm ever when the first times I went up to oh hi this north of LA there, you know, I just wanted to go up there and go hike around and check out the area and those an archery shop up there and I had this old guy kind of looked like Charlie Daniels just big overall It's a big old beard, you know, and I walked in there and just to check out the shop and also just asking about you know some areas to go stomp around and and I had a Australian Shepherd dog at the time and Just asking work, you know, good places to go stomp around and he said yeah, you know You go up there. He goes by wouldn't take your dog with you I was like really why he's like man those lions are real deal up here, you know He's like you he goes you won't see him, you know, until they're on on you You know, and I just yeah, I need their lion to stuff like that But hearing it from from that guy, you know, maybe he's try to scare me a little bit But you know, there's I it's a it's real deal. It's real. It's real. They try to downplay it Because the all the wild life lovers all the greenies. They don't want you long and killing them. Yeah, what their goal is to have zero hunting their goal is to have all the animals just balance each other out Angle ham It's not humans in the middle of the humans have interrupted that whole idea right? So if you've got a city and then you've got wild giant predators like 170-pound cats that are killing dogs and they're like you got control them Can't manage one without managing another right and so the first wet the first thing they did to stop people from doing it is They ban hunting with dogs So if you ban hunting with dogs guess what you basically you're killing most of the hunting because the reality of mountain lions is you can't find them They're really hard to find really hard to catch really hard to find and the best way to control their population is to Treat them and you get dogs to choose because that way you know if it's a tom or if it's a female You know if it's mature. You know what size it is. You have a really accurate Estimation you could look up at it. Oh, that's a mature Tom. Yeah, that's what we're looking to kill and then you can control their population Yeah, that's the only the same with bears. It's a great way to see what it is It's an end to side of it needs to go or if it needs to stay right But they do little things to stop The effective hunting first so California You can still hunt for black bears, but you can't use dogs anymore So as soon as they stopped the use of dogs the amount of black bears they harvested went way down Yeah, so the amount of bears in the population went way up Yeah, I don't think they I mean I know they've been around in Pasadena a lot But I don't think there's been one in Topanga for a while. I mean I've been up there Shoot almost 15 years and hadn't heard of one. This is the first time that that one's kind of made it over and that That aired that I know of anyway, maybe up you know around the Malibu Creek and those state parks, but in Topanga is probably people feeding them. Oh a hundred percent For you my friend You have it on weed So now there is Topanga is great, but it's always sketches me out of a fire catches Oh man, we we got hit hard last year as you know the palisades stuff and man I didn't that was kind of it for me too as I come out, you know It's terrifying. I've been evacuated out there several times over the years, but I've got horses up there now and stuff like that And luckily I had like a Always keep a big truck and a trailer just in case and got some friends down in Burbank that have some stables You know that I'll have like as a backup plan and but this was just a different deal I as a crow flies I could see the smoke from the palisades, you know It's like a mile away, you know, and we were actually working in our arena there and smoke came up and I was like shoot let's just go every time I see the smoke like I don't wait I just like will be the first ones out and yeah beat the beat the mad rush of everybody that's gonna decide to try to stay and Load it up the trailer and the truck and the camper and the dogs and all that stuff and it's like let's go and my wife I went down to Burbank and I'm there we were dropping through the night and the wind was just howling like I've never seen before and power lines are snapping and it's just like Trees are coming down and it just felt like the end of the world, you know And uh we get to Burbank and we pull back in these stables and there's a kind of a big cinder block wall And I just got as close to that as I could because it was blocking the wind, you know from hitness and the next morning I woke up and I was just my throat was sore and hurt and I could hardly breathe And I opened the camper door and the Altedina fire had started and it was right there until the system Mountain of black smoke coming over the top of the sare and uh So like let's go and let's get out here Let's like head north and had some friends in Moore Park, you know up in that area going towards been sure that had horses Trying to find some places to go with some horses and uh They're like yeah, come on up here So we went up there stayed there a night and then they cut all the power off up in that area because the winds were snapping power lines and they were worried about fires and And you know after doing that a few nights and hours like let's just head east and go to Texas, you know There's always so many friends you can like show up with five horses and a bunch of dogs, you know like hey We're gonna stay for a while, you know Especially in California. Yeah, we're like let's just get out of here And head it back and you didn't know when we were gonna make it back and they you know Closed indefinitely or whatever. I just like man. I'm I'm over it. I got evacuated a bunch of times when I lived there But the last one was 2018 and When the last one we got out early I came home from the comedy store and we saw fire coming over the top of this hill And it was probably like one o'clock in the morning and me and my wife were sitting there I go what do you think? She's like let's get the fuck out of here. Mm-hmm. Let's get the fuck out of here It just grabs some shit and maybe it'll come this way. Maybe it won't So it didn't burn the house down, but my neighbors the front front three neighbors all lost their house and my next door neighbor His his roof caught on fire But my friend who refused to leave he stayed in the neighborhood and Protected his house and guided firefighters. He brought the firefighters to that house and showed him that it just started on this guy's roof And they hosed it down. They stopped it in its tracks, but it's pretty fucking bad But it's wild because you know it's gonna burn and it's not a matter of You know if it's just a win and I mean that's that's canyons have been burning like that for thousands of years and They ain't the two masks were setting them on fire on purpose to get ahead of it right and controlling all of that stuff and Now there's just so many houses and Communities back up in there. It's just a tough thing, but when they when they hit man, it's they just They're rolling to how fast they come through those Santa Ana winds are blowing like that and it's just very surreal and person You can watch it on the news and you kind of get a feeling of it But when you're there and you're driving down the 101 and you look at the side of the highway and you see like these hills in the distance They're just covered in fire hundreds of yards of Fields of fire just making their way over the top of this hill and burning houses and we saw it when the the palettes that you Know the palettes things will start. You know from our house It's kind of a little mountain that comes up on the back and I hiked up there and was watching it and you can see the smoke and then you could Like start seeing little flickers of the flames and then it was just like somebody Don't gasoline on this thing and I mean the flames shot up hundreds of feet into the air and My wife is on the balcony, you know the house and I'm kind of up on this little mountain I'm looking over looking in her eyes. I'm like start packing up It's off. I'll go hook up the horse trailer. I'll be up to say it was load up and then just And you know the wind Rise, I'm like, start packing up. It's, I'll go hook up the horse trailer, I'll be up to say it was load up and just, and you know, the wind was blowing like offshore then, you know, so the fire is like all on the coast, you know, and just depending on where that, how that wind is blowing, you know, at the beginning it was blowing offshore. And then within a half an hour it just shot up the coastline and just ripped up through Malibu and burned all that coast like that's the, the stuff that you always thought was the safest. Right. You know, and then the next day the wind shifts coming back on shore and it blows it back towards Burbank, you know, going back up like the four up that way. And then the winds are shifting again and then coming back across, you know, so I was amazed at the, I've seen some of the fires that I've been through to see the firefighters up there, those guys are incredible man, those helicopter pilots, the airplane pilot seeing those tankers fly through there. I mean, it's just incredible what those guys can do. I mean, if it hadn't, I mean, they saved that whole canyon, you know, up to Pangit least, you know, it's like man, there's so much brush in there that probably needs to burn. It's been accumulating over years, you know, and cutting those fire breaks and you know, dropped the retardant on the ridge lines and stuff and watching the wind. It's just like man, I've hats off to those guys, absolutely. I mean, think about the amount of damage that was done in that fire and how much more would have been done if it wasn't for the firefighters. That's how crazy it is. Yeah. Yeah. It is. And I met one of the helicopter pilots. I was on a flight somewhere and we just happened to be sitting next to each other when we were talking about it and just, you know, learning from him, you know, about, you know, the thermals that come up from underneath and trying to hold those helicopters and, you know, information and all that stuff and how heavy they are when they're full. Right. And then as soon as you release all that water, whatever is in them, that, you know, all of a sudden that the power that they got, you know, throttles full throttle, you know, when they're loaded down and they drop all that water and, you know, trying to get back a hold of it. Oh, never even thought of that. Yeah. Then you got, then you got, you know, normal is different. 90 mile an hour winds blowing and, you know, and you, I could see them from the house, you know, there'd be like two or three helicopters that would come in, start dropping water and then they would move out and then the tank that planes would come in and then helicopters back in and then you had the guys on the ground, you know, trying to contain it as well. Just the coordinated effort between them, you know, I can imagine the conversation saying, yeah, hey man. He's so crazy that they didn't have the reservoirs ready. Oh, dude, so sad. I had Spencer Pratt on, you know, he's running for mayor now. He was explaining it like how bad it was. Yeah. How do you fuck that up? That bad. It's devastating here. It's like, you know that that stuff's coming. Yeah. And I don't know. It's just to not be prepared for that. Complete. It's comfortable. Yeah. Incompetence. Yeah. It's complete total incompetence. And yet they still are there. Like you, you're definitely not good at the job. And yet you don't take any personal responsibility and blame everybody else. The problem. It's just fucking, it's a problem that happens every few years. Like you're going to get fires period. The fact that you don't have a full reservoir is crazy. It's crazy. Don't, all your resources into fixing that fucking reservoirs, down, get the residents are more prepared than anybody. You know, because I think they just got to where they, you can't depend on it. You know, I mean, I know our neighbors and stuff have a pretty good program in place. We all all get together and talk about, you know, who's got fire hoses and swimming pools with access to water and where, you know, evacuation plans or, you know, there's some folks that will have horses, but they don't even have a horse trailer up there. You know, I'm like, okay, I'll come get yours to or whatever. You know, we need to do, you kind of just have to have that mentality. I think, you know, yeah, definitely. Definitely. It's, you know what's really freaking me out about like the palisades is what is in the ground now? You know, how much toxic shit you got melted into the ground? Because think about how many people have electric cars now. Well, the how those old houses too, you know, until not the the materials that they're made out of, and the asbestos or live, I mean, the stuff in the air that was even if you, you know, you were several miles away from the actual fires that the wind and blowing all the ashes and the smoke and all that stuff over. I remember going back up in there, you know, weeks and just trying to get stuff out of the house or whatever when they let us back up. And you could still, it would just make your throat hurt, you know, breathing that air and stuff. Right. That's bad stuff. It's not just wood fire. Yeah. No. No. Like chemicals. Yeah. Wood fires hard enough, but the chemicals burnt TVs and computers and hard drives and electronics and refrigerators treated lumber. Yeah. All that shit's going to get in your groundwater. Like it's, it's, it's on the surface. It's going to rain. It's going to seep through. Like what happens to the water? Is anybody checking the water out there? No, you got to imagine. I doubt it. Especially like to paying guy, but a lot of folks have wells. Don't you think? I think there's some, you know, it's definitely all like on septic up there too. You know, I mean, all of that building code stuff's got pretty crazy up there. I don't know. I would just, I would just worry about even breathing the air that has the dust of all that shit in it. Like I probably wouldn't want to live there anymore. If I was in a place where all the houses burnt to the ground, or I knew there was toxic shit in the ground, I'd be like, hey, let's get that fuck out of here. And so our house to China. Oh man. Because that's the other thing Spencer said, they're the ones who are the number one land buyers. All right. It's, it's China. It's going to be, is it going to be a golf course resort affair for? We know it. Who knows? Yeah. Or affordable housing. Yeah. One of the other. I don't know either. I don't know. But it's just I really wonder what the long-term damage of all those chemicals in the ground is. It has to be pretty high. Got to be. You know, I don't know. You know, I was talking to some friends of mine out the other day that have grown up there, lived out there their whole lives and, you know, going over the channel islands. You either got those oil platforms out there in the water. And there's been oil spills, obviously, throughout their through history. And, but also like when you're surfing and stuff like that, there's oil that's been on top of the ground. It's just like so surface level that's been there for millions of years. Right. And so I don't know. You know, it's like I'm sure it's all the toxic stuff that happens or how long does it take for it to dilute? Right. You know, it's not much rain. The wind or like, what, you know, I'm not an expert on it. But I feel like Mother Nature takes pretty good care of herself. You know, we're, we're the ones in trouble, right? Right. Mother Nature sorted out over time. But I just don't know how good it's going to be for the people that live there. It can't be can't be the long term, you know, I have a buddy that has a house out there and he lost his house and burnt down and asked him about it. He said, I think what they're going to do is take all the dirt out of their backyard and then replace the dirt. And I'm like, oh, okay. I don't know if that's enough. Like, because what about his dirt? What about your neighbor's dirt? What about the all the toxic shipments and his dirt's coming down into your ground? Yeah. As soon as it rains. And also they get all the round up and everything else is coming down. You know, it's, it's sad, man. You know, it's sad. That's just the kind of state of it. It's like it's, it seems like just it's so far of a mess that even the folks that do have answers that do want to fix stuff, it just kind of becomes impossible for for any solution. You know, it's like all the red tape and all the hoops and things and all the permits or whatever. Like can't even, you know, the roads blocked. Okay. Well, before we could even get somebody out here with a tractor to move the rocks, you got to call 10 other people to get it approved. And in the process. And then it's not. And it's like, that's the part. I'm just like, man, I wish I could just call Frank down the street. Well, those were just going to move this right now, you know, and it's like, you know, well, government has increased so much in California, and they just want more regulations so they could justify more government. And so they just regulate themselves to a place where people just want to leave. Yeah, let's go, look, I can't fucking do this anymore. Get out of here. And it's expensive. Yeah, and it's so expensive to live here. Yeah. And while it's beautiful, it's such a great place. They've fucked it up so hard. It's paradise. It's paramount. Mountain within like two, three hours, you can be in the sea areas. You can be in the sea. You can be in the sea now. You can go skiing. Yeah. And then swimming the ocean on the same deck. It's gorgeous. Yeah. Beautiful places I've ever been. You'll see him at eating and get out. Yeah. You know, incredible weather. Current river. Yeah. And it's beautiful. But they got ruined. They got ruined with progressive politics and bureaucracy that just ramped up all the control they have over people to the point where you can't even buy flavored zins. They ban blackjack. You can't have blackjack anymore. They just stop blackjack and the casinos. They stop flavored zins. They just regulate it into a blivy. And they're all these people that want to be they want to be the mommy of the world and tell you what to do. Like fuck off. Yeah. Like fuck off with all your goddamn rules. You're just making your government bigger. So you can justify all these fucking rules. And you need the rules for the government to sustain itself. So you just keep adding more rules and adding more government. Yeah. We were reading about it the other day. Like what was the number the California government went up by like 24% and their population went up by like 1%. I know and I run it kind of we're running out of places to go. Everyone the actual numbers were that we found. But it's yeah, I'm always looking for hideouts, you know, to kind of get away from. It's like man, you find a spot to go to. You kind of don't want to tell nobody about it. You know, that's what you're about West Texas. I think that's hard about Montana. You know, I went up first started going up there years ago. I mean, it's just such a and still is. It's a paradise. It's just, you know, and I think that's why we're a lot of people upset about lived up there. It's like, man, the secret got out a little bit and I can understand that. But I get it. I get it from there. Where's the negative? Where's the next place, you know, the thing about Montana though, or like Wyoming, another example is that winter will thin the herd. It's like West Texas. Like that's funny. Same kind of like, you know, Marfa and that area, you know, I grew up all out there going to junior rodeos and all kinds of stuff. And it was just ranches, you know, and local, you know, local diners and stuff like that. And, you know, I hear people going out there and buying houses and, you know, all that stuff. Then they go out there for like a week and they realize that the only thing open at night's the Dairy Queen. They're heading back to New York pretty quick. Yeah. But you're right about Montana. It was a winter. Winter gets you at the winter's rough. It's cold. Yeah. We were the first time I ever went hunting was with Rinala. That's where I got that mule deer that's on the table right there. And it was nine degrees in October and we're camping. And so we're sleeping on the ground and nine degrees. I'm like, bro, how did these fucking people? And you also you go by these old homesteads. So they were giving land out there for people. You just you can get a chunk of land just start farming on it and the government was encouraging you to prove it up. But it's all this like muddy ground. Like the ground is like mucky. Like when you hike in it after, you know, a while your boots are so heavy because they're just dealing with this clay. Yeah. Just muck all over your boots. And so it's not fertile. It's not good like in the Missouri breaks like that area. And it's not good for growing things. So you find these abandoned homesteads. It's really eerie. And you just think like this family that came out here and like the 1800s and they tried to set up shop and maybe got killed by Indians and maybe all the way out there. I think about my family and I've got stories. You know, I love them settling in New Mexico and you know, coming out on a covered wagon with maybe a steer and a pig and they're like, yeah, here's you bunch of acres and you got to prove it up, you know, and dig a hole in the ground is what they're living a dugout, you know, and dig a hole in the ground. That's where you're living and you try to build a ranch out of it. And I always laughed. I was talking to family or my grandparents. I was like, why did y'all stop here? You just like, you were so beaten down. You were like, oh, this is the driest, flattest place. Yeah. But we're here the most rough is you know, I was like, it's only maybe another thousand miles out the California or just keep going. They're like, nope, this is it. We're done. Yeah, I guess people didn't know what they were going to find if they kept going either. Like you want to keep going for like another month. Oh, and yeah, this miles and miles of the board desert and no water. Yeah. I mean, hold on with that wagon trail take a week. Yeah, even just like Missouri, Texas and now it's a through wet, even like just going through West Texas to get to, you know, South East New Mexico and all that. And then you're in, you know, that's this rough country and the people have always been tough out there. And you're just excited about it. Yeah, you're sitting, duck, you're slow moving with a wagon pulling the hoar and you got all your shit in the wagon and they just looking at you from the hills. Yeah. Wouldn't glamorous. No. I know my, you know, my granddad was pretty tough old guy and is real a cowboy as you ever want to know or meet, you know, but he wasn't really one day ever brag or, you know, talk, their fantasizer, romanticize about the cowboy stuff, you know, because it, it wasn't romantic then, you know, it was survival and it was rough and it was work and you know, had no running water. And I remember him having a conversation with this guy and he was like something like a tech guy, you know, he's been at all his website shit or whatever. And he was asking my granddad. He said, you know, what's the most, you know, important invention of your lifetime? And I think he was expecting my granddad to say like the computer or the internet and my granddad said refrigeration was the most important and been, you know, he was growing up. He was like, they had no way to keep their food cold, you know, like, reach seller, you kept it underground, you know, so it was just a perspective, you know, I think everybody was surprised to hear it, you know. Well, I think people are so accustomed to electricity and so accustomed to things like refrigeration. Yeah. Just like they're running water. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, when there was no refrigeration, you had to eat what you had, you know, like that day. And then the next day, you have to get something else. Yeah. And unless you knew a place that was an ice house, you know, that would get a giant chunk of ice and you could have a nice box and stick it in there and cool things. Like you're fucked. Yeah. You're on your own. Yeah. Well, you had to learn how to dry meat. That was a lot of it. Make pemmakin, dry meat, make things that will survive and last. And, you know, that's also how market hunting almost wiped out all the deer in this country because people needed fresh meat every day. So they were just shooting everything that existed. Yeah. And then finally, they started looking around and going, hey, we lost all the elk. There's no more deer left. Like, let's, let's make some fucking regulations on this ship. And they stopped market hunting. I did not know that. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. Beginning in the 1800s by, you know, the time, I guess, when do they start doing regulations in terms of hunting regulations in this country? Because obviously they wiped out almost entirely the American bison. There was, they were almost gone completely. And, you know, a lot of that was just for tongues. No, that's crazy. Yeah. They do send them back against their pickled their tongues. They and Steve, we're now gonna have a chance to show one of my buddy was telling me. It's got a great instinct. Yeah. It's a really interesting thing about the history of the bison and hunting and all of that. Yeah. Yeah. I think his books called American Buffalo, but it's really good. Um, first hunting regulations appeared in colonial laws in the 1600s, mainly as seasonal closed seasons for certain game like deer. In terms of nationwide US law, the first major federal game protection statute was the Lacey Act of 1900, which targeted commercial and market hunting and interstate trade in illegally taken wildlife. Yeah, there was Elkin every state. Yeah. And they, we wiped them out. And there was deer in every state. But now there's more deer than there ever has been before, which is interesting. Congress passed the Lacey Act. When modern regulations start. So the 1900s, most states had game and fish commissions, hunting seasons, bag limits and licensed requirements all reinforced by federal laws like Lacey Act and later migratory bird protections. Well, it's amazing that they did that. We have an amazing system too, the fact that the United States has so much public land. You know, there's so many different places where people can go and they can hike, they can whitewater rap, they can fish, they can hunt, they can camp. I mean, we're unlike any country when it comes to that. It's like the amount of land that we have that's available to Americans that every it's public for everybody is fucking incredible. Yeah. I may be up in Montana. New Mexico is like that too in California. And up in Montana, staying in that wilderness area, like that little cabin that I stayed in, you know, probably didn't have much land with the cabin. But man, there's thousands and thousands of acres of wilderness public land with dirt roads everywhere. I mean, I would, you know, on those days off that I had, I would just drive back in there for miles, man, and just see the most beautiful country, you know, and I'd haul my horse back in the way of the trailheads and just go explore stuff, you know, you had go over one bridge into the next and there's a waterfall and there's another drainage and it's just like, you know, and this is the wilderness area too. This isn't even a national park, you know, like man, this is beautiful country as I've ever seen anywhere. I never did, you know, I was always on my toes about it. And I'd talk, you know, no one rimming up there, he knew that area really well. So I'd kind of ask him spots to go check out and about bears and stuff and he said, man, there weren't too many grizzlies back in there, but you never know, you know, especially coming over from Idaho and stuff like that. So I never did. I've run into some black bears, never in any wolves and all that. But, you know, I don't know, maybe being horse back to, I don't know, a lot of those places where I did, but I definitely had my eyes open. Yeah, that's another animal that want to list again and make them available for hunting, particularly in Montana and Wyoming. They just have a lot of grizzlies. Yeah. They have a lot, and people don't want you to shoot them. They think of it as trophy hunting or whatever it is. Like, what's tough, man, but man, he lived, like you said, you like those folks that live back up in there, you know, they all they have is their neighbors and people to depend on, you know, and it's like, man, you get mauled by a bear taking your trash out, or something like that. That's what your experience is with them. And, you know, everybody wants to keep them as pets until they're in the backyard with you. They don't play by the rules. They don't play by the rules in their 900 pounds. They're like, nine hundred pound giant fucking wild animal that eats everything it can. Yeah. They might have that lion ringer in my house. It's like, man, I'm cool. You're fine. Why don't you go on down the road? You know, I don't need you in my backyard. The thing is that you can't do anything about it either. And times you could just shoot them. Yeah. And yeah, we don't have that problem. Yeah. That's how it should be. Yeah. Like, you shouldn't have wild monsters living in your yard. Yeah. And you should have it. You should have the right to decide that for yourself. 100%. Not only that, they're going to be fine. They're still going to be plenty of them. Yeah. Okay. But it'll probably be a more healthy number if they get whacked whenever they eat someone's dog. Yeah. And have a healthy respect for coming in your backyard or coming after your Exactly. The kids. Yeah. Yeah. They they should understand that. But just like we're so goofy, we make laws to protect them that don't protect us. Like help me out. Like, do you love animals more than people? Like, I love animals. But I'm I'm on team people. Yeah. 100%. Yeah. Everybody else is cool. Mm hmm. But team people first. Yeah. You know, oh, we got monsters in our neighborhood. And and then we got killed the monsters so the kids could play outside. You don't have to worry about them getting eaten. Yeah. Me too. I mean, growing up ranching or farming or whatever. I mean, that's your job is to take care of animals. You know, it's animal husbandry. It's that's your job. I mean, to take care and provide for these animals to provide food for your family, you know, and and the wildlife that's around it, you know, it's like, and to take care of the land and the dirt the water and the grasses and all of that stuff has to be supporting each other to make it all work, you know. And at the end of the day, I just feel like we've just lost touch. It's cities. It's urban environments. It's a natural environment. So, given people this delusional idea of what our relationship is with nature and, you know, people just think food comes from a restaurant. Yeah. And, you know, the ground is for streets. And you drive right along. Yeah. It's paved at all. It's all just this delusional perspective that comes from that sort of urban existence. And I just think that's why people that live in the country and live in, you know, environments like Alaska where you're confronted by nature. Like more interesting people, they're more robust. They're cooler. Will you say it out there earlier that you rode bulls? Yeah. Dude. How many times? So, I started when I was a kid, you know, riding steers when I was like 10 in the junior rodeos and then you were 10 years old and someone let you ride a fucking steer. Really? That's so like, it was like, little baseball, you know, what I grew up. So, a steer is a bull that doesn't have with nuts. Yeah. And so how much less do they kick when they don't have their nuts? Oh, they're a lot. They're pretty dog. So, yeah. How old are you here? This is, I was like 17. This is a Monterey, Mexico actually. Wow. Why in Mexico? Look at you, dog. Damn. That's crazy. Damn, dude, you're good. And you got off without getting stomped too. Is it just knowing when to release? Yeah. You got to know, you got to know when to get off. That's for sure. And right there. You're like, that's right. Yeah. He kind of bugged me off there. He kind of had me over to the side in the area, you know, but that's a good time to check out. There's like that gray zone, you know, either that or you hang on and end up underneath them. You started out when you're 10 years old though. How wild are your parents? Like, yeah, that's a good age. Yeah. Well, they, you know, my, they've ranched and grew up out there and my, my uncle rode bulls professionally and oh, really? Yeah. And that's kind of how I got into it too. I looked up to him a lot and see pictures of him riding bulls. And then it was just around. And I was like, I want to try that, you know, and, and then I just got the bug for it. Like super young. I was like, just ate up with it. Just wow from 10 years old. That's nuts. Yeah. And so how do you teach someone how to fall off of a bull without getting stomped when they're 10? Well, when you're riding those little steers, you know, a lot of time they cut bulls and turn them to steers. It makes them a lot of little dog. Steers are, you know, typically like 600 pounds, 600 pounds, you know, compared to 1500 pound bull that's aggressive and you know, back that wide and horns like that, you know, they're like little steer, you know, I remember my dad or uncle would get in the shoot with me and hold their horns, you know, and like, they just kind of of run out there and jump and kick and not fall off on the side. Yeah, not too bad. And then you kind of graduate up and collect the junior bulls and then the bigger bulls and then all, and then the harder they buck, you know, so there's kind of different levels you can progress as you, as you go. But it was a lot different deal back then when I was riding it was really before the PBR started, you know, there was no helmets. There was no vests. There was like none of that stuff is just old school rodeo, you know, but at the same time, I say that, but you know, it's evolved in such a sport now like the bulls are just so much rancor now that they were back then, you know, it's like now they're breeding them like race horses and the genetics where every one of those bulls, you know, bucks, you know, and like you got to go to get on three or four of them and tonight, you know, back when I was doing it, we'd go to the, they were still kind of full rodeos with all the other events and, you know, out of 15 or 20 bulls, there might be one or two in there that were like bad to get on. They would hurt you, you know, the rest of them were pretty rideable, you know, just to say so and, you know, we're smoking cigarettes and drinking beer back behind the sheets, you know, that kind of a thing, you know, we weren't training and doing yoga and I like all these guys out of the day, you know, but I loved it. I had so much fun and I loved the road part of it, you know, getting the truck with your best buds and go down the road in the weekends and there was always a band playing and, you know, it was just so much fun. I loved the culture of it and it was just good times, you know. How many times do you think you've rode bulls? I mean, I rode till I was about 23 from 10 to 23. Wow. That was all I ever wanted to do. Really? Yeah. I wanted to just ride bulls. Yeah. And, you know, I rode in high school, rode junior rodeos, rode bulls at high school and then I went to Tarleton State in Stephenville and rode bulls for Tarleton and then I got my pro cards for a couple of years and that was when like the PBR was like starting up and all of that and it got in sense of your backwards on one. What Jamie? There's one picture I just lost. He was backwards on it. Oh yeah, I was probably getting, that's probably getting dusted. Oh no, that's not it. That guy is about riding backwards. Yeah. I don't know if there's on purpose. He seems like a re-tool. He's going it off if he did. Yeah. What a terrible choice. Yeah. It was cool though. I loved it, man. I loved it. How do you go from that to anything else? Like how do you stop riding bulls and eventually become an actor and a singer? It was all very much a kind of a natural progression. You know, since I was a kid at the junior rodeos, there was always a dance afterward and a band playing. It's a very much a family community deal, you know, like you go to these towns and now those are the junior. The rodeo was going on in the dance, the street dance and food and music and you know, growing up listening to bands play specially in Texas, you know, you know, guys like Gary P. Nunn, I remember he always played the dance halls and he get Robert O'Keen and some of the, you know, growing here in those bands. And I moved to Laredo, Texas, you know, like 16 or 17 when my dad and my mother bought me a guitar and I didn't know how to play it much and walked into this place and my dad was living at and he was playing dominoes with these guys and this guy saw my guitar and he's like, yeah, you know how to play that thing? I said no. And he said, well, let me see it. And he picked it up and he played this killer like Mariette song called La Malagania. And I was just fascinated with it. I was just like, wow, I can't believe you made that guitar sound like that, you know. I've been dragging that thing around for a couple years. I didn't, you know, had to tune it up and he's like, you want to learn how to play this guitar? And I said, yeah, he said, let me show you this song and he taught me that, Mariette, Malagania. I had a couple little parts, you know, finger-picking part, strumming part and it really kind of gave me that foundation, you know, just kind of those few little tools. And then I went up to Stephenville to ride Bulls at Tarleton after that and a couple other friends that I'd met there that really good could play the guitar a little bit and they had bands that played every weekend in the town. It was a little bar there called City limits where all these bands would come play like Jason Bowland and the cross-Canadian ragweed guys and Pat Green and Robert O'Keene like all the Texas guys would come play, you know. So I was like, I went from being on the ball. and then the cross-Canadian ragweed guys and Pat Green and Robert O'Keen, like all the Texas guys would come play, you know, so I was like, I went from being on the border, just kind of just mostly like the curios and tahono bands that I would see, which was really cool, but when I got up there I was like, oh man, there's all these like, cool kind of song, you know, guys writing original music and songs and playing bands and we'd go watch them all the time, and as I was still a rodeo and the only song I knew was that Molly Gain routine, so I was like, I gotta come up with some new stuff, it's all I know how to play, you know, so I went and got a book of chords to teach myself some new chords on the guitar and we just learned one or two at a time and I'd start making up songs about our adventures on the weekends, you know, a lot of it was just sitting in the back of the truck and being in places where you didn't have radio, signal or, you know, nothing really listened to your tired listening to the same old stuff and I'd make up songs and then whatever town we would get to in my buddies, but I'd play that song, you were singing in the back seat, you know, and so that's how the whole songwriting thing started and then I ended up getting a job working, for guiding Mac Altizer, he had a rodeo company called Bad Company rodeo and Dale Rio and I'd written Bulls that at some of his rodeos and new name on my uncle, you know, over the years and so it's kind of familiar with that whole thing and started working for him on the ranch and helping with some of the rodeo stuff and still riding Bulls and he found out that I could play the guitar and sing a few songs and he always had a party at the rodeo, he was kind of notorious and famous for having like just awesome parties, he's like, man, all right, being in get your guitar, you're going to play like the after party, you know, and pull the flatbed trailer up there for the hospitality tent for all the contestants after the rodeo and those are like the first, he really encouraged me to like start playing for people and doing that and then it would just spill over into the bars afterwards after the rodeo and everybody would end up going to the bar and I was like, being in bring your guitar with you I started getting gigs in the bars, the bars would ask me if I wanted to come back and play and just after you're like, I feel like a few years of that, it's just like, you know, I was kind of a weekend where riding Bulls, I was definitely not going to making a live and doing it, always had to have a day job during the week, you know, I was working on the ranch or doing something and I started getting to where I could go to these bars and make like a hundred bucks and tips, you know, within a couple of hours and get free beard, free food and I was like, man, this is almost as much as I made all day digging holes with the shovel, you know, it had taken me long to figure out that that was pretty cool and I was just like, I'm going to stick with it, you know. What an organic sort of a journey, you know, like a natural progression. Yeah, and I didn't have high expectations, you know, but I just like, and I was talking about kind of community in this Austin area in Texas in general. It's just like, man, people were so supportive and I was just like, if you had a song to play it, people led live music, they're like, yeah, get up and play, you know, like, Mac with the rodeo company and all the guys that worked there, Dave Jennings and Casey and Smurr, there's the whole crew of the bad company crew from those days and they always had kind of the bad company house band to where everybody would get up and try to play a song and it's just like, man, we don't care if it's any good or not, just get up there and play. We're all in it together and there were so many like places that were like that that I don't think if I was in that environment, I probably would have never pursued it, you know, I said so many people you know, support and you're in encouraging and try it and it took me a long time, you know, to work stuff out and learn because I didn't have any really formal music, musical background or lessons or training, I really just learned it on the road and playing in bars and from other musicians, you know, really. Yeah. No lessons at all. Just feeling it out along the way. Yeah. Well, they got, you know, they got taught me to the Lamala gang you there, but then after that, it was just, you know, anybody else who had a guitar and might know a song, you know, like, oh, how do you play that chord? You know, like, oh, you play it like this, you know. Wow. So how many years were you doing that before you got Yellowstone? Oh, gosh, for a while. I mean, I think my, you know, I was 22 or something like that in Steed and Bill, you know, Ryan Bull starting to play songs, trying to play gigs. After, you know, ended up moving down here to new bromfels and the Austin area playing music for a while and then ended up going out to Los Angeles and playing and then hit the road with a band for, I think I had four or five albums or so, you know, out, you know, I've been touring for five or six years. I think a how old was I like when Yellowstone started like 36, 37. So yeah, I'd been playing the music stuff for a long time. And so how did the else, how'd you go from music to Yellowstone? Like, how'd you even, did you do any acting before that? No, I've been one, I'd done a film with Jeff Bridges years ago called Crazy Heart and wrote some songs for that movie. And that was really my own thing. That was a good movie. It was pretty cool. You know, I was just like, Jeff Bridges plays a musician in the show and I, and we're like, the backup band at the bowling alley for one of the scenes, you know, which was really cool. And then written some songs for some other films and some TV shows since then. And I met a game named John Linson out in Los Angeles producer and his, him and his dad, Art Linson. They did like Sons of Anarchy. A bunch of shows and a bunch of great movies and he introduced me to Taylor. And Taylor was, I think it was that movie, Win River is first maybe. I'd met Taylor and just kind of talk about music and stuff and he wanted me to write a song for Win River. And I'd given it a shot a couple times never really had anything that fit for what he wanted. But he ended up using a song that I'd already written. And then we just kind of kept in touch. And then when the Yellowstone thing came up, he got in touch again about writing some songs for the show. And then he learned that I used to do all the rodeo stuff, I think. And grew up ranching and he's like, well, shoot, you can do a lot of this stuff. I got to find a way to get you in the show, you know. And it literally went from the conversations like, well, I don't know what I'm going to do with you. But I'll find something to do with you. And he literally said he's like, you know, if you do good, you know, you guys, if you suck, I'll kill you off. If you do, keep it on. Something like that, you know, like, you know, formal acting like training or anything. No, not at all. That's what's amazing. Do you know, really good. Oh, I appreciate that. You know, I get to kind of play a cowboy and be a little bit of a bon of myself. Yeah, but it's that role's got some complexity to it. It's not just a cowboy. It's like you've got some complicated scenes, you know, some emotional scenes, some deep scenes and you're really good, man. Thank you. That's impressive. I appreciate that. I enjoyed it. You know, I hadn't done much acting at all. And I got to give a lot of credit to the actors that are on the show too, you know, that those folks that have really studied it and paid their dues learning that craft, you know, they really create the environment, you know, especially for me not knowing much about it, you know, just kind of being a part of the scene. Like, they're so good that they make you react in a certain way. Right. You know, they know how to get it out of you, whether you know, a cold and get a look and all those folks, you know, they know how to set up the scene. They know what they're doing. So they already kind of have the whole thing set up. And so when I walk into a scene and they say they're lying to me, it's just like, oh, okay, yeah, I got an answer. Right. I'm just like kind of like naturally, you know, answering that, you know, right. Yeah. It's like if you work with a really good actor, sometimes you forget their acting. Like, oh, oh, yeah, we're acting like you see like this is really happening. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For me, like, I think it was the moment when I thought it was really happening. How long did it take for you got comfortable like doing that on camera? Still not. Really? Yeah, still not. Yeah. Well, you play it off. Good. No, thanks. You know, I think some of it comes from the ride and bulls, you know, you learn how to channel that anxiety or fear into just like, oh, okay, let's go time. Let's just like pull it together and channel that, you know, if you write a bull, I think you could kind of do basically anything. Man, I, you know, that's one thing. My uncle taught me when I was young, you know, he was really quick to be like, man, it doesn't matter how strong you are. You know, it's not about it. It's all the mental, it's all in your mind. And it's all, it's not, I think I can. It's, I know I can and I will. You know, when he goes, if you don't, if you don't believe that every time you go put your rope on one of those, on their backs, he's like, it ain't gonna happen. Yeah. He says, you see, you don't, it's not being cocky. It's just being confident, you know, and believe it in yourself and, and having that, that power of mind over matter. Yeah. If you could do that, acting's easy. And take that in anything in life. Yeah. And I, and I did exactly how moments were, you know, I'm like, whoof. Okay, take deep breath. Right. Yes, go time. Let's go, you know, what's actually having more than a decade of doing that with bulls, like that, that's so uncontrollable. Like, it is like, you're at the mercy of fate and how this plays out. Yeah. And you have this enormous beast and you've chosen to scare the shit out of yourself. Got top of this thing and try to ride it. You chose to join the dance. Yeah. If you could do that, if you could do that and be successful at that, I kind of think you could do anything. I think that, I mean, I wouldn't want my kid to do it at 10, but fuck, it's probably really, if they could survive pretty valuable. I, I really picked two of the easiest professions. Yeah. I've read, write and both play in music. Right. Two, two, they'd have the least about a success ratio. Impossible task. Right. Well, you did you get an ever getting these serious injuries? I, you know, I was fortunate, like, not serious, I did, there was one of the worst ever. I got knocked all these teeth out and I got jerked down one night and the weatherford and took my lip off and my teeth went through down here and these are all fake up here and then my lip just hanging about through it. What it didn't knock me out, which was wild though. I got on this bull and I remember it is in weatherford, Texas and it's got Butler Arena there. Any of this little angles bull there didn't have horns on him, little muley. And usually you can go up to the guys that own the bulls and a lot of the bulls have patterns, you know, that they, that they'll do over and over. You know, so you can kind of talk to the stock contractor, the guys that don't want to be like, hey, you know, what's this bull did generally do. He's like, I almost time they'll take two jumps out and they spin to the left or they take two jumps on and they go to the right or all they just, you know, they'll jump kick around and make a circle and he goes, man, he goes, I don't know. He's like the last two times I bucked. He's not, he hadn't been ridden. He'll usually jumps out there and just spins right in the gate and he's like, nobody's really ridden in past three or four seconds. So he goes, I don't know what he's going to do after that. And sure enough, that's what happened. I got on him and it jumped out and just got it on right there in the gate just spinning right there and I rode him through it like three or four rounds. And after I rode him, like I think the boy didn't know what to do next. He got a little frustrated and he just stopped and just stopped dead still and just blow and it just, you know, just mad. And you never really want to jump off of him when they're still like that because you just you'll fall right beside him. You know, so you want him to have a little momentum. So when you, you know, you're checking out, they can get away from him. And so I spurred him a little bit to get him to jump. So when he jumped, I could jump off. But when I was spurting it, this jumped off, straight up off the ground like a cat off all fours. And when he came crap and when he jumped up like that, I, you know, kind of rot me back on back like that. My hand still tightened the rope. And then when he came down, he just brought out jerk me down with the fours and I came forward and he threw his head back and I just head butted him. And then when he did and then my hand was still caught in the rope and then he took off, running around and just dragged me around and just stomp the crap out of me, you know, for a bit. And I finally got Liz and I remember running over to the fence and I just, you know, kind of had my arms on the fence and I could see all the blood just pouring down all over me. And one of the bull fighters ran up and he looks at me and goes, Oh, buddy. He's like, whoa. Ella. So they have to stitch a lip back on. Yeah. You know, and the shock was just, yeah, I didn't feel anything. Like I was just like in shock. And I was like, Oh man, you know, I remember like my girlfriend was there from high school and my buddy and we drove to the little, you know, they're like, you want to call him? This was like, I don't have health insurance. They're called my ambulance. You know, got my buddy's car and we drove her to the emergency room and weather for it and I go in and the nurse, she's just like, Oh man, she's like, we can't do anything for you here. You're going to have to go to like Dallas to like trauma. You know, you have to get like a oral surgeon to put you back together. And she goes, you want me to, you know, get you an ambulance there and I was like, no, I think we could make it, you know, and she's like, she gave me some pain pills. She goes, don't take these now. She goes, hold on to these. And then when you get to Dallas, then take them because you're probably going to have to wait, you know, before they can, because three or four in the morning, before they can get somebody in there to see us. And sure enough, we got to Dallas and I'm just sitting there in the weight room and I had a rag and I was just holding my mouth together and the shock wore off. And then it's, you know, I was starting to feel it. Took those pain meds and then Dr. Kane, then held me back and getting a big shot in the roof of my mouth, trying to numb everything. And just, I think it took them longer to clean it all up, you know, pull all the hair and dirt out of there and sew me up and, T, oh, it was an ordeal here. And I was for sure, for months after that, you know, getting the dental work done on that crap. So how was the lip hanging off? It bit it all, it would have came all the way off. It was just hanging on right here by side, so it was just hanging down. And so they just had to stitch the lower part to the upper part and put it all together. Yeah, just all the crap right through the middle. And if I shave, I got a big scar that kind of goes down there. And then they went through down here. So I got some stitches down there. And then most of the stitches were all in my, my gums and all of that. So they had to put like posts and implants and all that stuff. Wow. Yeah. That should take forever, huh? Kind of knocked the front for out and then it just dominoed the rest of the, you know, this riding bulls with no health insurance is wild. That's crazy man. That's crazy. Yeah, that was just life back then for me. You know, if they go into the music stuff, it's like, I don't know. I just wouldn't really scared about it or even the expectations of making it or I mean, to me at the time I had a truck and a camper on it. And I was like, now I was like, I got no bills. I got no responsibilities on just like go make a hundred bucks a night playing music in a bar. I was like, this is the dream, you know, I'm like, I made it. Yeah. Well, I think when you've done something super, super difficult, everything else seems easier. And if you've done what you did with riding bulls for that long, like the music business is like, it's the worst thing that could happen. Yeah. Even the travel part, you know, like, you know, in the early days of playing when I really decided I was going to try to make a run and play, you know, and it's like, oh, well, we got to get in the van and go drive around and play in bars, you know, I was like, we're doing that rodeo in for years. You know, he's sleeping in the back of the truck or whatever. And it was fun for us. We loved it. And some ideas like starving on the road playing in a band playing music. I was like, let's go. And getting a guaranteed paycheck every night, you know, right? The gratitude you must have the right in bulls. I mean, after time, you know, you walked away with nothing. Right. You know, a bus to lip, nothing. Yeah. And no health insurance. And less fuel life. And there's not a bunch of people that love you. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's a great base to start out from, you know, I mean, it sounds like it's almost like the universe engineered this path for you to go down. Like if you wanted to pick a path that would bring you to where you are right now, it is the perfect set of circumstances. I look at it all the time, you know, just from an outside perspective, I guess. And just like, wow, how in the world all this come together. And just a lot of luck and perseverance or whatever. Not I would say I haven't worked hard at it. You know, I feel like I have and all that. But there are a lot of luck out there. And a lot of good people too. Yeah. A lot of good people helped me out along the way and gave me gas money and gave me a place of sleep or placed to eat and helped us get other gigs and other. I mean, I remember going from one town to the next and not having gas money to get to the next, and having no plan other than like, let's just head west or head east. And, you know, he'd go play at a bar and sure enough there'd be somebody there that where they like, oh man, you know, you come back to my house. We'll have bonfire and play some songs. And he's like, oh, my brother's got a bar and Phoenix. And you know, he's like, call them on your way out. You know, we'd go there. And we'd always like chop firewood or wash dishes or wouldn't know your lawn or wash your car on the way too to like to get gas money and keep on going. Wow. So that was just kind of how it always felt like I learned early. If you were willing to help yourself, you know, those people would help you all day long. I think luck is a factor, but it's only a factor if you've already had all those other experiences. I think about it. If you hadn't ridden bulls, you hadn't gone through all the ranching, all the hard labor, all the different things, then like you probably wouldn't have capitalized on that luck the same way. No, not at all. Your character wouldn't be the same. No. You know, that's like part part of who you are is the character that you've developed from what you've done. It kind of conditioned me to do it in a way. Yeah, in a big way. It seems like it's it almost like it's engineered for this to happen. What happened? It's kind of crazy. It's been cool, man. I've filled. Very storybook, you know. Very like movie. Like a plot in a movie. Guys, a cowboy bull rider, start singing songs, people like, hey, you should probably do this for a living. And then someone's like, hey, man, you should be on TV. You know, you're one of the biggest hits in the world. I think I got that song one day you think I'm putting me in the movie. Yeah, the bucko is a living this thing right now. You know, it's like, I mean, people all the time they're like, you know, they can't really believe where I'm from or whatever. They just think it's something like made up story. All right, man, you know, well, it seems like a story that someone would make up if they wanted to pretend to be a cowboy. Yeah. Well, I think a lot of people have a bet. Right? Yeah. A lot of people still do. Yeah. And that funny. That's funny. That's like stolen valor almost. Yeah. You know, anything like, you know, all kinds of stuff, you know, professions or whatever. You pretend to be the, oh, yeah. What it is. Which would you kind of, I went to the restroom. Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, totally understand. I want to keep talking about, I don't want to stop this. Let's pause, take a leak, we'll be right back, folks. And we're back. Yeah, it's kind of funny that people would want to fake the life that you've lived. But that is such a romantic story. Like it's such a, it's such a movie that it makes sense that people want to fake. It's got to be weird walking around. Like having lived a life that people would want to fake and pretend that they lived. It is, it is sometimes, you know, it's like, you know, I remember when I really started for, you know, playing music and stuff, I work, I've worked. I've had all the time. That's what I wrote, blues. And, you know, it was my, very much my identity, you know, no, cowboy stuff wasn't really cool then, you know, I like to feel like in the early 2000s and all of that, you know, you know, there wasn't a lot of big, there wasn't a big Americana scene or, you know, any of that kind of stuff, you know, and definitely going to New York or going to Los Angeles and touring around, like, I'd be the only one wearing a cowboy hat, you know. I remember the, I think the first time, what time I was in LA, we were out on the Santa Monica Pier and there was a guy that had like the one man band thing, you know, out there and there's always tourists on the pier and I'm just like out there checking out the scenery and just mind them home business and this guy gets on the microphone and he just points over at me and goes, oh, bro, that mountain. And everybody on the pier, turn around, I looked at me, there's point of it laughing at me, you know, just like, ah, okay, you know, it was like, that was the association with the cowboy hat at the time. That's hilarious. Yeah, they changed cowboy. Now's a whole new ball game. You know, all the way to that legend. But you know, now playing and man, I'm so stoked to see all these new bands out there and like so many young folks playing actual instruments, you know, I felt like for a long time there was so electronic DJs and all that stuff, you know. Well, there's a giant country comeback that's going on right now, kind of nationwide. I'm sure you love opening the gates. Zach Brian song. Yeah, that's such a great bull riding song. Yeah, I got some great teams. Yeah, that's a great bull riding song. But there's just so many great musicians out there now and also have lived like different, but very like Charlie Crockett. What a fascinating dude that kind of is like just kind of performing on the streets and you know, just being kind of a vagabond traveling around and then finally catches and people like damn, this music is fucking great. Yeah, I wear it on their sleeves, you know, and I haven't happened to competence to not think people have always been. I think there has been plenty of folks out there, you know, right from the heart and so to speak and all that and, you know, having a certain integrity to the things that they're saying and and one, you know, the truth and they're speaking into their songs and things like that. And there's just a there's a lot more of a platform to support them, you know, and like people like, oh, wow, there's a there's a bunch of this stuff out there, you know, there's also an appreciation for it because I think we're all fearful that people like you won't exist in the future because it seems like a guy like you, you know, bull riding, living on a ranch like the same songs and bars, like that almost is like a thing of the past. Oh, very much. But it's so romantic to people that like when we meet a guy like you in real life, you're like, oh, keep him around, you know, like you want to make sure that people like you still exist. It's a very exciting thing for people to have a person who's lived an authentically interesting life and authentically out of the box life. It's not a normal life. Like you're if you meet a million people, the odds of you meeting one guy who used to bull ride and then started singing in bars with his friends and was happy living on the road. Now all of a sudden he's on a fucking gigantic television show. It's not even one in a million. It's pretty it's strange that sometimes I, you know, I meet people and like, you know, oh, yeah, it grew up just like you, you know, and then I really like, I don't think I did. I kind of have to think about it myself. No, definitely didn't. You were a bull and you were fucking 10, dude. Most people in their 10 they're playing with GI Joe's, you know, they're not riding bulls. That's a very unusual setup for the rest of your life, you know, you can I think if you do some things difficult when you're really young, you get accustomed to fear, you get accustomed to anxiety and nerves and the thing that, I mean, that that is like the mark of a man, like a man is his ability to be in a very high stress situation and keep a shit together, you know, and to have gone through a lot of that when you're very young, like riding a bullet 10 is crazy to gone through that when you're very young, it just develops the kind of character that allows you to kind of do anything in life. And I think most men see that and they wish they were like that. I remember a moment, you know, it was really when I was, you know, riding steers and then I made that transition to the big bulls, you know, and it wasn't like all here's just like this little steer and then there's an in between and then there's the big it was like this little steer and then this big bull, you know, I went to it was a junior rodeo and oh, dusted Texas and it was my first year to ride junior bulls and I entered the bull riding my uncle was there with me and they started running the bulls up into the streets and they were big. They were like backs that wide and horns sticking out inside the streets, you know, and they were big, but they didn't buck that hard, you know, they just kind of jumped kicked down, but they were still big, you know, and like I remember like scared and like in tears, you know, kind of I was scared and a uncle, you know, it was super cool about it. He wasn't like you have to do this or you have to do, he's like, man, whatever you want to do, you know, you can pack it up. Well, we'll get out of here right now. It's like this is either for you or it's not for you, you know, and I remember just him telling me you want to take like 20, 30 minutes and just kind of think about it and whatever you want to do will make happen, you know, and I did. I kind of walked around there for a bit and I just had this some kind of like I knew I would regret it if I didn't do it, didn't try it, you know, there was something in me where like I meant because I slept it. I dreamt about it, you know, it's just like loved it and I was like, no, I'm going to do this, you know, and I put my rope on him and had all the sport there that I needed in that moment and they opened the gate this big old high horn boy, he just turned and kind of jumped out there a real doll style and I think I rode him two or three jumps and fell off and it was just like, I'm the king of the world. Yeah. I was like, I'm a bull rider now, you know, I'm not just the steer rider kid, you know, I kind of made that little and I remember after that, I just, man, I just craved it. Like this, the higher they jump, the faster they spend the better. I like it. Really? Oh, just, yeah, the dirty ranked is running in there. Let's go. And when I was, when I was little, I mean, even when I was like 14 or 15, you know, the guys were starting to breed the bulls for like the PBR, like they full on started these like breeding programs, you know, used to, you could go to a practice pan and, you know, it's been old farmer that had two or three old bulls that you could get on and practice and they just jump around and just, you know, nothing else we're really going to hurt you bad, you know. And then they started breeding these young bulls. And man, you go to the practice pan. There'd be 10 or 15 of these like yearlings that bucked and they needed somebody to get on them, you know, like test pilot. And I was the test pilot. It was a guy named Bradwick, uh, raspberry, I believe, uh, kind of out in brownwood. I remember going to his house and, uh, I could ride, I could ride. I was pretty sticky when I was, I could ride a lot better when I was younger than I was when I got older, you know, for some reason, I just had that no fear, whatever that was. And I could get on 10 or 15 a day. And they just kept running on them man, man, they'd be trying to flip over in the shoes and just, you know, their young green bulls that were half wild. And, and they're just trying to figure out which ones bucked and which ones didn't. And they would, you know, they'd get rid of the ones that didn't buck and people want to did. And man, I just be like the wilder they got in the shoot, like the more aggressive I got, like I just like, like, okay, that's what we're going to do. Come on, let's do this, you know. Real loud. That's so crazy. Yeah. That's such a crazy way to live your life. You know, wild bulls, you say wild, like the ones that are out there in the wild, there's some of the most dangerous animals that you could ever encounter when they're act like they're called scrub bulls. Like my buddy, Adam, he lives in Australia or he's moving to America. But yeah, when he lived in Australia, he said that they would encounter these scrub bulls, which is like wild domestic bulls that got out and started breeding. And then they, many generations later, they're now completely wild. Like deer out there. Yeah. And they will run after you. I know these three guys from Australia that that several Australian guys that came over lived in the Stephenville. A lot of these cowboys have moved to Stephenville because it was so central and it was kind of cowboy capital there. And his name was Lance Kelly, he has some brothers and they were from up there in North Queensland somewhere. And once summer he went back to work. And then when he came back, he wanted, he'd tell me about where he was from all the time. some brothers and they were from up there in north queens and somewhere and once summer he went back to work and then when he came back he wanted he'd tell me about where he was from all the time you know I was young curious I was always fast I was like wow you're from Australia you know I've only seen movies you know like uh what's it the how guy said my mom's all dirty you know man from down uh man from snow you ever know which was in any way um but I was a fascinating with Australia and him and his brothers and so he went home and he videotaped a uh a VHS you know you didn't have phones back to him it was like the old camp BHS tape recorder and he'd videotaped it around his body while he was walking around working on the ranch and he'd have his four wheeler in their chase in these wild cow and rounded him up and his brother brothers and he would just like chase him on a four wheeler as long as you know to keep him running till they got so tired they couldn't go anymore and then he had this piece of pipe on there he could run up behind him and kind of knock him down and then he'd jump off and tie their legs together and they would catch a bunch of him like that and then his brother would come by you know later with a truck and a wench and winch him up into the trailer and they would catch all these wild cows like that and to be able to see that footage and stuff and have him tell me how they were doing it and so on then I was like oh that's the coolest thing in the world I want to get when can I go you know Australia is such a crazy place it is I mean it's bigger than the United States and it or the size of the United States roughly and it has less people than Los Angeles and everything will kill you everything will kill you every snake spider every snake crocodiles they have saltwater crocodiles and giant fucking great white sharks and a hardy people man yeah hardy motherfuckers come from that place I feel like Texas and a lot of folks from Australia like a big kindred spirits yes I think so too my buddy James McCams on the podcast yesterday he's a comic out of Australia and he's from there and he spends time here he was living here for a while but he hadn't moved back because he had another kid and but now he's coming back and forth and trying to figure he's really talented he's coming off in here yeah he was living in Austin for a couple years and living in America for a couple years years living in Austin for about a year but you know it's why I just about to have another kid and they just decided to go back to Australia where she's got support but man he fucking misses it he was here he's like mate I miss it so much yeah I miss it so much like I think these are any places like this place it's pretty awesome but Australia it's like it's the same kind of thing it's like it's a rugged place and the kind of people that that live there they're fun they're fun kind of got a super fucked up oppressive government unfortunately I think it's a lot about what you say too you know when you survive certain things in your life and you know it puts things in perspective of what you're taking seriously or what's it what's an emergency right right oh is this this this is life or death or is it not or you know and to be able to laugh at stuff and I thought I love the comedians it's just like man to be able to just joke and cut stuff about the most serious things or whatever it is like God we need that so much yeah it's an important service it doesn't seem like it is to people because it seems stupid you know like oh you just told jokes like not for for me when I go and watch a good comedy show I feel better it's medicine and I think it also puts life into perspective with a sense of humor you can kind of look at things through a different lens ago yeah we're probably gonna be all right I get a feeling like you know I think a lot of folks have this idea that song writers are where you know but especially I've you know have a bunch of sad songs or whatever to go to that deep place and you live through stuff that you write about but I mean I find in comics man I like I feel like there's some of the heaviest stuff in the world that those folks have experienced to be able to you know come up and tell these kinds of jokes and stories and the educational part of it with it you know it's so much I don't know for me it seems like it's so much more than just a joke it is for some you know some people just do jokes it really depends on your style but I mean if you go back to like Richard Pryor his whole thing was like explaining life and telling stories yeah but with an amazing sense of humor and then you would leave that and you know like everybody feels like more united they feel better yeah just like like what everybody was thinking yeah that was everything in afraid to say and also he would look at things from a very wise perspective that was also hilarious so you walked out of their feeling better yeah you felt like you were better it felt like there's it bringing some hope yeah yeah there's hope in humor yeah for sure but this hope in music too yeah you know I don't have any musical talented all but I always think of music as almost like a drug because music when when a good song hits you like like you're if you're in the car and a good tune comes on like especially back when I used to listen to the radio you know and like you didn't expect what was coming on and also rewind it yeah also that it's radar love by golden earing like fuck yeah let's go yeah like you feel different it like changes your mood like a good you hear like free bird like you're flipping through the channels in the fucking guitar solo for free bird comes all you're like yes you feel better like it excites all these parts of your senses your consciousness your feelings it's it's a drug I mean it's an amazing thing real therapeutic for me at the very beginning like I like I said I didn't have a high expectations but I I knew and I've kind of wrote some of the first songs that I wrote and I like got some of that stuff off my chest like it changed me you know yeah it like it became a tool that all the sudden I had access to this thing that like was helping me heal in a way like I could get I could get stuff off my chest like the things that I was uncomfortable talking about in conversation with folks like I could put them into a song and like sing them to the wall and I was just like getting that stuff out like there wasn't anybody in the room I was just like you know but I was getting this stuff out out of me you know and it's also a way for people to hear it where it's not annoying you know what I mean like do you just tell some sad story about your life people I wrote jeez like there we go cry me a rib or kid everybody's got a story but if you have a sad story in a song it's like fucking it's kind of it's beautiful like I love a good sad song you know a song that has like real emotion in it whether it's a real story or whether like one of my favorite culture wall songs is Kate McKinnon yeah Jamie turned me on to that song yeah he said it's a mate man and culture's him yeah he was fucking 21 when he made that song which is crazy yeah he was that song that sounds like a 58 year old man who's been smoking cigarettes his whole life yeah and that dude is interesting too because he still works on a ranch yeah yeah he's a great guy he's one of my favorites of the younger guys that have come up in doing this he's just I same way when I first heard those first songs I was like fuck is this yeah yeah you know they saw that I saw like a picture of him up on that he's kid you know crazy and I just fabulous right song there's a wicked bird you hear that you're like what is this yeah what who is this guy and I couldn't believe he was 21 I'm like that makes zero sense yeah he's got a tone man and there's a bunch of them out there now that I'm hearing too there's just like I'm like man how cool yeah how cool I'm so glad that they're getting a shot at it or just getting the support I don't know if it's a getting a shot at it but it's like getting the love and support that they deserve for the it's good music man yeah it's great great music and there's a thing now with the internet where it's so easy to share something you know like someone's got a good song and it's on youtube or Spotify and then you just send a link to your buddy yeah you go bro check this out like I kind of say like half the songs I find out about my friends just send me and then all sort of I'm like oh shit yeah then I'll add it to my playlist you know it's like it's easy to share things now where you don't have to go to the record store and pick up the record and you know now it's just like within seconds of you getting it in your phone you're listening to it and it's easier to record the stuff too you know it's like you don't need a half a million bucks in a studio and all that stuff it's like man half this stuff you can record on your phone look at all over answering yeah one fucking song yeah one song and the first show he ever does is like 18,000 people does the first show that dude ever performed yeah I feel for my I would never have been able to do that when I started you know like I would not prepared for anything like I don't you know I don't know maybe they're not but that's a lot of he settled in carry he settled in pretty easy he figured out he's a smart cat yeah he's a really smart dude and he settled in really easy I guess they have to you know I always think like you know gosh it's changed so much since I started out you know I mean we didn't even have like you know if you wanted to learn how to play a song you kind of had to go listen to the record and just try to figure it out you know rewind it now there's like oh here's a guy that'll just show you ever know and this guy on YouTube that'll show you exactly how to do it yeah that took me years to figure out you know and you know maybe that is like today you know these guys it's uh they're learning how to do it that's such a quicker rate and like they know how to handle the crowds and do all the stuff and it's just like boom Mary there you go well that's what everything today yeah you know I think that's also why like I mean in martial arts and like UFC this is the reason why the guys are so much better today and it's because they get to see everything that everybody's ever done and then they practice it and improve upon it and they get it at a year early age you get essentially just on your phone watch every fight that's ever taken place ever in human history that's been recorded I did that on the road a few years ago I mean I've still I've always been a pretty rudimentary guitar player you know I can't solo all over the place and all of that stuff and I think it was like 2019 last I put out a record and I was going on a tour and my friend Charlie Sexton produced album he's a wonderful guitar player and Charlie Sexton the guy from the from the 80s beat so long when yeah played with play with I remember that's all in play the archangel he was like really young when beats so lonely came out right man he's yeah legend and I remember calling him though I was like man I really want to get better at the guitar you know and he's like well just listen to all the stuff that you really like you know he's like don't try to play it all note for no he's like I just keep listening to it and like you'll start eventually finding those places and develop your style and but it was when I got on the road as well man I had access on YouTube right all of my favorite musicians and guitar players and I just kind of made a point of sitting down and I even found this guy that was just breaking down and giving simple blues guitars lessons for kids and I was like now this was great never done anything like this and just like went through I went back you know right I got to memorize all the notes on the fretboard and I needed you know it was just it was so much fun doing it and uh you know and also give confidence to get up and jam with other musicians and play and kind of know what key you're in what you're doing and uh you know I went years you know without having any kind of lessons or training and then I'm just like within three weeks of being on tour and watching YouTube videos of it just stepped it up so much like how'd you learn I did I just 20 about 20 years later my career I decided to learn how to play the guitar on YouTube it is amazing I mean that's the positive part of the internet you know if you can avoid the negative parts there's a lot of great positive stuff in the internet and the access and stuff like that it's amazing yeah I'll for you all to disable negative everything right right well there unfortunately there's a lot of people that don't have good lives and they do have a lot of extra time because they're not really investing in their own life so they just spread a negativity online yeah and it's just human nature but wild it is it's a wild world but it's also a wildly positive world too just what you just said about the guitar stuff or with the Oliver Anthony stuff yeah this guy standing there with a guitar in front of a field with no production value at all but has a song they sing and from the heart like how many how many views does that shit have on YouTube it's got to be like 100 million views or something nuts and that song was fucking gigantic yeah richman north of mm i remember my wife playing it for me for the first time oh this is yeah what does that she's like oh man check this out you know it's like that's so fucking rad yeah I got a chance of seeing perform live too was banned they're fucking fantastic and he's settled he's completely settled into being famous now he's he's cool with it yeah he's still the same dude I met him real early on and I actually talked to him on the phone how was it got at 236 million holy shit wow when you say like he's settled it was he's I didn't know it was he's having a hard time later he was freaking out and uh I contacted him early on and he said they can I ask you some advice and we talked on the phone I said yeah sure so I called him up and he was just telling me that he was getting hit up all these different people that were trying to give him money to sign a contract this then I go hey hey don't sign nothing I go you don't need nobody you don't need to be locked up in any contracts with nobody yeah and he was like they're all telling me I got a strike while the iron's hot I'm like fuck them I go you got talent dude talent is the number one thing you already have that you're going to be fine you just keep making songs like that you can't fucking lose but what you don't want to do is be tied with some legal contract to some assholes just sucking you like a vampire yeah and they're going to be stuck with you for years and then you're going to have to go to court get out of that and exactly yeah whatever the opportunity like I said you just man you're writing good songs you're doing good stuff and you have a way to give it to the people but he's getting more you make seven million dollars to sign this I'm like don't do it I know it sounds like but that's seven million dollars they're giving you that because they're going to make 14 there's not a chance in hell and you don't need them yeah you don't need you should get all the money you should get all you shouldn't give any money to anybody else you don't need it you can make your own records you could put it all together yourself you don't need nobody yeah you always got a member there they're going to buy for one sell for two you'll somewhere exactly it's there's no way they're going to give you that money unless they're going to make a lot more and then you're going to get stuck with them don't do it and he's like they're all telling me I got to do it now is if I miss this opportunity I'm like you ain't missing shit yeah you ain't missing there's not a chance you're going to miss it especially when you're that young yeah and good yeah and just fucking good you know there's what they're going to be you know be right in the next 10 years yeah have you heard that song woman squirmed I haven't no is that one of his new ones whoa he wrote that one after break up it's just whoa you hear that fucker it just gets you right in the bone marrow yeah it's fantastic it's so good it's just like you know it's a beautiful story and I love a story like that and it was like selling uh who's selling like a heavy equipment like with salesman just like fucking machinery and shit yeah and then right in songs and he gets fed up one day and he puts this song let's make a video this fucking song yeah and all of a sudden boom and people asking all the time they're like man he thinks you know the best young song writer out there you know musician or guitar and like man I don't know it's probably some 16 year old kid in the garage that nobody's heard of that's probably the best guy out there you know he's ready to jump on yeah and get you with some song that this you know crushes you yeah they're out there it's just but that's the thing that I was saying about guys like you that people look at guys like you and it's such a romantic story they worry that there's not going to be any more of you you know what I mean like this weird digital world and AI and just this strange fucking life that we were all living like now that a not I want to say simple because it's not simple but it's unencumbered by all the bullshit of the the world that we think is fake and unfortunate yeah like to have this pure life and this wild romantic story when people meet a guy like you're like oh man they're probably going to be many more of them oh no man I mean look at this guy you know guys are kind of I feel so fortunate too like when I did come to Austin like in my you know mid-20s you know I met guys like Joey Ealy and Terry Allen and Guy Clark and like these little Steve Earl legendary kind of guys that I looked up to and I remember being young and then I mean I'm like oh man I don't think you know these these are the got last guys left you know and so you know I don't know there's so many of these young folks out there they're doing it that I think crave it and they're that's what they're interested in they wouldn't want to play that music you know I don't want to feel that stuff so I'm optimistic about it but I can definitely here's a different world out there these days not an act you know even for myself you know just going with the flow and like well where we going tomorrow you know how's this like I have no idea how so much of this social media stuff is working or what you know and how you put out an album or songs and it's like don't worry about all that jazz just like just keep right and yeah just keep right and keep making it and just be undeniable and at the end of the day if all of that stuff disappears you know you can always go sit on the sidewalk and put your tip jar out there and play a song for people who are walking down the street and I guarantee there's gonna be somebody that's gonna stop and appreciate it you know well that's what got a Charlie Crockett started yeah I had plenty of gigs where like you know you go into some bar and the you know what my wife always says go where you're celebrated not where you're tolerated you know you go into some bar and they kind of you can tell they don't really want you know they're not excited about you playing anywhere like yeah shit I'll just go I'll go park in the parking lot across the street and sit on the tailgate in my truck and play and we'll have a party over there you know that's the crazy thing about music you just kind of set up anywhere you don't need all that thing like tell them about that signed contracts and deals and what it's like man just like you got that guitar in your hand you got your song you know hold on to it yeah it's pretty and protected you know that's what it's something that's special to you I think when I talk about the therapy of songwriting or so that's what I hold on and protect that ruthlessly you know I'm not just giving that away you know and that's more that part of it's way more important than selling an album or a concert ticket or going on the road touring and all that man like what I get out of music is like what I'm sitting at home in a room all by myself and letting that stuff pour out of me and I'm just just singing it to the wall like that's what's a save my life you know that's awesome and any of the rest of it I'm glad the you articulated that way too because I think there's young aspiring songwriters and singers out there that are listening to this right now that are feeling this they just can't wait to get to a pad right now and start writing you can pick up their guitars start writing yeah because it's like stories like yours and the way you express it it inspires people to get excited about it inspires people to really dig in I hope so you know I definitely had folks that mentored me like that and you know steered me in the right direction in a lot of ways Terry Allen the guy definitely I've just like man just keep writing keep you know and whatever it whatever that it's making you want to do that in the first place you know like that like hold on to that you know protect it and and the rest of all be always be around and always come it'll change in a good song will survive and find its way just like the guy you know that song he just played me like I said 200 million people and it just they'll find its way you know find it find its way into people's hearts you know yeah and like I said it's just it's important for people like you to tell your story really is thank you it's fuel for people thanks thank you for being here I really appreciate it it was a lot of fun I really enjoyed it and tell everybody they want to find you performing anywhere where they can catch you as you got a website that shows where you're gonna be out of all over the inner webs yeah it's all out there is it do you have your own personal website I do it's probably just rhyming them dot com or being a music dot com something like that you know all the days they're up there yeah do you social media at all yeah we're on all this I mean all do you pay attention to it or you got somebody does it for you both yeah yeah like mostly like on Instagram I pay attention to that when you know and check in and stuff like that there's so much of it these days it's like I can't keep up yeah all of it it'll rob your time yeah I'm trying I'm trying to go get away where all that stuff's turned off that's where I find me beautiful all right thanks brother appreciate it it's a lot of fun thank you you guys bye everybody