Okay, so I want to impose my theory on you and you tell me what you think. So for the past 15 years I've been watching the feds, the FBI, the DOJ, tried to destroy you and I've watched as no group of gatekeepers or whistleblower protectors or journalistic, you know, ethics guardians have defended you on First Amendment grounds, which is pretty shocking. But the question has always been why are the feds so intent on taking you out? And here's my theory. So the summer of 2001 you go on TV, time stamped and say, they're going to, someone's going to fly planes in the World Trade Centers. They're going to blame us on them and let them call the Bush White House, one of them. You basically called 9-11 in detail. You're the only one who did and we can prove that. It's not a guess. We have the tape. I've played the tape. 9-11 happens in September. There's a 9-11 commission immediately in panel. They go and interview a bunch of people in the US government and outside and ask like, were there signs that this was happening? They don't interview you. You're the one guy who predicted it in public or the only guy who predicted in public and no one calls you to ask, how the hell did you know that? Which is the obvious question. Then they said about trying to destroy you rather than like, hailing you as a profit or at least asking the question, how the hell did Alex Jones know and to tell this was coming? How did you know they never even ask you? And then they mobilized DOJ and FBI against you. And I think there's a connection between those two facts. Well, there certainly is. I'd already been researching false flag attacks, not despite our government, but other governments throughout history. The Gulf of Tonkin to get us into Vietnam in 64 that was literally classified, do have been staged. And of course, the US is liberty between Israel and the Lyndon Baines Johnson administration wanted to get us into full war with Egypt, but the ship survived, became the most decorated ship in US history because the valiance of the crew and Operation Ajax where the CIA current Roosevelt 53 overthrew Mahalad Mosadek who was a reformist and he really pro-west, but he wouldn't give them all the oil and they use radical as long as it's over throw him and then put the shaw in and then over through the shaw over and over again. There's just hundreds and hundreds of historical real case examples of that being done by our government and other governments. And I saw a lot of pre-programming in the news. Oh, someone been a lot and is going to get us when he gets us. We need to give a ball of our rights and we'll be a new America and we've got a set of this police stage. So I saw a lot of pre programming and but you called the specifics. You called the specifics of 9.11. I just can't get past that. And I've asked you in public and private how did you do that? I've never gotten really a straight answer. I doubt I will now, but the fact remains the incontrovertible fact, the you called it and then they began a campaign against you and it's not because you're a racist. You've never been a racist or an anti semi or a crazy person. Actually, you've never spewed hate, but you have for, you know, 30 years said the foundations of our system are actually kind of fake and rotten. And it's but it was 9.11. That's when they decided that's when they really decided this guy has to be stopped and and just basically eliminated the first amendment to stop you. Well, just to be clear. It's not that I'm dodging how I knew it. That was 24 years ago. And I remember what I was covering and what I was doing at the time. And everybody seen the July 25th where I went into detail, but actually my crew using chat GPT scanning through all my whole shows found shows in April. And even before that in March where I get more specific and I said the CIA is going to fly planes into the World Trade Centers and blame it on been a lot of time. So I just think that's the most amazing fact I've ever heard in my entire life that you call that and again, we can prove it because it's on tape with timestamps and everyone's like, oh yeah, okay, Alex Jones is crazy. Hey, okay, whatever. And it'll be that's true. But you called 9.11 and no investigator ever called you to ask you how you called that. No, no, no one. No. No one from DOJ Phillips, Zellacow of the 9.11 Commission. No, I called you. And obviously because certain segments of our intelligence agencies with other foreign intelligence agencies were tracking the supposed and hijackers. They were being trained US military bases. They were being given government money from our government and other governments. They were being protected. Then two of their magic passports. All that rubble and hundreds of millions of pieces of paper were found of the next day to then connect them to it. And it was all laid out. Then there had been a lot in the family was thrown up. It was flown out of the country in the days after. And that was basically shut down in the news. He was covered some locally here in Florida. So I knew there had been a lot in had been CIA going back to really the Mijadhi being set up by Zabindi Brzinski and Jimmy Carter. And the Reagan took that over. And then they kind of build that as blowback. But even recently you've seen the USAID information and other documents come out and the Institute for Peace where they're directly paying massive amounts of money to Taliban, to al Qaeda, to ISIS even in the last few years. And they use them as these proxy armies. So that was well known in the research circles that that that that been modern was basically a multinational cut out. You used my Western intelligence agencies to destabilize areas. But also be a boogeyman that you see CNN in a mountain cave, magically being able to find it. But the US can't kill him and nobody else can. And I knew that CNN is literally the CIA broadcasting system for sure total mockingbird, thoroughbred. And there were hundreds and hundreds of points that went in, but OK, been logged in. It's worth the CIA. And you got CNN interviewing him. And they're all scaring at saying he's about to attack us. And then I remembered how Ahmad Salaam, who was an Egyptian intelligence agency operative working for the FBI and CIA, was hired to build a bomb in the early 90s to blow up the World Trade Center. But then when they said build a real bomb, he started recording them because he sort of figured out what's a setup. And then you had that press conference where he played it. And I interviewed him a few times where where the FBI said, no, just go ahead and let it go forward. And so he started adding all that together. They'd already tried to hit the World Trade Center before. The World Trade Center had a lot of issues in it. With asbestos and also some of the structural issues. So they're already wanting to have a plan to get rid of it. And then you have the CIA and FBI in the Solomon Brothers building. Building seven, the 47 story skyscraper. You have that right next door. So I looked at all of it and I thought where would the new Pearl Harbor be? And the year before in the project from American Century, headed up by Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney. Dick Cheney wrote in there that we need a new Pearl Harbor event to launch the Pox Americana. But it wasn't an American Empire freedom and liberty. And Justice Trump's trying to launch. It was a globalist empire military enforcement and tyranny. And so there was a lot of other data points that went into it. Cheney also writes in that same document. We need to look at race-specific bio weapons to have control and bring in our power. And that was actually picked up in the newspapers. Okay. So these are not minor issues. This is these like the biggest things happening in the world. The most important things happening in the world. And the end of one system, ushering in a new system, millions in the end, died because of all of this, millions. And you're on like cable access in Texas, figuring this out. Like where is everybody else? I don't understand. Like I don't where I worked at CNN at the time. I don't know. And we had it, as you said, Peter Bergen went and interviewed. But not in that time, Peter Bergen. But like how come you were the only one who figured this out? Yeah. By that time, I started out in 94 as a guest on access TV in that my own show, about 95. But I was on local talk radio. I just started getting, I've been syndicated a few years then. Okay. But I mean, you're right. I was on access TV as well. And that's where the same thing was. But you were like way out on the range. And all the people at the very center of our business journalism, they didn't see or didn't talk publicly about any of this. Well, none of this. Well, I saw Gary Hart, all of another guest. Gary Hart, the former presidential candidate, Senator from Colorado? I think it was the Hart-Rebin Commission. Yeah. I saw him in Congress with testimony earlier that year. I also saw him on, I believe it was CNN or maybe it was Chris Matthews, MSNBC, but the clips famous. And they said the world's about to change. There's about to be big things happening. You're big, big attacks. When was this? It was an early July. It was before 9-11. Yes. And that's, and they were very specific. So I should find that clip. Congratulations, Horace that. And that was the final catalyst because they were basically telling the establishment very thinly veiled. What was about to go on? So I sat back. I looked at it. And I thought years later, how did I come up with that? I don't just say a bunch of stuff. Then most of this is going to be true. I'm very specific on predictions. It's almost all of them have come true. So I thought that it was the spinoff of the X files, and I wasn't even an X-Files fans rarely watched it, called the loan gunman that it turns out had come out in the spring of 2001 that I didn't even learn about because there wasn't Facebook and Twitter and X back then. So if you didn't watch those entertainment shows, you didn't know about it. And then six months or so after 9-11 listeners start saying, have you seen this? And I had listeners send me VHS recordings off Fox TV of this episode where a criminal group in the US government hijacks a jumbo jet in New York to fly it in the World Trade Center to blame it on a central Asian terrorist show that they have a pretext to take over domestic with a police state and launch wars in the Middle East. Wait, this was on the X-Files? Yes, this one, the X-Files. And so later I thought maybe I got it from that, but then we found tapes even earlier a month before that came out where I was already had put it together on the radio. But here's what's crazy. Then I got reached out by some of the hosts of the X-Files saying, hey, Chris Carter told us that the CIA came to him with the plot of this and asked him some of the scripts that they would ask him as a favor to put this in as a TV program. And then later I corresponded to what Chris Carter, the email, he talked about this in the news, like in entertainment publications about Alex Jones, really good guy. And when they rebooted in 2016 again, he talked about the talk show host characters based on me. So I've talked to him, some of them is crude, but he said, no, I don't know why the CIA used their interview him. You came to me and said, here's the script for the show. So so was it just Alex Jones saying that a government agency was going to hijack a jet fly the World Trade Center, the X-Files spin off the lone gunman. One of its main episodes was about that specific story. This is just crazy. So I often get people I know. Oh, and they were remote control and hijack the jet, the good guys and came from crashing the World Trade Center. So why would the CIA come to Chris Carter and said we want you to write this? And then it's released months and months before 9.11. So I'm not the only one. It was in the collective unconsciousness. I mean, I don't know. But I mean, I said two weeks before they shot Trump in Butler. I went on air and I said there, I'm going to try to shoot him at a rally. I mean, that was that's obvious to see how desperate they were. The law fair did work. I mean, a lot of this is just studying how they operate. But so much of it now is John Podesta in August 2020, the New York Times wrote about it had a big war game on top Democrats. And they said if Trump wins, if they weren't able to steal it in my view, then we're going to have civil war conditions. We're going to have blue states to see blue cities. And we're going to use social issues to foment a rebellion that we're going to basically frame as racial George Floyd on steroids. You know, 10.0. And then we're going to drive from office. Well, they were able to steal it in my view. The evidence that they saw were walling. So they didn't use that plan. Well, they sort of talked about that plan again in the months before this last election last year. So so so much so much of what I'm able to predict is the really prediction. They admitted, I mean, the UN said for 20 years, we're going to use disease X to bring in a global system. A global central mechanism currency, a global social credit score, a global vaccine ID. It'll be used as the global internet ID, global taxation ID. That's official Bill Gates, the UN, all these big bodies preparing how they'd roll this out. You're the Rockefeller Foundation with Operation lock step 2010, 2011 describing lock it down the sports stadium. It was locking in your house at six feet apart, wearing masks for fear. I mean, that's then Bush, George W had that in the bio shell program that passed in 2005 where they set up kits, millions of them, everybody into the Red Cross with the six feet apart with the mask with all the stuff that they didn't launch the bio attack scare that they had. I think locked and loaded then they waited till 2020. So basically you're just taking them at their word. I'm just paying you're doing what I don't do enough, which is listen to people I disagree with. And sincerely tried to assess what they're saying. Got Founcy just said last week, a much worse way higher mobility. It's respiratory, it's common. And you got hotels all done, Larry, Trump's gonna have a big problem and it's gonna come crashing in on him. We'll see how he tries to reboot the economy. And then you know that you learned Founcy and Oliver involved with Obama and Chapel Hill and North Carolina creating COVID-19. It was a big scandal 2015, gain of function SARS. And then they move it to who on that plausible deniability so they can kind of blame the Chinese. So they want, I'm not saying the Chinese are good, the Communist Chinese are terrible. It was kind of a joint project. And then they roll it out and they've got their so-called shot that's mRNA. I mean, this stuff is all very well planned. And so when you see him up there lying, going no Senate apologies, you that is wrong, no gain of function. Then it's in all his emails. This is gain of function and he has public symposiums in defense of gain of function. And I mean, he's Mr. Gain of function if he was a superhero. He would just have gain of function on his chest and the back was Cape. And he's like, I don't know anything about that. And so I mean, these guys just treat us like children. And so they kept saying we're gonna use a virus, we're gonna use a scarad of bringing our global government. I mean, I remember Blue Dobbs in Judicial Watch 2006 sued to get North American Union documents. And in it, they're meeting up at Bamp Canada. And they're like, we're gonna use collapsing migration flow from a virus to flood the last and use that crisis to bring a new Marshall plan. We're gonna use a disease X to finally get the world to accept this global government. So they're just scheming constantly. They have event 201. But in public, in public, they have a sparsed war game 2025, 28 that came out of here as before 2020 in the viral release. That is actually set in 2020 to 2024. And it rolls out how they're all gonna do it. The tweets that are in there, almost word for it, they just changed the name. Spars to COVID-19. So it's a blueprint. And then they get caught. Oh, it's not a viral attack plan. Oh, it's just a war game. But the war game matches the exact rollout of the attacks of their all-inscript. So in a normal world that rewarded excellence and pressures, you'd be a billionaire because of your predictive powers. I mean, huge companies, governments hire people who can piece together fragments of evidence to create an accurate picture of the future. That's a huge business. I know a lot of people in that business. George Friedman, guys like that, really, really smart people. But you have got the best track record of all. And they get so telling that rather than rewards you for this or call you up and be like, I'm showing you, what do you think's coming next? They're like, no, we must eliminate our own first amendment to destroy your life, which is what they've done. That seems like a pretty clear indicator of their guilt to me. What they don't want is compartmentalized good people in industry and government, not just your world. To listen to what I'm saying, go check it out for themselves. George has said it's on record, nobody can type anything. I said, it's from their own documents. And then people will basically put the glasses on like they live and see it for themselves. I'm not telling them what to see. Like the corporate media does brainwashing people and selling them a lie that two men could have a baby. And there's no action on my chromosomes and communism is great and open orders are wonderful. No, I mean, I'm simply saying see this for yourself. I like it to those hidden image paintings. And when you first can't see the hidden image, you're like, I can't see once you do see it, you can't unsee it. So I'm only trying to get people to go look at what I'm pointing out and find out. I like him this whole thing to like you have the adult table with the CFR, the club of Rome, the W.F., and the U.N., the think tanks, the rank corporation. And they're at the adult table at Thanksgiving and the general public and even a lot of the politicians are compartmentalized. And I were over at the kids table. And we'd actually listen to what the adult table because that's their arrogance. They admit 99% of us in their own battle plans as if we are too lazy or stupid ever go look at it. And that's part of a confidence game they have with their own people, their own corporate intelligence operatives, their own government intelligence operatives, their own networks, where they just basically admit all this stuff out in the open. I mean, it's like, you know, mud from the CIA on CNN saying, foggy bottoms going to kill this guy. We're going to kill Trump and then Trump and called me to the Department of Space Administration. I said, listen, you need to watch out. They've got film, mud and all these other guys on CNN MSNBC saying they're going to kill you. And he goes, just a moment, he goes, I'm having a secret service call you. In about an hour they call me, go, what's going on Alex? Trump told us, call you. And I said, you don't know about this, this, this, this, this, this. So he goes, here's our email and I sent the secret services as if the secret service doesn't know they were all over TV. Same, we're going to kill Trump. So, so, I mean, possibly caught that. Yeah. Yeah. And then Trump didn't catch it. So, so, and I mean, now they're everywhere. You've got this new rugker study out where 55% of Democrats liberals are asked, you know, do you support Trump being killed? They're like, yes, we want him dead. We, we, he should be assassinated. This is like this week. And came out whatever the weekend. And they asked him. So, would you see yourself as part of a assassination culture? And they said, yes. So, but then if you say, oh, the Democrats are fomiting violence, I mean, the view says all the time, he's killing people. Elon's killing people. They don't say how he's, they're stealing your Social Security. They're killing all ladies. And so we need to be ready to fight and die to take this guy out. Those are quotes. And, and then they just sit back and go, oh, no, no, no. We're not called for violence with Crockett and all of them. But, but they're not going to do it. They want lone nuts to do it because they're other wind up operatives like Crooks and the other guy are in Florida failed. But I mean, they are, they are crazy at end of the establishment or what's left of it's falling apart. Thanks. Killing Trump is going to help them. They're delusional because if you look at all the scenarios that come out of that, it's much worse for them. I agree. I absolutely agree that. Not all sleep aids are made by pharmaceutical companies. You probably heard about eight sleep by now. They develop the country's most innovative products for sleep. Almost everybody in our office uses something they make called the pod and they love it. And there's a reason that professional athletes and lots of other smart people do too. You add the pod to your mattress like a mattress cover and it helps you get a better night's sleep and fill with vitality at the start of each day in an intimidating way, almost. It's amazing. How does it do it? Well, it uses advanced technology to track your sleep and automatically adjust the temperature of your side of the bed to what's perfect for sleep and temperature makes all the difference. It's backed by over 600 million hours of data. They've also used those insights to create their new product sleep a little bit, to help you get quiet before you get a bed fall asleep faster and stay knocked out longer. No grogginess, no weird side effects is better deep sleep. So if you're ready to take sleep and recovery to the next level, go to 8sleep.com-tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod for ultra full refund for 30 days if you don't love it. It works. Before I ask you what you think the signs you're pointing to now, like what are your predictions for the next five years. And then I ask you how your battles with the US government are going in its attempts to silence you. How do you like if you have this ability, what you do, I'm not sucking up, it's just again, it's provable to put together a picture, an extraordinarily accurate picture of what the future holds. Like what does that do to you? How do you sleep and how do you live and like why haven't you totally destroyed yourself? Like those are kind of not thoughts that most people including me are burdened with and don't really want to be burdened with. But like how do you turn off the visions of the future in your head? Well I mean I appreciate you saying nice things about me and obviously God gives us all different gifts and I do have some gifts. But I think a lot more people have these gifts and then really realize it. But you can prove it. That's why I've obviously were friends and I like you as a man, but you can prove it in a way that others can't because it's on tape. So it's not really debate as Alex Jones had more accurate predictions in the future than any living person in the world that I know of. We can prove that. We don't have to argue about it. I've got the freaking tape. So again it's not even a compliment. It's just an observation and I don't know why I seem to be the only person who's obsessed with this. Like how did this guy predict this? No everyone's like oh, okay, maybe he's crazy but he predicted this. So my question is like what is that duty you? I mean it is stressful the responsibility of constantly researching and looking at all culture. Top culture that's where a lot of the real brainwashing said that's where a lot of the predictive programming manipulation goes on. Yes, but also in so called news. But I mean I did get to where I drank way too much. I got really unhealthy because I could go home at night and have some drinks and eat half a kilon pie and just kind of dial out and forget about reality. Things have gotten so intense and so dangerous that about the last nine months I've had it drank and I've been exercising every day and I lost 63 pounds and I feel great. And I've just embraced the responsibility plus we're alive right now really in the way to great awakening where more and more people are piecing things together and deciding to really get informed and engaged. So I've always said I want to become obsolete where people really start understanding how the world really works to such an extent there are so many other journalists and researchers and pundits just private citizens and people in business and academia and life. And in the Ecclesiastical circles that they really realize that this global system is transhumanists it is evil. It is a spiritual battle at the end of the day and people need to really choose the side. And so I think choosing the side and saying, hey God I can't do this. I'm weak I'm imperfect but you'll through you I can and really praying and asking God to lead God and direct you and give you discernment. So to really answer your question. So to have all this data in this research and so that my feeble human mind can understand really what God tells me. And then it's that final little ingredient of being sure about something that that's what they're intending to do. But we have real agency. Good has more power than evil. They always said the devil's greatest tick trick was convincing the world that he didn't exist. I think that's the second biggest trick because he doesn't exist. And he does. His biggest trick is convincing people that there is no good out there and that there's not. That's right. And that God doesn't exist. So for me so much of it again is in the old days the globalist, the Western propaganda after the end of World War II. And since then when we won World War II had pretty much total narrative control. And so anything they were pre-programming and preparing and hyping the people for they pretty much always got what they wanted. So it was easy to follow those trend lines out and see what the probable main scenarios were. And then things would almost always come true that I predicted because they were still in charge. Now that the globalists are really collapsing and a new international order and system is forming coming from the grassroots up politics is downstream from the grassroots. And because Trump is such a chaos bringer to their system which is good. But with it also comes danger but it's better than living on our knees and then anything of having our souls basically take it. It's better to fight down our feet but in my experience people that fight on their feet live a lot longer and have better lives than people that try to live on their knees. People live on their knees. Actually dial their knees a lot more often than people will dial their feet in my experience. So now is really the global revolution. It's a spiritual revolution. The information, the culture, all of that comes out of that. And so now there's so many possible futures and so many developments because there's been so many good people that actually care and want to stabilize civilization and thrive and have a future. And who are not based on conquest, mindsets but are based on renaissance concepts. The great reset versus the great awakening that right now anything is possible because America still has the world reserve currency. He still has the biggest best military still has the best energy system for all energy and still has a spirit that is being rekindled that was the apple the world's eye. And really the flower of the renaissance that we're now rebooting it's powering back up right now. And that window is closing but we're acting on it right now and if we're just not weak and cowards like Trump has said and if we don't become panicking but remain Americans then really anything is possible because as Elon has said of America falls the central pillar in western civilization. And western civilization falls it all falls. And so for me I don't do this without courage. I do it out of direct self preservation for myself, my family, my extension everybody else is rolling or connected. And people need to understand the true urgency that the globalist said they were going to collapse the world economy and use that for social control as Larry thinks said to control our behavior. And we're going to build something extremely hellscape-ish and just topic in their own admissions. And all the horrible stuff we see is just the leading edge of it. And so to me there's really even no choice but to fight with everything I've got. You said two things that really struck me one that anything is possible right now. This could go in an infinite number of directions some hellish and some blast. So I think that that feels right to me. Second you said this is a spiritual revolution. What are the signs that you see of that? What do you mean by that? Well if you read the Bible Old Testament New Testament it's all there and then I see it happening. It says that during these big times of change that you'll see the best out of the good people and the worst out of the bad people. And some people you thought were good are going to really activate and show you their real cards that they really are servants of evil or really slaves of evil. And then you're going to see some people you thought weren't good that are going to be touched and make the decision to be strong for liberty that will be some of our greatest champions. And that you're not going to really see people in the middle anymore. That big middle of people passing the book. God said you were hot and are cold. You were Luke warm. I spit shut in my mouth. And so we're going into really the beginning. It's going to get way more intense in my view. I mean if any prediction it's that. If people think things are wild now and tumultuous it's this is going to be seen as the calm before the storm. And so so there's going to be nowhere to be in the middle. People are going to have to choose the side. And those that have chosen evil, chosen the establishment, chosen the satanic world order are going to get deeper and deeper into their devotion and their hysteria, their violence trying to prop it up. Because deep down. They're they're scared and they have a form of Stockholm syndrome where they go to the abuser and think if they prostrate themselves before it somehow they'll be given deliverance. When really they just need to repent and ask God to come in to their heart and cleanse them and then rise them up to be a soldier against this evil in this key time. But there'll be no room for anybody in the middle in the time we're in and I'm talking to so many people that weren't even Christian or weren't even religious or weren't even spiritual who are saying it's good versus evil. And I talked to so many people I know that are professionals and they you know, Austin's full of a lot of you know, particularly rich people and women, you know, just becoming demon possessed. I mean literally saying they're demon possessed and and and I'm hearing about all over the country all over the world. What is that? It's so noticeable and I'm so blessed to be surrounded by mostly by women who are just the opposite or wonderful, but I who are the rock. I mean they're just the best. However, what you just described is just on display everywhere. Well and it's men too. You're about the soccer coach that just kidnapped a little kid and took him a kill him and threw him in the woods reportedly allegedly. I mean it's just I mean it's men too, but normal. and everywhere. Well, and it's meant to you're about the soccer coach that just kidnapped a little kid and took him and killed him and threw him in the woods reportedly allegedly. I mean, it's just, I mean, it's meant to, but normally in history, it's men that do the really openly satanic stuff. Exactly. And women of 2% of all the crime now, it's, you know, there, it's, it's big because it's a crisis and women particularly, but men as well buy into whatever they see is the power structure of the survival mechanism generally. It's exactly right. But when the power structure is a death cult by increment, they get deeper and deeper you look at these leftists and women of hundreds of photos, they took their shot and they, or they, or they had their abortion or, you know, they want to kill Trump and you look at where they're worshiping death in some way. Absolutely. You could see it. They look all like super unhealthy. They look totally insane on the eyes. They look like Charlie Manson. And so it's, it's, I've seen more and more love in people's eyes. Yeah. More spiritual connection to God. More, more of that quiet place of just serenity in people. And then I'm seeing more and more of the satanic energy. So it's really a parting of the sea. Yes. So to just linger on the first observation that you're seeing more of the serenity, the peace from God in people. That is including people in your orbit, people you know, personal. Yes. But it's very paradoxical. I'm saying just godliness, peace, understanding. And then I'm seeing confusion in hysteria. And I mean, what we're seeing is evil, thriving around trying to take us with it. It's, it's, it's senses that humanity's waking up. And then all of it's carefully laid plans to keep us in a trans, keep us sleep as it's, it's burning away. Do you, is there any way to predict, while just say my view, which is I, I've been really shocked by people on both sides, there are people who seem totally seized by hysteria and rage and hate and the desire to come in violence, never expected they would be that. And then there are other people who I'm equally shocked to see filled with the kind of serenity you're describing, who are filled with love and understanding. And I just, I couldn't have predicted who those people are in some cases. Do you feel that? Absolutely. I mean, I've always had a lot of. Burs are her energy and and you know, in the fight, but it was always focused and I wouldn't say it was demonic, but it was you of the flesh, but also had a big connection to god. Now more and more, I'm just have serenity focus clarity and I'm more effective at breaking things down. Not actually like a Tasmanian devil. And so in my own life, I'm seeing more and more of that serenity just really, really intense the last few weeks. And I picked up on that being around you and your crew and you know, folks here in this little hamlet we're in. And then it really does make you feel sorry for people that serve evil. I mean, they torture us and they attack us and they want to bully us and but at the end of the day, you actually realize that's on them. It is so sad that they live like this. They're being destroyed too. They're being destroyed too. That's like one of the main insights I've had in the past five years. I come to things really slowly because I'm not a genius, but I always kind of felt hate toward the destroyers in our and any society hate destruction. I like building and creation and but the destroyers always were, I felt my enemies in my whole life. I felt this and then it was only last couple years. I realized they're being destroyed also. Like they are suffering. They're not getting out of this unscathed like they think that they're getting power or whatever they money, whatever they think they're getting. But in, but they're like in agony. Well, a lot of them are cowards too. They think survival of finish is being as ruthless and mean as possible is what they have to do to win. And then when you no longer hate them and I'm, and I'm, because I was never driven by hate as my main force, he was still saying, you don't fight an enemy attacking your people because you hate them. You fight them because you love the people you're defending. Exactly. But still, I would always say, no, no, forgive them. Still fight them. Still expose them. But, but, but, but really forgive them that removes the spiritual connection that you have with them. And you see it when Christ says, you know, be kind and pray for those. The person who it'll, it'll keep burning holes on their head. Stalkers, you know, down at the kind of a low level. I've learned like once I didn't care about a stalker and I've had plenty and you just forgive them, they just freak out and go away when they're getting to you. They're enjoying that energy. So you still fight them with more energy than ever. But you do it from a position of just removing a damage collapsed, you know, poor victim of the devil that you have responsibility to protect yourself your family from. But you don't give them the energy of being angry back at them and seeing them as powerful because they're not their pawns. And these people that are influenced by, say, tannic energy by literal spiritual forces, demons, they are the slaves. And when they're not out doing evil and persecuting people, they don't even feel like they're alive and they're desperate and they're scared and they're lost and then they get driven forward, you know, by this dark forest to look, it'll be all right. Once you just go out and once you take these people out, you know, it's the good people that are making you feel bad. You know, it's them. Destroy them, then you'll have peace. And that's the deeper understanding I've had of how this satanic system works. So clearly true. And if you ask, if there's anyone that you've really like focused on, I don't know, George Soros or Larry Fink, I mean, just the other day, I was talking to someone who knows, sort of Fink really well. And I was saying, I think Larry Fink is like, I don't know what I remember, Larry Fink, but boy, he's responsible for a lot of suffering from my perspective. And, you know, this person said there's no one more unhappy than Larry Fink, like nobody and I was just with him at a car. He was like screaming at someone on the phone. It's guys made billions of dollars and personally tormented and I know a bunch of people because I know a lot of the people involved in things that I think are really evil and there's not a happy one among them, not one. And beyond the fact that he's got billions, he's in control of more than anybody. You know, we're always hearing Elon Musk, we're just kind of in the world. Well, he's a guy that has been good at keeping the company's under his control. So he independently is the most powerful person corporate science communications Titan. But then they spend it like, oh, he's the establishment. No, Trump, as you know, has a very small orbit of independent billionaires that are defending him because they want to stabilize civilization for everybody's good. But when you look at the international power and the largesse, it's been against Trump more and more, they realize they're losing because the people are with Trump and we were just talking last night. I hope you would repeat that because you were asking me with some folks who were talking to about what my view is basically on the geopolitical new landscape. And I laid my view. You said, no, I think that's that on. And then you said basically, if you feel like repeating it that that we need to sell it very clearly here on this team or here on that team because it really is team chikom EU globalist new world order. That's that's what's left. You know, the UK don't trust him who runs it, but they're trying to come in under a US alliance. And America in the world needs to understand there's a new international system forming the old and fell. And we better decide what this new system's going to look like and who's going to be in charge of it because that's the way it is. So think about how you'll feel when you achieve your biggest goals of all, whether it's starting a business, paying off your mortgage, send your kids to college, number the money to pay for it, you'll be pretty proud when you've met these essential life goals. And you should be proud all the sorrow we do that. But what do you do next? So getting to the goals is one thing. But protecting them is an entirely different thing and maybe a bigger thing. And this is where life insurance from policy genius comes in now. Policy genius makes finding and buying life insurance really easy. And probably want life insurance, but it's expensive and how do you even get it? Policy genius makes it simple. And it means your family has the safety net. It needs to cover expenses and to face the future nearly half of Americans look back in which they've gotten life insurance earlier. It can change everything if you have it because you don't know what the future holds honestly. So with policy genius, you can find policy starting at just $292 per year for a million dollars of coverage. And some options are 100% online. And that means no unnecessary medical exams for you, which is a win. You can pair quotes from top and shirt or side by side. You talk to license agents. You secure your families tomorrow with peace of mind today and it makes it super easy on policy genius. And it's all transparent. You know, exactly what you're getting. So you head to policy genius.com slash Tucker. You click the link in the description to get your free quote. That's policy genius.com slash Tucker. Yeah. And you hope that the questions like that are almost never resolved without big wars. Unfortunately, you can't think of too many examples or any in history where they, you know, have just sort of evolved gracefully. It's a lot of people die. And that's, you know, the point, you know, room falls in the fifth century new system or whatever. And I really hope that we can escape that. And I'm very opposed to violence and war. So I, um, I think we should all be working toward that. But it's, but it's the big things that matter. And you have the rise of this superpower in the east. And that's the main fact of the moment that we live in is that the West is falling. I think it's been undermined from within by people like Larry Fink and many, many others. And, um, but it's being replaced by this, by this, by this threat from the east. And I don't hate the Chinese at all. I think they're acting in what they think is their best interests. They're not Christian, they hate Christianity. Um, so you've got a totally different worldview. And I'm not mad at them about it. But I think we should be honest about what it is. Right? It's not, we're not going to have like, you know, the United States and Russia and Iran and Malaysia and Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, China is all sort of acting in their own spheres. That's not the way it works. And, and as you said last night, all these countries want to be on team America. I think that's right. And for people don't know this. I'm surprised. I mean, Trump understands that you do, but this needs to be everywhere. The globalists went into the 80s, 90s. They made a deal with communist China. You get the manufacturing worth minerals, but you don't expand your military into the South China Sea. Well, they started 20 years ago, expanding everywhere. And then it took Obama till about 14 years ago to figure that out. We had the Asia pivot. But, but by then it was too late that infiltrated Congress, they were financing all this destroy America, wokeism and bragging about it. And then people like Bill Gates and others continue to be totally aligned with China. No, it's right. And the CFRCing America is over and Larry Finkmaking jokes about it just three or four years ago. Ha ha ha. You know, five years ago, Trump thinks he'll bring America back. Ha ha. He hasn't seen China. I mean, very arrogant. And now that China is even double crossing the globalists and saying, we don't even need you. And Xi Jinping is like, we're going to pay people to have kids. We're not doing your one child policy more. They're breaking with the transhumanist, you know, angle, but, but using the control grid of the cashless society, social credit score that the West helped them set up to now project that around the world. And so the globalists are being destroyed by their own Frankenstein monster. And then the EU's decided to ally with China. And again, the UK is at least on the surface actually like no, they want to be in a, you know, new, you know, Anglo-Fowl alliance with the quote, you know, US empire. And again, the US has limited window to get everybody on board with us. And then our alliance easily with, you know, the key countries in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia, central among it. And some other alliances and then obviously an open economic alliance with Russia who wants an economic alliance and has more resources than any country in the world. I mean, that is the real chessboard. And that's why the left and the globalists want to drive America and Russia apart because geographically and also militarily and then also scientifically. And then just raw material, of course, that is the obvious. If you're, if you believe Russia is at greatest enemy, if you are working full-time to divide the United States from Russia, you are acting against the interests of the United States. You hate the United States. You hate the West. You want to see it fall. They hate Russia because it's a white Christian country as a fact. Why Russia? In all of this, once you take three steps back, makes perfect sense. Like we have a lot of people in our country working actively for the destruction of the West of Christian civilization. So that's just a fact. The stands in the white area. You know, people don't like it when you say that, but they don't like it when you say it because it's absolutely true. And the farther you get from the United States, that's one of the great benefits of travel. The more obvious it is. Like you can't, you don't know you're married to an alcoholic until you go on vacation without that person. You're like, Oh, shit, I'm married to an alcoholic. You can't see any of this when you're in the middle of it. But when you leave, it's like, Oh, my gosh. So, okay, I just want to go back a step. So you have made reference a couple of times to the rise in violence, the acceptance of violence, which is of course the purest distillation of evil in my opinion, most obvious for sure. And there are signs that it's, you know, we're entering a violent stage. I pray that we're not, but it feels like we are. You just had a long time employee assassinated. I don't know the extent to what you want to talk about that. But what was that is it a harbinger of things to come? Well, a month ago, Jamie White, a great reporter, great guy. We were working up there Sunday night till about nine o'clock. I left. He went home and then got shot to the carotid artery one shot through his neck. And then out the back of it, he blooded death by the time we got to the hospital about 15 months later, the place got to the very holiday was he? He was 36. Yeah. And he was on the Ukraine hit list long myself and you and a bunch of other people and everybody getting a SWAT calls, the SWAT team, something their houses and their families has been on that list as well. She's basically everyone you know. Yes. And then of course you crane tortured American journalists guns all over the and then celebrated that. And so, and, and, and of course we have the, the would be assassin down in Marlago, who was a big leftist connected all these intelligence agencies were creating hundreds of fighters for Ukraine, an American, then he comes back and tries to kill Trump. So I think, I mean, you've seen Alexander Dugan's daughter blown up in front of him in 2022. In Moscow by the Ukrainians, and lost covering a guy's daughter applauded by and Apple bombing all the rest of the ghouls in the United States effectively because they don't like Alexander Dugan's ideas. So it's okay to murder his daughter with the, well, that's the new, I mean, that's the only the help of US until agencies. I mean, let's stop lying about it, right? Absolutely. I mean, I said three plus years ago when the war started, I said the US is running all the targeting course there with the weapons that's just a fact. And with their soldiers on the ground, I know some of the people whose sons are there when it all started were really nervous. They didn't give me the tell if they're like, yeah, my son's are there special operations. And if in a lot of US military personnel fighting Russia in Ukraine, absolutely. I mean, I'm on record three years ago saying that. And then two weeks ago, New York Times, the US has been running the war and been there the whole time and oh, get a Pulitzer prize. So that that was all known. And so now Trump is trying to rightfully end I mean, people that don't know how your audience knows, but we have Victoria Newlin, we have Sirals back we can still talk on for reads our carry on CNN saying, oh, yeah, we went there with State Department money and overthrew their government 15 years ago. We did it again. And we're finally going to break up Russia. I'm going to be the czar of Russia. Five weeks ago, they had the deputy head of the elected EU commission. Say, oh, we're going to keep us working on for decades. And we're going to bankrupt Russia with it. And we're going to break Russia in five parts. So they're on the news saying we want peace. We want love. Oh, no, you crayon will never join NATO, which is why Putin went in. And the weapons being brought in to his border. And then separately someone, he's always no idea. And so again, the West started this war. Imagine if Russia, I'm aware. I know you don't want better than anybody probably. No, it's just hasn't circle. I mean, you actually, yeah, I mean, any American journalist you've been everywhere, you've documented it. And it's just we're starting the fight. These crazies are dragging us in to what's really already World War three conventionally that every escalation moves as closer and nuclear war of the doomsday clock with atomic energy scientists. You know, it's the closest ever been. And so this is really fundamental. And so any concern I have about being sued or law fair or attacked doesn't even hit my psychological spiritual mental radar because the big threat is so big of what these magma and the acts are doing. So one thing I don't, what fact I don't think is penetrated the brains of policymakers in Washington is that we just lost a war with Russia. The US was running that war. The US military, the Pentagon State Department CIA running the war against Russia. It was not, it was never by Ukraine. No one in Washington cares about Ukraine or the hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian men destroyed the fact will be populated by third worlders. I mean, Ukraine, we just eliminated Ukraine. Nobody cares. This was a war against Russia, the hate Russia for a lot of reasons, mostly spiritual. But we lost. And my concern is because nobody will say that out loud that we're overstating our power. And in the same way that you sometimes see like divorced six year old guys hitting on young women and don't realize that a young women think this is like absurd. You're like an old man. Why are you really think I'm going to sleep with you? But the six year old guy hasn't readjusted to the reality of his present condition. He's still thinks he's 25. Do you see what I'm saying? And he humiliates himself. That can happen at the level of nations where, you know, you think you can affect outcomes that you actually don't have the power to bring about. And so that's called hubris. And that's how empires get destroyed in populations vaporized. And I'm really afraid of that. Like why can't we should know that we were not able to win a conventional war against Russia? Period. So like what does that say about our power? And maybe we should readjust our expectations a little bit. I don't want that to be true. By the way, I want, I'm reading, I'm American. I'm not leaving my family's bearish here. But like, don't you think that we run the risk of thinking we're capable of things that we're not capable of doing? Well, as an example, Hillary had a lot of fraud begged him, but Trump wanted such a landslide. He beat her. And then a lot of Republicans and conservatives and populist thought Trump was going to win for sure. So we'd have his big turnouts. They were able to steal 2020. But there was such a giant landslide. This time it overrode the mail-in balance of the dead people, the illegal aliens voting, all of that they ran out of bullets. But that's a perfect example of how the Democrats were sure they were going to win in November last year. And they were sure they were going to win in November in 2016. And they didn't. So they had this incredible hubris and this incredible arrogance. And so many of them are actually militarily ignorant themselves. They just put on this big, imperious act. And of course, there's the clip of Sean Penn saying, well, I don't think nuclear weapons should be off the table. We shouldn't be afraid to use them because that is Russian advantage. Well, it's called mutually assured destruction for a reason because anybody that uses them is insane. So I mean, well, they got in the middle of the war. this is about the other day. The Pentagon wrote an assessment saying that they calculated that if we gave weapons to Ukraine that allowed Ukrainian military or our military using Ukraine as a proxy to hit targets within Russia, they judged the likelihood of a nuclear exchange at 50%. And they did it anyway. At that point, like you should be in prison for the criminally insane. Well, that's right. If Russia moved, you're risking nuclear war. Like you should be locked up. I don't understand. Like that's, I couldn't even believe that. I mean, I of course, intuitively knew that and say that again. It's not a rupture. That's important to sing in for me. That the Pentagon under Joe Biden assessed, like because they assess the likelihood of everything or they get, you know, they guess they sort of work out how they think things will progress. But in every scenario globally, they do this is what they do at the Pentagon. And they assessed that if we gave certain weapons weapons that allowed the Ukrainians to strike targets within Russia, if we did that, which we did, the chance of a nuclear exchange, nuclear holocaust, that killed everybody on earth would be 50%. And they did it anyway. So imagine the brain, imagine the evil, like you would have to be controlled by like supernatural forces to do so on. I think there's a 50% chance every person on earth could be killed in a nuclear exchange, but I'm doing it anyway. Like why aren't you, how are you still walking free? I'm serious. No. And I'm glad you brought that assessment up because I really tried to be able to focus on I agree with that assessment. I mean, let's let's pull that down. Imagine if Russia had the equivalent of attack of some storm shadows in Canada in Mexico, our border that they can fire above the trees that can't be shot down that are nuclear capable. And Putin said, as he said, if you shoot a few missiles once it started, we'll just shoot them down. But if we see a large aerospace attack with a whole bunch of these, we have to believe it is a first strike to take out nuclear deterrent. And so we see a large signature of a large aerospace attack, be it cruise missiles, be it glide bombs, be it a mix of aircraft, or all of them, we will do a total commitment. And then Russia and TV said, here's the government scenario. And it showed nukes hitting all the NATO countries and submarines, you know, hitting on from there. And we're talking about world destroyed in 30 minutes folks for sure. Submarines off our coast, two minutes New York's gone. Five minutes Dallas is gone. This is real. What would happen if Russia was bombing DC with conventional bombs with large heavy cruise missiles that the drone in the capital is the US did through the Ukrainians, they droned the Kremlin. You were there once when you saw it was low up. I was there. I was actually driving by. I was over there last winter, didn't it? If you Putin, I was driving by the Kremlin just like on the street and downtown Moscow, smoke coming out of the top of the of the Kremlin. And so I called the like the guy at the press office who I was dealing with for to set up the Putin interview from the vehicle. And I was like, think your Kremlin's on fire. And he's like, oh, no, no, no, it's not. I was like, I'm right there. I'm looking at it. Russians never want to admit that they have been unable to defend their capital city. So they, you know, a lot of murder has taken place by the Ukrainians of Russians in an attempted murder of Americans, by the way. And just think about the provocation here and, but the Russians in every case, like, oh, that's not happening. They don't want to admit it because for a bunch of reasons, but it would force them to response. But anyway, I called up. I think you guys just got drones. No, no, didn't happen. But it did happen. I saw it personally saw it. So like, there's been a ton of that stuff. What would we do if the Russians drone the US capital or the warehouse? That's so freaking crazy. Russian knows it's a provocation. The globalists want to reset their financial systems going down. And they're willing to roll the dice. And they think a nuclear war survival has you know, as the Pentagon has said. So it's complete madness. Nuclear war is not survivable. That's a fact. It's not. But we nuclear weapon explodes over a nuclear power plant. What happens? Anyone know massive meltdown that makes Fukushima look like a Exactly. And we have a lot of nuclear power plants around the world. So there's over 450 that we big that are big industrial thousands of small ones. And when society breaks down, they all melt down in different ways, much worse than Fukushima and Chernobyl combined. I agree. And it makes the whole service of the earth that that's mainline science unlivable for hundreds of millions of years. I agree. And I know everyone's for nuclear power. And it's like, obviously, nuclear power. I don't. Okay. I'm not against nuclear power in theory. But it's also one can answer the question that you just posed. Like, what about that? That I mean, they're never run right. They always have scenarios where they're not going to leave. Basically, they all see at least stupid concerns like the answers nuclear. You want more AI data centers comma, which I don't answer is cold of obviously. But I don't understand why everyone, this is just side bar. I'll stop in one sentence. But like those who are super up in the 70s and 80s, remember that all the opponents nuclear power were like, you know, furry armpit dumb people. And you know, all the green piece people once you're just like, oh, shut up nuclear is obviously the solution. Like you just don't understand science. How can you be against climate change and also against nuclear power? I've said that myself, like a hundred times in TV. But it's not about the spent fuel rods. When we do it nuclear waste, that's easy. Put it in your come out. And it's about what if these things are untended? What if they're, you know, the subject of a conventional or nuclear attack? And you look at all the mismanagement. Massive vulnerability. Like, why doesn't anyone mention that before we put nuclear power plants all over my country, which I think a lot of people are psyched to do because they want to get rich from AI, like they should answer the question. That's really freaking scary. No, you have to also ask, why do they build so many here and in like Japan, the plants ride on fault lines? I mean, there's a real, we see a lot of that aptitude in industry and things. So you don't want to have things that have potential to be so dangerous. And when coal creates carbon dioxide that plants breathe and the earth used to have a lot higher carbon dioxide that it does now and it makes plants live longer, yields are up. It will green the planet all the studies show it. We're actually terraforming the earth to make it better. It's like God given when you actually look at the real studies and talks to the real climatologists, the people they'll tell you. No, no, no, it's great that we're bringing this old carbon backup and putting it back in the atmosphere. This is fabulous. More carbon is good. Carbon, carbon dioxide, oxygen, water and sunlight are the four ingredients of life on this planet. And the globalist created a way to tax and regulate one of the four pillars of life on this planet. It is good. I mean, again, they're trying to convince us that cows, methane is bad. You actually look at the carbon equation. It all turns right back into the gases. It came from it's a good guess. But again, if the cows are bad, well, what else releases methane? We do. We're the carbon that they want to reduce. They want to teach us to aid ourselves, teach us not have a life force. And their new religion is they will give us all these indulgences and all these flasulations and all these things we have to do to a tone for how bad we are to the priest class that is the big satanic ring church. So the threat of nuclear war over hangs any conflict with the country that has nuclear weapons, of course, you push someone far enough, you know, you don't know what could happen and it could result in the extinction of humanity. That's like the main fact. That's what people want to run not to have nukes, right? Obviously. So with that in mind, what do you make of the public repeated public statements by a bunch of European leaders, particularly Starmer in the UK and the president of France, that they're ready to like continue the war against Russia with their own people armies, like what that seems crazy to what what is that actually about? And they've said that now they're saying their troops that if they get killed, then that's direct war with NATO. They admit that the EU population wise is collapsing. Those they've brought in most of them, 80% never even get jobs. All the different ministers, defense ministers, as you know last few years have said, our business model is a 20 year war. They think they can continue that and somehow bankrupt Russia and again break it up into five parts. So they've made it existential for themselves. They made it existential for Russia. And you go back to the Pentagon, assess what that was public that 15% chance that if we start bombing, and that's the West doing it, I mean, the US inside Russia, they was tried back with nukes. And then Putin clarifying, well, if we see a large launch, it could be a snake attack with nukes. So we're going to have to go ahead and nuke you at that point. Please don't do that. So at least least they limited to four or five big cruise missile attacks a day. And then you'll maybe a hundred drones a day going into major cities and attacking their nuclear bases, their nuclear bomber bases. I mean, extreme provocation, testing the line and not playing Russian or Latte where you have a six shot revolver and you put one, three, seven Magnum casing in around in. But this is three out of six. And they're like, well, that's the safe bet. Let's roll the dice, spin the cylinder, and then click it to our head every day. It just goes the fundamental insanity that you see escalating. I mean, if you go back to the bid actual and like actual insanity, not, you know, I don't know. Well, tariffs work because that's, you know, whatever you could argue, but like risking nuclear war. I mean, that's so fucking crazy. That's a good point. They say Trump saying our surrender to these one side of trade deals, which is totally true and de-adduce realized this and destroyed him around. And as a huge natural security issue that he's rolling the dice there. No, no, it would be rolling through ice. Nice. Nice with nuclear war. Again, I think you should be in prison for even having that that's like the craziest thing I can imagine. Well, remember Biden just two years ago said we can't send F-16s and Abrams tanks because that escalates the threat ladder or the rank corporation. That's World War three, but they went ahead and did that. Then they went to the bombing inside. So I, the reason I went back to that, I'm glad you raised it is the EU is refusing to end the war. We're trying to drag us into it fully. Are there arresting their police? But then they went to the bombing inside. So the reason I went back that I'm glad you raised it is the EU is refusing to end the war, which run to drag us into it fully. They're arresting their political opposition, Colleen to address you in Romania, the not letting him run in the new election. He's an amazing man. I just talked to a man who was there before yesterday. And then Marie Le Pen, that is super popular in the head presidential polls. So they have judge find her guilty of nothing and take her off the ballot. We have the State Department under Biden admittedly working in Brazil with Lula to take Bolsonaro off the ballot because he's popular and then indict him. And they're talking about doing it in Hungary. They're talking about doing it in Poland. They said of AFT1, which they almost did that the EU commission might cancel that election. So the EU has really taken off the mask and people that don't know, instead of in 56 is a steel deal tree of Rome. And they got the nations over time to sign away. They're sovereignty to it. I remember an unelected commission with Vanderlaid and up there running all of this. And she even came out as you know, on Monday, it said, well, Trump's blown up the international order. He's defeated the New World Order. And she said, okay, we're going to go ahead and agree at least in principle to what Trump is saying. And that's because the trade is completely one sided. So again, Trump's move isn't just the perfect move. It's perfect in that it's the only moves we have left for us and for global stabilization. That's why anybody that cares about self preservation for the whole planet should be fully behind Trump's policies that are very popular on the world and are seen as sane. And again, the world, this huge alliance of nations wants to join that team. And the good news is Trump pulls the highest ever. I know the American people are understanding that and getting that the concern is it is kind of crazy that is number. I mean, I'm getting, you know, because I live in a rich people world for part of the year. I know why rich people in both are really upset. And I share their instinctive concern about any chaos. My parents got divorced to hate chaos, right? So I get that. But from my perspective, I'll just admit it like on my phone, it's like, I voted for Trump. What the hell is going on? And I get it. I'm not, you know, criticism is anyone. But then his numbers go up. Well, I'd like to show you that you can even I really make a big effort to like live in different places. No different people not be a captive of my surroundings, not just live among rich people with like dumb rich people. Adagits like really try to be bigger than that. And I always fight on myself that I succeed. But even I am like, I guess kind of captive to that. Cause then I see the numbers. And I'm like, people really like this. His numbers went up after the tariffs. That's correct. Right. Absolutely. I'd like to talk to folks out there saying Trump is being a destabilizer. The globalist order was collapsing by their own corruption and mismanagement and their alliance with China being double crossed. And so that order was already being collapsed by them. And Trump's coming in very pragmatically with a good fair freedom based meritocracy competition based system. But you know, two people that one company stabilization starring the world with Russia, totally stabilization, dissolving the borders and all the human smuggling and the fentanyl, totally stabilization in engaging all this over spending and the country basically being bankrupt if we don't grow our way out of it, totally stabilization. And then wink, wink, the attempted assassinations of Trump. What do they think would have happened if Trump really would have gotten killed in Pennsylvania and July of last year or a few months later in Florida? If you look at the scenarios there, they run from bad to worse. So the real destabilization. And bad for the people behind it, like clearly those assassinations were not long gunmen. They were part of a much, much larger conspiracy. Obviously, everyone knows that. But those people behind those attempted murders would have been in bigger trouble. Had those murders succeeded attempted murder succeeded, correct? Absolutely. And if they somebody's able to kill Trump now, people that are hoping to start by bolt alightening because the bad guys will get to blame. That's why so many people that have kind of been on the fence, the establishment, but we're working with the global issues because that was the system are enthusiastically joining Trump and Elon because they understand that this is the only game in town for people that aren't delusional. But you have that, Megalomania. I think that's true. You have that Megalomania historically when elites have never lost before and are losing that they just continue to accelerate and intensify it. And I know you've covered this. A lot of the people don't seem to know that in August of 2020, I mentioned earlier, it was a big article in their times with John Podesta covering a war game they just had that if Trump was able to win, they were going to have blue states to see the blue cities to see and then create civil unrest and civil war conditions. And then when they do Trump was going to win because the poll numbers are so incredible a few months before the last election last year, Raskin, Carvel, Podesta, all of them set civil war conditions. We're going to need to have uprisings. Carvel said that. Trump's coming to kill you. We got to rise up. Carvel said in others and they are clearly escalating with the Tesla attacks and the swatting attacks and the calls for violence, the 55% of liberal Democrats in a study want Trump killed. They're embracing real terrorism, real domestic terrorism. And that's building towards what I believe is in the cards because you see the Democrat pundits and their operatives everywhere before the election and after it in the last 78 days or so saying once you got in office, Trump and Tom Homeman are going to kill migrants. And when they do, there's going to be an uprising. And well, Trump's not going to go mow down people that eat lately in demonstration. You also have them saying Trump supporters are going to attack black people or where black people will be alone in a big number of church university. Trump supporters are going to kill black people. And we know a lot of the global scripts have been funding white supremacist groups in domestic terror groups and basically run them historically. So the last piece for all the pre-programming I've seen is that to have these uprisings are going to need something much bigger than George Floyd, much bigger than Jesse Smollett. And so I am predicting on the current trajectory of what they were game before and what they said, the final piece they need for this destabilization that they'll label a race-based civil war that will then crash the markets and be used kind of like the predictive programming in the movie that came out last year. Civil war to have a bunch of states, the main military join them in a military operation to remove Trump when the Trumpian figure in the movie is killed, you know, an executed inside the, inside the Oval Office. And so that's their dream, that's their backup plan. And you have the two camps, one camp is kind of the Chuck Schumer completely evil, but is it particularly publicly pushing that though he had his famous role when we're coming after you speech, but he's an old man. Absolutely. So you have the Soros wing with all sorts of Soros that more and more is in charge and is really making a run at escalating domestic unrest and terrorism leading into some triggering event, starting things are aligning for this summer. And I know that folks in the government, their patriots are aware of that, but I think that the spokesperson and others need to really get ahead of all this calls for violence and not just repudiate it, but talk about the Democrat leadership and they're talking heads that are pushing. And I mean, we've seen Colbert just last week say, deep state, please, you know, do something, stop Trump. And so that's where we are. So so they want to expand war to try to take control of the agenda. They've been hyping a new virus being released, try to stop Trump's reboot of our economy, because they think that would stop this popular revolution in Europe. It's arresting their political opposition and stopping elections. And they also have Europe trying to sue Elon Musk and a million dollar fines trying to shut him down like we saw with Brazil. So those different strategies, they're also doing big put options and naked shorts trying to crash the market and then blaming Trump's tariffs on that. So it's economic terrorism, the buildup of domestic terrorism, the false flags that can be used and nuclear false flag to get us into record with Russia, a new viral release. Those are the things they've got set up ready to go and that they've said before they would use to maintain control. Everybody loves and appreciates the first responders when things go haywire. They're the ones who show up and make you safe, protect you, not just you, but the entire country. Most people agree they're heroes. But what happens if they can't show up? First responders cannot be everywhere all the time. And if there's an emergency, particularly a big emergency, there aren't enough to go around. So you have to be your own first responder. Before an ambulance arrives for a doctor can help, it is up to you to protect yourself and your family. And if it's a medical emergency, you could be out of luck because you don't have the right medications. Most people do not have the medications they need at home. There's an answer to that. It's called the Jase case. It's a simple but smart solution to a problem. Most people don't even think about it. It's a set of emergency prescriptive medications created by medical experts. You've got peace of mind knowing that no matter what happens, you are totally prepared. Even if you're a prepared kind of person with stuff stored in your cellar, you probably don't have the right medications. But if there's an infection or any kind of crisis and you don't have access to first responders, you're going to want a Jase case medications on hand when they matter most. Go to jase.com and use code TUCKER at checkout for a discount. Jase.JSE.com checkout code TUCKER. The first thing in countries that descend into darkness that happens is speech is controlled. There are political police who put people who speak out against the regime in jail. That's happening in Brazil as you know. It's happening in the UK. It's happening in Germany. We're trying it in Canada. It's definitely happening in Canada. These were formerly free countries in Australia. The one place that it isn't going to happen right now is the United States because of the first amendment. How do you end first mental protection? You pick off people like you, which they've been trying to do for over a decade. I happen to be, I've told you many times in private, I happen to be on a fishing trip when I worked at Fox that the night that you were taking off the air. I thought it was one of the greatest threats to speech in the United States that I've ever seen. I wasn't there and Fox News prevented my filling house from defending you because Alex Jones is bad. That's what I realized they were in on it. But they need to end speech in the United States. They need to shut down X. They have to. My guess is, and I hope I'm wrong, that there is legitimate hate and extremism on social media. It makes me uncomfortable. I'm thinking that maybe a lot of that is manufactured actually. If there is a mass shooting and God forbid, but if there is a mass shooting of the people who've been targeted for hate on actual hate, that's true, on social media that that will be used as pretext to shut it down. Absolutely. Has this occurred to you? Yes. Because I see people on social media who I know for a fact, I think I know, are being funded by the very people they're attacking. It's like, what? Including one of the biggest voices. I know that that's true. What is this? It's clearly preparatory to some sort of event that will shut down a violent event that will be used as a pretext to shut down free speech. Am I being paranoid? No, that's where all the foundations have been laid. Actually, the superstructure has been built. They're just putting the finishing touches on it. So in a way, it's fortuitous that I'm here today because you were here, I was talking to my lawyer, before we started taping. We got some really big news that in Connecticut, the Supreme Court said we're not even hearing your appeal now because it was so strong, the kangaroo show trial that I was went through there a few years ago where the judge had already found me guilty. Wouldn't it let us? Of what? Of having an unauthorized opinion of being mean or whatever, those are all legal under the US Constitution. You cannot be punished for giving your opinion. I don't care how ugly other people think it is. And you've contested whether you even gave it a payment. It doesn't matter. Under our system, you're allowed to say what you think, period. Well, you're right, especially the Bill of Rights is. We have the Supreme Court rulings in New York Times, Sullivan. It's a scene. And Brandon and Burke versus Ohio, you have a right to your opinion. And what they did was with all these PR firms and massive thousands of articles in times a month and hundreds of TV programs a year, they built a straw man once I was censored off the internet the last seven years. Still on my website and force.com. Still on the talk radio. But it was the verbotan thing people had to go, you'll get underground. They could then build a straw man of things I'd supposedly done. I never did. And then when I wasn't offended of them, then people like you, it set the precedent to then come after everybody else, including President Trump when he was taking off everything on January 6. So people couldn't hear him saying be peaceful before, dare you have it? I just then did black nationalists who hate whites. Obviously, don't agree with them. I am white. It's where my kids like I reject their program, but they were indicted for giving their opinions. And like we cannot allow that. And now the ACLU has just completely captured. It's like a training organization. Nothing to do with free speech. Like where are the people who will stand up for the foundational right that separates a free man from a slave, which is the right to say what you think. And why were they also made the basket in shame for not defending you? I mean that. Well, I have a major update. It's in the last seven years of them suing me in this whole saga. We now have basically all the pieces of exactly what happened. I told you some about it last night. We've taken a few minutes, but I could just give people a basic summation of what's happened. Yeah, please. But first, just an example of free speech in Texas. There's famous cases where they take people small children because the school secretly convinces them with grant money. They get paid for it, public and private. They, a little boys, really a girl, a little girl's really a boy. They, then the parents find out the school's been putting them in the database, giving them a social worker, sending them to special school times with peer pressure of other kids that have been put in the cult for sterilization, transhumanism. And then they take the person's child, saying it's abuse. When you argue, you know, my son is really a boy, not a girl. Well now Colorado and the house, as you know, just passed the, the, the, the, the, it's in the Senate and they allowed no debate, saying that if a parent finds out their kid is being brainwashed and says, no, my, my son is a boy, my girls, a girl, that is abuse. And they're going to officially take her child. Other states have passed laws like Oregon and Washington. So you talk about free speech. This is beyond that. This is parental rights. This is everything now. Say parents can't argue and say to the state that has determined that, that, that, that your child's other sex and then in places like New Jersey and other states, the hospital systems now have on the form when your child's born dozens of things transgender, all, all these other names, gender, queer, all, all these things where the parents pick at birth, what the baby's going to be and say this. So, so if the state wants to come and say they're in other sex, that's okay. If parents don't like it, their kid gets taken in these areas. That's where this is going. It's already happening. But if the parents want to opt in, they can decide for their child. So as long as you decide that we're going to chemically and then medically sterilize surgically, this, this portable person, is being put into this death call, then it's okay. The only thing you're not allowed to say is no, I say no to this designation. So that's where Alex Jones having his speech massively attack goes. So it's a long story, but here's the summation. I didn't understand, even though I know a lot of things about politics in the world. I didn't understand how PR firms work, how law firms work, how the deep state was operating. And they later admitted even on MSNBC that fears ago, oh, we've been successful with Alex Jones next. We're going to do it with people like Tucker Carlson. And then they mentioned you. So Hillary knows she's in trouble two months before the election 2016. She does a $20 plus million ad buy talking about me and twisting what I had said about that event in Connecticut that mass shooting. And then in the ad, she says Alex Jones is Trump's brain. This is the guy that Trump says is an amazing person. We'll be talking about your great guy. They show that clip of Trump on my show saying that. So they created a demonized version of me to attack Trump. Then that made me this huge demon with the left even more. Then for two years articles every day, sometimes dozens a day TV shows, programs, PBS, CNN, MSNBC, every channel, foreign news, Tokyo news, Russian news. It was being pushed over Alex Jones's bullying kids, parents and dead kids, Alex Jones is sending people to pee on graves. No, that ain't ever even happened much less me. And then they sue me and then they want all this discovery and they say, who do you work for? Who's telling you what's doing the Republicans in all these depositions? Of course, it wasn't there. So they hold me in default for saying I didn't give them my secret plan to get rich off these people out of barely ever even talked about. They put 22 minutes of evidence in the Texas show trial or us found guilty of the judge and the Connecticut show trial that were only a month apart in 2022 in the fall. So I go in HBO's producing it. Cameras putting makeup on the judges. I'm giving 20 plus things I can't talk about. My lawyers are sanctioned. Do they try to raise that? Well, where did Alex Jones say this? Where did he do this? No evidence could be showed to counter them. They could just say whatever they wanted to. And then they have a billion and a half dollar judgment in Connecticut. They have a $50 million judgment total or $49 million in Texas because I'm already found guilty and the judge tells them to say how guilty I am. They lie and totally exaggerate all the money I have. I got it from these people with no evidence. And so I know it was being well-rooted for my speech. They said in the Connecticut trial and in the Texas show trial and on the court of steps, we don't want money from Mr. Jones. We want to shut him down. They said that in court filings. So I go into bankruptcy because I'm out of money personally. Never had all this money. They said not even a fraction of it. And so for three years I'm in bankruptcy and they keep going and say we don't want money. You want him closed. The judge keeps saying no. You have to actually do a settlement with him or we have to sell him for war. This is all because you said something that other people said they were offended by. Yes. But how can you, I don't understand in a free country how other people being offended by what you say can have you destroyed by the state? Well, well, it's more than that. They said I sent people to their houses. I peed on graves. All this stuff that nobody did. Why weren't you arrested? Can't pee on a grave. Why weren't you arrested? Why weren't you arrested? I don't have the people that sued me. I always said the name of one of the people ever. If you commit a crime, you should be criminally charged for it. And the state has to prove that you did it at which point you're convicted and punished. If the state accuses you of something but doesn't charge you with it, they're fucking liars like by definition. They don't, that's not on the list of options that they can just discredit you, attack your character, destroy you. No, no. You made us one option. If you committed a crime, they charged you with a crime and they prove you did the crime. It's that soon. That's right. And I never got an investigative or stock here. I think that did nothing for any crime. So, so, so, so, so here's where it gets crazy. Here's what we've learned since they have the show trials. And us know the libertarians defend as you either. Where was the reason foundation in Cato and all these supposedly free-to-minded nonprofits who were just freaking liars, like none of them defended you that I know of. Bear minimum, they were bought off where they wanted to keep their head down. So, so, so, so here's what we learned. The Democratic Party and the Justice Department, the FBI and the CIA, this has come out and court, come out and document down. We've got it all, I publish it in them for wars. They can be shut down literally in days now. We're fine with the war today. It was a big ruling. But it's the truth's out there, but they don't want you to know it. So, they come after me to demonize Trump. Then they run ads on Facebook and Twitter and everywhere. For the two years before they sue me, 2017, 2018, saying I'm attacking them, saying I'm coming after them, using my name to raise money. Okay, it turns out hundreds of millions using my name. This has come out, saying I'm victimizing them and then never showing what I supposedly did, just this man's hurting us, help us, help us. Then I was already taken off the internet after that for other reasons that they cooked up. They had lesser hope get up on TV and say Alex Jones called for people to get battle rifles and go attack Democrats. No, I talked about the anti-fat attacking your house and how they were playing attack more people's houses. And I said, none of us are going to be violent. But I said, everybody needs to have their battle rifle ready or their shotgun in their home if the left comes to kill you. Well, as someone who's house was attacked by anti-fat, I agree completely. But then, but then, hold never showed what I supposedly said. He just said straight up. Okay, so I wasn't even taken off in it for Sandy Hook because I was even known for that. Okay, barely ever talked about it. Then they sue me. Then they run more PR. Then they raise more money off of me. Then when they didn't find anything in there, all their discoveries or was nothing that I did, then they have the judges both find me in default, coordinate for both trials we held in a month and a half period in late 2022. And then right after they win the series fine for all this money, they come back and they say, that's not enough here. We want 2.75 trillion. That's the GDP of India. People don't believe that. It's type in Alex Jones, Sandy Hook, 2.75 trillion. And I said, no, you just get 1.5 million. In retrospect, did you ever think when they awarded judgment against you equivalent to the GDP of India, did you ever think like maybe I should keep my visions to myself and not, like next time I see 9.11 coming, I just shouldn't say anything because people who predict the future accurately are always punished for it? I think that's, I mean, well, what I realized was I've got something important to say, so I better say it even louder because the evil wants to shut down, but there's the finish to keep part. You're speaking me upset hearing this. No, no, no, I'm saying I haven't gotten to the big stuff. I'm just giving people the back. This is not the country I grew up in at all. Just saying that. No, no, you're right. Thank you for the platform. No, thank you, Tucker. And I told you all this last night took 30 minutes. Let me just try to condense it. So I know they're trying to demonize me to get it from. I know trying to set the president to shut down everybody else. And once I'm demonized, I think nobody will defend me. And that's the president. They admit it all that. Then when they win the show trial that was already fixed, these PR firms come out of New York, Connecticut ago, we've been doing this for years. We exposed Jones. We did this. We helped get this big win. Blah, blah, blah. Then this undercover video comes out that is in a predator-sexting trolling operation in DC, which the guy was ever implicated in, but that's like I caught up with the troll trolling operation. This will blab us person CIA and FBI. It's confirmed. Says, well, we investigated Alex Jones for years at the FBI that he went on the CIA. Torrey's currently and he said we couldn't find anything criminal on him. So we went to the Sandy Hook people with law firms that we developed this plan with this narrative to take him down. And now we're in the process of shutting him down. And the person says, are you still trying to put him in prison? No, we've just destroyed his name and destroyed who he is. You know, it's all on video. It's online. It's type in FBI CIA agent, you know, admits to running Sandy Hook frame job of Alex Jones. We recommend you take this moment to do what we're about to do, which is enjoying help. Just to kind of refresh our baseline assumptions here, is the CIA allowed to destroy people in the United States for criticizing? No, it's illegal. Oh, it's illegal. Okay. Of course, you have it. So then then we have that. But then I go wait a minute at the trial last year, if I have this FBI agent with the chief counsel who on the stand, they say it to hide it in plain view. The Democrat Party law firm talks to him for like a day. And he goes, so you went and got the suit against Mr. Jones. Yes, I went to your law firm, Mr. Costcoff. And I went to the families, you know, and I organized them to do this. So they're hiding in plain view, the chief counsel of Connecticut, that I didn't pick up on the time. Why is he on the stand? I'm sitting there talking about how he went and set this up and did this to me. Then later we have a blabberst talking about years ago, we criminally investigated him for a decade. We couldn't find anything. So we went and did this sibling. So now that's two of them admitting it on the stand and undercover video. Now, this is where it gets wild. Then three days, efforts from the office, we done a four-year request two years ago for my FBI file. We done it many times. They never responded back. Soon as Trump gets in, they send us a disc in the mail. I got a call from the FBI saying, hey, you can be sure you watch your mail. Then they send me a disc of our four-year and it was 196 files, but it was just a cover sheets. It's the rest of the national security. But it said, Alex Jones and the top national security threat, Obama administration ordered me to be a level three terror national security threat in 2013. I'd call Sarah Fanon who knows how to read the code documents on the dozens of pages I got that were attached. He said probably the thousands, but 196 other investigation packets. We were talking weekly and monthly meetings out of the Boston field office and Trump didn't learn about this as first admin. We learned this was going on until I was sent this by the new FBI director or the new FBI. It's just the cover sheets, but they have codes on it that call Sarah Fanon used to run counterterrorism on the FBI. Huge whistleblower came on my show for hours and documented what it meant. Then he talked to his sources currently in DC and they said, yeah, we're actually on this. It's bad. Obama illegally had me declared an national security threat, open criminal espionage investigation with huge resources, human attempted infiltration. That's all the codes. And that's now makes sense. People we hire trying to set us up, trying to get us to make commit crimes. All this stuff over the years, hacking into our surveillance camera systems, trying to find something dirty, all sorts of sabotage. So now I mean, I'm living in a spy movie. So we get that like 10 days in the Trump administration. Three days in, they mail it. It comes to mail like seven days later. So now we have that. So we have a blab of submitting it from the FBI. We have the other lead counsel in in Connecticut admitting it on the stand proud of it. I didn't play for you just because they knew it would come out. Then we get another FBI contact. They say, why don't you go look at the federal register and it look for money going to these Sandy Hook foundations or the people that sued me. We go look, it's $4 million plus in payments to them right after they sued me. And then two payments to them during when both trials started. So one payments from the Justice Department. So tax dollars, tax dollars over $4 million from the Justice Department were paid to the main Sandy Hook foundation that is on the board and the head of it for the people suing me that ran it. This is crazy. So now we have the Justice Department and I'm releasing those documents. So it's actually planning to release them today a week ago before you invited me out here. So that's all going to be out today. The documents all of it, but it's online. They don't hide it. Also millions and millions and millions more of COVID money went to them. And you know what happened to Corey Bush's husband. I'm not saying it's illegal. It should be looked into. So this is what this is important. This is the most open-and-shut start to finish operation. We've ever seen with all this money directly from the Justice Department with the Justice Department admitting they initiated it under cover tapes with the CIA. When you have the FBI been able to stand that they initiated it, then you have the money directly from the Justice Department to them directly when they're attacking me and then it gets worse. In the last year in my bankruptcy, before that they attached a U.S. trustee with a no federal law to my bankruptcy like I'm in Ron. Most people don't have this happen. So there's just department lawyers and agents at my depositions giving me U.S. code to read before the deposition when after I'm sworn in that if I say anything incorrect, they're going to charge me with felonies. But I still don't take the fix. I've done nothing wrong and have accountants and it's all lies. They're alleging I've stolen hundreds of millions of dollars from these people. None of that's true. I don't have hundreds of millions dollars. I've never had $10 million dollars you've actually been around with these stolen money from what people did. They just say I harassed them. I made money off them. It's their money. It's just all made up. But I have the Justice Department there so that the Justice Department has the U.S. trustee in May of last year order a private security company on a Friday evening to show up with guns on their sides and say everybody out of the building. And I say where's the court order? And I say call the head of your security company. I get on the phone and he goes, hey, I'm telling the people this too. We got to have a court order. I'm going to tell them they should have been your office. They showed my office with guns. They're armed security. Yes. And so I call my lawyers. They don't even believe it's happening. We get a hearing and the judge blocks it. Then he has a full evidence hearing hearing June 14 fires the U.S. trustee removes them, removes the CRO that did it. Okay. The bankruptcy and then a point said new one who comes in to be all but buddy, buddy. Then they. Some remove the CRO that did it. Okay. In the bankruptcy. And then a point said new one who comes in to be all but buddy buddy. Then they, he says, okay, we want to sell it. And then that way proceeds have sold him for worse. But then we have buyers that are good. They'll keep it going. The Sandy Hook family is really Democratic Party. Says we don't want money in court filings. We want it shut down. But just as no, you will sell it at an auction, but cash auction. Then they have a auction date set that day before they say that's canceled. It'll be private bids turned in on that Monday. And then the next day we will tell you the winner is well then it was the Bloomberg financing his every town group, the onion. Everybody heard the onion had gotten in for us. Remember that back in back in November. So all that happened. So we we countersuit the judge has hearings on the summer night content says there was never an auction that was fraudulent. You know, you guys need to settle this and you need to get money for Mr Jones's buyers and it needs to stop. They come back to the judge three times and say we don't want money. We don't ever want it sold. We want it shut down. So the judge said about a month ago, he said, okay, I'm done. This is going on three years. Take it to state court. The state court is judge ballas that did the show trial with HBO. Or that that's Judge Workambal in Texas. That's the other judge in Connecticut. So it's Judge Workambal. Just like Judge Bellas running the show trial, find him guilty. She has said as soon as she gets that, she's going to send in the constables from the county and just close the doors, lock it because they don't want the money that can produce. They don't want any of that. They want it shut down. Can I just ask you a reality based question here. So all of this stems. Try to watch the story. But no, no, no, it's a shocking story, but I just don't want to lose the base. It's never been told in full the baseline facts. Okay. So all of this stems from a school shooting in Connecticut. 12 years ago, 12 years ago and you suggested on air that there was something weird about this. I covered other people saying that. Correct. You did not commit the school shooting. No, Adam landed it. Adam lands it did. And I said for years, I believe it happened before they said me. Right. So we spent approximately zero time and zero money as a country trying to figure out why would Adam lands of murder all these children. We're all against murdering children. Some of us are against murdering all children, including in foreign countries and here in abortion clinics just against murdering kids. Okay. So I'm not going to see the moral high ground on kids to ghouls like this. So okay. But we have no idea why Adam lands do this. No one's trying to find out you instead are being blamed for the father of four kids. For the murder of all these kids when you had literally nothing to do with the murder at all. And the actual murderer is probably brain fried in a supervisor or whatever the cause. Like no one cares. Let's try. He was on SSR as I almost all of a minute and exactly. And here's the finale. But like no one cares. It's like all these people jump up and down, including some of these parents. I assume. And like I understand they're upset. They're kids are murdered. I mean, I have true compassion for them. But they're blaming you for it. And then raising money hundreds of millions off my name. And his mother bought the gun legally. And then Remington was bankrupted by it and paid $73 million to them. Remember that. It just goes on and on. And after they sued me this one foundations increase went up while they were suing me and during the show trials 375 a percent. Let me give you the actual numbers. 337% to 119 million just during that period. And their main fundraiser was me. Not to mention all the justice department for plus million. They got, but here's the here's the here's the blaming you when you say the fundraiser was you know, they were blaming you for a mask murder that you were horrified by and didn't commit. And ignoring the actual mask murder or blaming everyone but the murder for political reasons. So like they're they were just saying it's like that meme or any of Jones moves the idol and puts the bag of sand on there. They remove lands and just put me on there. And it was he's coming. He's harassing us. He made all this money off of us. He's bullying. He's sending the stalkers. He's attacking help help with just ads everywhere. help help help us find out shows help help help. And I had talked about him in years and years. Only talk about one of their names. I never even knew this FBI agent was none of my crew said his name. My lawyer got up and said if you ever Alex shows their name. No. Any as crew ever say your name. No. You ever post your picture. If we're talking about you know, when's the first time you heard about Alex Jones 2016. And then he goes and does all this but here's the finale. Here's the finale. This is what I know when you talk to Trump and others. This is important because this needs to be looked at this is conspiracy against rights. We're getting ready to take action on this legally. This is a violation of process. This is racketeering. I mean, cut and drive my view. And that's what my legal experts agree as well. It's cut and drive. Turns out poll lies the big law firm that lost its intelligence agency. Clarence's because they targeted Trump and they admitted to it. They came to Trump a month ago. And they said give us back 50 plus percent of our business. Let us have an international security clearance. We promise to stop doing law fair and senior supporters. And this is an agreement. And we'll spend $40 million on pro bono work that's non political. It's it's in the agreement. Okay. And that's by the way in our legal actions about the amount. They just filed that 40 million of that 20 is their suit of me. And they list the lawyers. That's their pro bono work. And they've been coordinating the entire bankruptcy assault. They came up with the fake auction on record. That's come out in our depositions of them. We're suing them currently, but more coming. They came up with the plan with the US trustees multiple times to have fake auctions and the judge set up the fake auction. They're the ones that sent armed security on Friday evening. I was even like seven o'clock. There's all these guys showing up from the security company. We already used for eight years, but all these guys never seen. They're like, hey, man, we're told where they're closed the doors. They're kicking you out for good to die at nine. We should have told you this, but I knew one of the guys. And but now it's under the court. And then I get on the phone with the head of the security company. And he goes, listen, man, he goes, I'm being, I got this lady saying, I'm a judge department official, Melissa Hazleton and her lawyer. Freeman. Melissa Hazleton and Liz Freeman, and they're telling me we are just department officials. You must close it. He said, no, I want a quarter. So that I had to sleep up there because they tried to hire another security company the next day. And I knew it. And I want to steal your office from you. Listen, when they did the fake auction the next day, they came and turn the internet off because they knew I was going to appeal it and the judge shut that down to. And I was out of there for a few days. So there was such an outcry in the judge ordered and let us back in the building. We've been run, we've been kicked out repeatedly once I would live your own building of our own building. So so, but Paul Weiss has has been running this whole thing with cost, off and cost, off. It's basically a total deep state operation with Senator Blumenthal and his son. Okay. So this is on record and but but so so here they are telling Trump. Oh, yes, we'll stop doing off air. I guess you and your people. And then now they're building that in the basic fine, they agreed to a Trump. That's what it is on official fine. They are telling Trump. We're going to stop our attacks on your supporters and you and now they think Trump, you know, they don't be busy that he won't learn that they've done this. So in my view, they need serious sanctions from the White House. If this isn't about me, I'm tough. This is about this saga. Everything I've told you is even worse than I'm telling you. The insanity of what they've done and the persecution would take days because they had four court ordered that my company had to pay for. And then the money didn't come in. We wouldn't make it through those investigation. I'd tell listeners, hey, by our products, we've got to pay to be investigated. Four different investigations forensic accountants looking for dirt. They had the IRS audit me for a year. We got a $4.3 million tax return back. The IRS says we never do this. It went into the bankruptcy because I'd overpaid $4.3 million in five years because I tell my CPA overpay. I know because I don't want to target. So there are three years of investigation. I got a $4.3 million check back and none of it was true. And then even the New York Times last year had to say, well, it turns out Jones had meager resources and never really had anything. It was all lies. It was all lies. I didn't think too. It was all lies. I made money off of it. It was all lies I had all this money. And the point is is now to last night, the Connecticut Supreme Court said we're not even going to hear your appeal. And which is ironclad abuse of process, all the rest of it. Texas, the judge violated three laws cut and dry. I mean, the cap is at $5 million. She said, I don't care about the Texas cap. I'm doing 45 with change was 49. They just don't care. And it's the same in all of this law fair. Just like a judge found wrong. I never did anything. You never broke any laws. They would have indicted you like this is all so loose and energetic. It's so crazy. Well, imagine it's like it's like I'm there too toy and they just chew on me. But your crime. Look, I just want to refer you to the very first moments of this conversation when I pointed out once again for the 100th time, you called 911 in detail before 911. So that is like just from my perspective as an outsider and so we know that's like the defining fact of your life. That's the first sentence of your obituary. No one did that. Only you that fact. I think is responsible for everything that has come after. Well, just exactly, but just think of the scandal on record call Sarah Finn and he showed me the conversations with high level FBI that said they're investigating it. He's going to come back on the show. They tomorrow. Or Friday. You know, famous whistleblower. He read the documents and we got a lot from it. He explained. I mean, this is like terrorist designation. This is espionage. I've had a full espionage. Counter espionage operation. Trying to find something for 10 years. So where's the DOJ? Where's I mean, this is a test for the new Department of Justice. You know, brought in on the explicit promise to end the corruption stop using our justice system, which my ancestors helped build in years two as a political army mobilized against domestic political opponents. That's not allowed. That's like Haiti stuff. We don't do that. It's not a ton. Tom McCutas, the FBI. They promised to do that. So can they help you? Are they helping you? Well, I'll say this. Trump cut and dry had the same stuff done to him. He's the only person on a wire scale that has had this and you'll hear him say it's unbelievable. It will take a long time. It's unbelievable. I've Stay the cases of you. It's it's the same kind of crap. A judge in New York finds him guilty. I'm giving him a jury trial. I mean, it goes on and on. So what they've done to me, they want to do to you. But if you want that string that pulls the whole sweater apart, they think because the demonization, what they said, I did to kids. I didn't do that the Republicans will be scared to ever defend me. That's for sure. When in truth, it's like the Mendez brothers, people found out what they went through. They learned that they'd all been lied to about that. Well, this is like that. This is like what the story you've heard folks from start to finish isn't that they saw was famous. They saw was big. They tied me to Trump. Try to hurt him. Then they raised hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars off of me. Got just department money had show trials to put out all the stuff I didn't do on record. And then and and and then now are not just trying to kill the Second Amendment. Using these poor dead children who have got rest their souls, but the First Amendment as well. So this is outrageous. And it's a bell weather showing that Paul lies that big Democrat law firm on the top ones would literally tell Trump, okay, we'll stop. doing political persecution. We admit to it. They confessed to law fair against him and his supporters, his family. And then they're still doing it to me. And they're building the money they said that he pay in me. So so it's a sick joke. They think Trump won't learn about this. And at the end of the day, I just wanted to stop and look, we've survived so much. People say, oh, they were going to shut you down here. They were showing down there. It's in the news. They kicked us out of the building in November. It's in the news. They kicked us out in or try to kick us out in May of last year. There was a bunch of other stuff that happened. My big deal is I'm not going to give up because they've said we want to get the name for wars. We want to confuse it and have Shuba cobras and big foot and we're going to act like relics Jones. They claim they own my ex account. Must have had to sue getting involved and have them back off of that. The Democrats in their filing in bankruptcy six months ago said that the amendment against slavery was a 13 to 14 13. Doesn't apply to me. That's you read it in Bloomberg from the filing. They said he is a special type of person. And so just like Prince signed away his rights to a record company for his name and his music. I never signed away my rights. So they're saying they own the name Alex Jones in the court filing. They said they know the name real Alex Jones. They're saying they own all my catalog of material even though it's always been free to air. And it's my political views and it's open. They can't do that. I can write a book and publish the world and say it's free. Somebody can't sue me and get a bankruptcy letter and say they own a book. I gave away copyright free. My show is owned by the world. But what is it? They don't want it's because my older shows going back 30 years are ultra green. They're not ever green where they stay the test of time. They get more important. And so the system knows that those clips are getting hundreds of millions of views. Some of them where I lay out and predict hundreds of subjects and what's going to happen. And then I explain though. So that intellectual property is at stake. They are preposterously. This is new law. They think off of demonized Alex Jones. They say this. They can set a precedent to not just censor you. Not just take Tucker Carlson off the air and they said you're the next target literally. They say the clips you didn't see them on CNN, MSNBC that they will then take your identity. Which under the prohibition of slavery and under the prohibition against slavery and the Texas Constitution, all the others. You can't take someone's name. You can't even take someone's tools under state law in Texas. And but no, they are saying that they own the name Alex Jones. And they own your archive of content. Yes. And they say that they want to twist it and make fun of it. They had the onion owner with the every town Bloomberg representative on the, they've been Bloomberg pay for it. One you know, there's just an intel cut out. I mean, absolutely. From MSNBC. I'm very aware. A censorship operator. That was his job. New has literally no sense of humor at all. It's most humorless drone working on behalf of entrenched power like in the United States. And he's running the comedy site. It's like the babble on B. It's also fake. And he's the MSNBC version of Brian Stelter on. I know you're the exactly. So what I'm saying is it's a constellation of operatives corporate media government, justice department, the trustees, all of them. And they just like an army believe they're still going to be America. Oh, I know. And they see me as a populist, firebrand, folk hero. And they said that themselves. And they want to silence and destroy that person. So they can then take the identity of that and turn me into Satan. So meanwhile, Adam Lanza is the guy who murdered all those children is totally forgotten. Yeah. And I almost apologize. I don't really talk about this a lot of my own show. It's just come to a head today. And I'm very honored. You let me run on and on. But I mean, folks, this is your country, your world. This was done. What I've told you, 10% of it. Okay. I mean, this is an incredible scandal, the law firm that confessed to Trump to try to destroy him illegally with law fair. It said, don't worry, sir. We'll do $40 million a good work non political half of that in a filing last week is me. They have gone and filed that half of our $40 million is what we've done to all shows. I mean, come on. I mean, I don't carry what happens to me. I just hope Trump takes away their national security clearance because they're not going to stop what they're doing and those other law firms know exactly who they are. I agree. And you'd love to talk to the person to go shoot a deal and see if he's aware of it. Oh, I wonder who that is in the White House. Yeah. Maybe they should be looked at a little bit. So I wonder what they got. I don't know. I'm just speculating here. That's why we need to investigate because because I mean, you know this in racketeering laws they passed. If the mafia says, oh, you better harm my cousin and pay me 10% or something might happen to your grocery store. And then they burn your grocery store down. They start investing and they learn how the criminal networks operate. The mob bosses says the seago burn it down. He just says, yeah, that guy's not paying. And that's and they all want to mount my head on the wall. Like you've got, you know, that great deer amount on the wall over there. They want Alex Jones's head on the wall as a symbol to scare everybody else. I mean, they said that the court houses and on the court house steps. They said, send a message to everybody else. These patients zero. Yeah. We're going to take him off. And destroy him and we're going to scare everyone of these other Americans to keep that. I mean, literally it's like in bugs life when the grad headgrass officer says, yeah, we got all this grain. Why are we going to go beat up the answer? Just one little answer to it up. He goes, yeah, one little grain doesn't hurt. They goes, but if they all stand up and he pulls it into floods them, he goes, if those little puny ants out number us a hundred to one and if they ever figure that out, it's over for us. That's why we're going back to kill that ant. It's exactly right. That's it. So I'm just the ant in bugs life. you are. And but it hasn't worked. And so I want to make a prediction because I just want to be on tape saying this. I would say it again even more clearly this time. And of course, I hope I'm wrong. I pray I'm wrong. But I do think a lot of the really crazy bitter ethnic hate that you see on social media is fake. It's it's people were saying it don't mean it. I think it's like, you know, the Klans men need to see more. Or she can be like, don't know, Klans men. Like what? And of course, you find out that it's all it's it's fake. And it's designed to convince people that there's like a lot of roiling ethnic hatred that doesn't really exist. And and that's a predicate hatred front exactly. It's it's Charlottesville. That's happening online right now. And I know that it is. And I think that at some point I pray I'm wrong, but there's going to be an act of violence ethnic inspired violence of hate, hate inspired violence, actual hate like killing people. And I really hope I'm wrong. But I feel like this is real. And that event will be used to shut down free speech on social media. I 100 because that is the threat. And they you saw a TikTok like, oh, we need to ban TikTok just China owns it. Oh, nothing to China. It had everything to do with opinions that the people in charge didn't like being expressed there. And it's like we're just going to and the Congress went along with it. But if there's an act of violence and innocence murdered and I pray that doesn't happen because I hate that above all, but it has happened. And it I feel like it could happen again. And people say, and a lot of good people will go along with it just like they went along with the censorship of you and the destruction of your life because they were told like he's bad. He had something to do with murdering children. And then people just shut down. They're like, you know, I don't know. Alex Jones is sending with murdering children. So whatever they do to Alex Jones, like it's fine. I can't tell you how many times in front of of my family people walk up and they go, you killed those kids. Exactly. And I always go, really, I did. Huh? And why am I walking around? And then just like, well, you, you know what you did. But, but what you said is so important. The last ingredients is the false flag on a big, illegal alien demonstration or a black church because the Democrats keep saying crumbs come into kill the migrants. We got to rise up. Yeah. Or something else like that. But we're innocence or murdered by a crazy person, a crazy person or maybe an actual crazy person used or whatever or maybe this happens organically. Maybe if you stoke enough ethnic division online, it's clearly I mean, there are people who have, you know, views that are, you know, we're mad at other hypotheses. I mean, that's that's real. Okay. But there are also big actors who are not real. They're doing it on purpose. And we know who they are. I guess we do know who they are. And for sure, she's a reason. I'm not, I don't want to get involved in all that filth. But let's just say we've seen the document separately. 100% and they're stoking the stuff. And maybe it just organically inspires someone to commit murder, a mass murder. And again, I just pray as someone who hates all violence to say it again. I pray that's not the case. But let's just say this, the people they're mainly attacking are the ones financing them. It's the oldest trick of the book. Yeah. Hungarian dialect and so just be aware of that, ladies and gentlemen. Yeah. And I just don't know. Yeah. And I think you're what anyone was going to bring that up is because I worry about it every day. I do. That's the next big move. Free speech is the foundation of free society. Without it, it's not a free society or a slave. If you can't say what you think your slave is really simple. And we don't have slavery in this country. It's a free country. And when it happens, I pray it doesn't. That's the next move. So we're predicting this so that there's enough eyes and ears on it and enough people watching so they don't pull it off. Because that's the thing. Everything I used to predict basically came true because the global is still in power. They're so disorganized. They have so many problems now. A lot of times when we're able to get out ahead of things, you and others in Trump and Joe Rogan were able and he launched the huge voice. Secondly, the Trump were able to disrupt what they're doing enough people see through it. So if it does happen, they try to stampede us into blaming whoever it is. Oh, the crooks guy, you know, he acted alone. Well, this will be some right wing Trump supporter with the manga had 100% of it killed by the SWAT team. He was inspired by hate online. They're for you're not allowed to have legitimate opinions or your own opinions. And, you know, God can decide whether they're legitimate or not. But if you're a free man, a free person, you have a right to see what you really believe. Period. And that cannot be encumbered or else you're a slave. Absolutely. And, and, you know, we get back to the spiritual battle here. I just want people to know that my lawyers are told me, but, but, you know, figure with them. They said, I could be shut down within two days, two weeks. They are coming to shut down in full wars. We've survived so much like a long boxing match. People are like, oh, yeah, right. Now, this is very, very real. This has been very, very serious. And so, you know, for now, people can find me on exit real Alex Jones. But, but that part doesn't matter. People understand more and more how things work. All of your voices are so important. All of you sharing this interview, sharing the other great work tuckers doing all the courage he has others have to really put it all the line. You know, we haven't even talked about Iran. Well, give me, give me your five minute. I mean, dad, I should say, I think this interview is going up tonight. We're going to try to get it up in a few hours. But that's such a dynamic situation. Steve Wookoff apparently is meaning directly with the Iranians, which I think is such a great that's a blessing. But, and I hope for the best, but give us your five minute overview, like, what is that and where is that going? Well, Iran's plan B for the glob list. And Iran's got its issues and its Shiite militias and all that. I'm not lionizing the moules. Oh, you're not. But, but but they've been isolated. Israel has knocked out their proxy forces in Lebanon in Gaza and in the West Bank. And Netanyahu is extremely unpopular. He's been indicted. And he he said he doesn't want investigation in January. He doesn't want to investigation of October 7th until the war is over. But then he never, you know, is going to have the war be over. So I'm not even against that young. I'm not against Israel. I know most people in Israel don't worry with Iran either. But he's been trying to drag us into war since 9-11. That's how long he's been around and empower off and on into this. And they have the most ballistic missiles in the world. What it is, you've four to one, five to one, six to one to even the Israeli anti-missile defense system. Israel, as you know, only has three big cities. They will get blown off the map by this. Conventionally, even if Iran doesn't have to excuse some of the word as they do, Israel will new kyran and then all hell is going to break loose. And in most scenarios, India and Pakistan start nuking each other. Saudi Arabia has got nukes. There's a lot of the countries that have nukes that people don't know about. You don't want even a limited nuclear war because in most big threat assessment war games and tuckers and experts, you're going to test to it. He talks to the experts. It breaks out. Kind of like your neighbor has the black plague. You might get it. Or you know, you're your neighbor. His God, syphilis, God forbid you have sex with them. I mean, this is a lot worse than syphilis is a lot worse than TB. This is really dangerous. And Iran does have proxy forces in Europe and the United States that Biden let get in and they really do have some of these sleeper cells that are here that this does go to full war. They can cause some major problems and different foreign intelligence agencies are famous for spoofing Iranians and Saudi Arabian terror attacks. They could easily stage a big false flag to get us into a war with Iran. And they're also the Russians of war and before they did, I warned the tax on nuclear power plants in Ukraine and Russia. Try to blame Russia. Ukraine's done that and caught Ukraine and NATO. Try to blame Russia for the North Korean pipeline. How laughable is that? Of course, I heard some information has been proven that obviously it was the US government with NATO. I mean, hell, have been Biden said, you know, we'll get rid of the pipeline of UNF. So the globalist are very reckless. Again, 50% chance, depending on set of they started bombing Russia, Russia with nuke, they still roll the dice. So we need really cool heads here. This is not like going into Iraq twice. This is not like going into Libya. This is not a cake walk. Even for people that love to, you know, buy a bottle of bourbon and sit back and get drunk watching, you know, a war like so many sick people do. This, this, this is the main threat to civilization. And I mean, Tucker, you really have all the connections. You travel the world. You cover these summits. I don't know any, I don't know anything other than I think that people in charge of a bunch of different countries are like reckless on a level that's without precedent in the modern era. And I don't think they're serving their own people, by the way. Leaders like that, it's not just like, you know, you've got a bellicose leader is threatening war or whatever. It doesn't necessarily mean the people he rules are being served. He's putting their lives at risk earlier, so put our lives at risk for no good reason. And so you know, I'm hardly an expert in anything. I'm just an observer and it's just also obvious. And I'm really worried about my last question to you is you get this sense that there's like a spirit of dullness or fantasy, maybe it's connected to living digitally or something. But like smart aware people are no longer smart or aware. They're sort of sleepwalking through this incredibly dangerous moment. And they don't even acknowledge any of it. And like, what is that? Well, that was the description I was going to use. There's like a mist that settles over all of us and like we can't. It's like no one is even like a week. What is that? Well, that's how I describe it. I've used it to try to we're sleepwalking into Armageddon. The Bible calls it a spell. That's that way. Medically they would call it a transit. And you know, since the advent, I say that's our costly television and everybody gathering around it, people are way more highly suggestible. Most people are closer to a near dream state or daydream state pretty much all the time feels that way. You go to a movie. You see everybody kind of drooling. And I've never really had a lot of suspended disbelief. When I was a kid, I was always in the audience. Me too. Me too. And so I guess that's a gift, but also it's kind of torture. It'd be fun to just be able to be mindless sometimes. But yeah, and the establishment itself is all about never actually making a decision they get in trouble for, having committees, having groups, having a kind of a policy where no one can be accountable. But then that creates a runaway trained scenario where then only the most reckless people that are the craziest kind of become the consensus, just nobody else wants to challenge them. And through Trump and Elon, you know, saying, Hey, we don't want war. We don't want to meet Grindr. This is too dangerous. This is crazy. We want to stabilize civilization. We want to have more kids, not less. Every actuary shows we collapse if we don't. Those are consciously a Trump conscious away sharp, Elon conscious, aware sharp, so many others. And then it's a system of kind of quasi zombies and zombies run by a few clip to crack psycho demon possessed people that don't want us waking up the zombie. So that's why they're mad at me. It's why they're mad at Elon. It's why they're mad at you is that we are trying to collectively get people to wake up because the wheel on the ship is so heavy and so big, a few of us can't turn it. But if we get more people politically engaged in them where together we're able to turn the wheel as we're about to go over this waterfall, 5,000 feet and get killed. And so it's people that are dialed in and conscious versus people that are unconscious in the middle versus evil that is driven by a very nihilistic, destructive force. And that's what the transhumanism is about. I mean, I remember 30 years ago reading government white papers that were public that listeners sent me medical people that they had human animal hybrids that could grow in cows for organ harvesting. And that and of course that's been admitted for 20 years now. But just last week, hundreds of articles, oh, we can grow humanoids for organ harvesting. Don't worry though, they don't have consciousness. We've already raised them at undisclosed laboratories. And then it's in the MIT, you know, reports that they've done it. Or I remember 30 years ago, oh, military bases have goats that are part spider that produce body armor out of their milk, but we don't show them to you. And then later they brought them out. And then oh, oh, we have dire wolves living in an undisclosed location where we spliced 13,000 year old DNA with a regular wolf. And my point is, the future has been here for a while. It's just not evenly distributed. So you've got the super advanced sectors of technology, literally underground bases of facilities. And you've got an establishment, the very small technocracy that's even aware of those systems. Yes. And they don't want to give the literally an underground basis of facilities. And you've got an establishment, the very small technocracy that's even aware of those systems. And they don't want to give the general population access to that. So to them, they want a nuclear war. They think it's survivable in their underground basis. And Ian Fleming, former high level OSS in my sixth, wrote the James Bond books, okay, movies. Remember the 80s moon wrecker with Roger Moore. And remember, there's a crazy billionaire with these other billionaires, the underground base in Brazil, that's going to release a bio weapon on the earth to kill everybody. But it only goes for a year. He's going to go up to space while everybody dies on earth at their space station. And then come back and repopulate the earth. And he's a eugenicist. And they only have the best specimens of the humans to do it. They're in the movie Zardoz, which on Connery in the 70s, and Logan's run, and the island and THX1138. And then you have Aldous Huxley, who wrote Brave New World in 32. His brother Julian Huxley was the head of the World Eugenics Society. When that got a bad name of World War II, they changed the world transhumanist society. He was the director general of UNESCO, really ran the UN. And his brother before he died gave that famous Berkeley speech now or long. And I've read his book Brave New World Revisited that's nonfiction. Everybody should read it. And he says, no, no, no, no, the world's not going to be like Orwell with the SWAT teams. That's for the 1% of my resist. The real plan, the reason I could write Brave New World, is this was the consensus of the elite in Europe and England of the world we're going to build, which genetically engineered people, a subspecies that serves us, everyone taking some, everyone's controlled and he explains that Berkeley speech, if you don't read the book, he gives us an opposite, that this is a real plan that he saw being in place by 2020. And so you have to understand Brave New World is an instruction manual of what they want. They want to turn humans into a commodity. That's why Obama calls it the end of history, where there are no more cycles where everything's controlled, where 90% of the world populations reduced. And maybe if you serve them right or whatever, the 10% is here, but there's these gods on Mount Olympus for these Elysium, demigods that are the technocrats that control everything. Everybody is wired into their brains and the technocrats control the AI. And then they play God like Rick Herschel said, I don't believe in God yet, I'm going to become one. You all know who are. I don't believe in God yet, but there will be one in the cloud of AI. And so I'll just say this, the best laid plans that my cement in Offigo Australia is the famous writer said. And these people are prideful. They're satanic. Yes. And it's all going to end in disaster. We have to choose God. We have to choose Jesus. We have to choose free will. And we have to get out of nature more. And we have to disconnect, from the system's lies. And then only go into the systems to basically tell the truth. And just know that if you're fighting evil, evil is going to come after you, but that's a blessing. And that it's very rewarding. And the experiences you have in that quest are the greatest experiences in my life. And you find out who's real. You find out who's not real. I just see the arrogance of these lawyers. It's warfare. It's warfare. And with through the agencies that are running them and what they've done to me, they want to do to you like Trump said a thousand times, they're not trying to get me. They got to get through me to get to you. That is true. And so that's why I do want to see action from the White House. I do want to see the Justice Department take action, because my case, because they felt like it's free free aim on me that you're just open season, they've been more transparent. I mean, it's illegal in my view to have the Justice Department fund these lawsuits. It's illegal to have the FBI go create things. It's illegal for Obama to listen to as an actual security terrorist. Now, a dragnet for decades. And then all of this concerted is the stalking. All of this concerted is the racketeering. And that's what it is by definition, conspiracy against rights. And then they're just sitting back laughing and going, oh, Trump, 40 million, you know, to help poor people, we won't be politically more, we're using it for Alex Jones. You know, it's just these people need to be called on this. They operated darkness. They operate because people are too busy. They operate thinking you're never going to figure out what they're doing. And more and more, they're scared. But I would have thought with all this coming out. They would back off. No, instead, they got scared because the connected Supreme Court and all of them were going to hear this. Now they said suddenly they reversed it. No, we're not hearing it now. Yeah. Because because they think just shutting down, shutting up, it's not going to work when if they sat down in force. And I don't throw fights. I'm fighting right to the end. But if they're able to do that and everybody sees that, it's only going to make what I do that much bigger. But again, like when they, you know, the establishment tried to kill Trump, that's when the establishment went from collapsing to collapsed. So their order is over. And I like it. It's been closing to Japanese soldiers. The last one 27 years later, because the Japanese were losing a Pacific, as you know, Tucker, they would dump soldiers out on islands to frustrate and harass the allies coming in the US, England and the Australians and the New Zealanders that you'll fall to Pacific war. And so the last guy 27 years later was still in an island shooting at people and stuff thinking that he, you know, he still had to fight for the emperor until he found out the war is November 27 years. So the radicalized death cult left, the Jacobins are just running around like chickens with their heads cut off like zombies, attack, attack, attack, everyone's a Nazi cutting women off in traffic, getting out, beating up women because they're driving a Tesla being proud of it. I mean, they have been radicalized into a cult. And, and that's what Closhwab said. He said, we're in a collapse of civilization by creating an agri or world. We've got to not target each other. We've got to target the policies and ideas on the list and dismantle the policies and have a big tent to unify behind stopping nuclear war. You know, you're, you just, you pray you live long enough to affect good in the world. And I definitely pray that for you. Now, it shows. Thank you. Thank you, Tucker. So much for the best. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.