Joe Roman Feinten. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Podcast by night. All day. For a 10 or 10, it seems fine. One sub 10. Small. What's up, Joe? It's me, Joe. Great to be with you. I've seen a lot of your content online, but the one that got me the most was absolutely the giant in Afghanistan, the Kandahar giant story. And I don't know if you know, but I had Devin LaRotte on the podcast, the arm wrestler. And he told a story about how when he was in the Canadian military, he was deployed in Afghanistan. And one of the guys that he was working with over there had to have a conversation with a warlord, with a local warlord. And he said this guy was eight feet tall. He said this guy was fucking huge. And not just tall, but wide. He said it was the biggest man he's ever seen in his life. Well, I've heard a lot of things about giants in Afghanistan. And I find that I talk about a lot of different topics. I talk about a lot of UFO stuff. And I say some things that I know are that I know could get me in trouble. But nothing makes me more nervous than talking about giants specifically the Kandahar giant and the giants in Kandahar in general. Why? You know, mainly because when I talk to people who know things, they're very, very nervous when we get to this topic. And some of them will just flat out will not talk about giants in general, but specifically giants in Afghanistan. And some of these guys are high level guys that worked at the Pentagon. And they'll talk rather freely with me about UFOs. But as soon as we approach this topic, it's like they weren't they literally were worn maybe careful with this topic. What? What do you make of that? Well, I think that the topic of giants is intermeshed with the occult. That's my personal theory because nothing else makes sense. Who cares if there's eight-foot tall guys, right? Big deal. Well, there's eight-foot tall humans, right? We were just talking about that young kid. That's a basketball player. That's 7.9, right? Yeah. So there's actual giants that are in public. Right. Play for the NBA. Right. They're out there. You could meet them. But when I say giants, I'm talking about 9 to 12 feet tall. Right. That's 8 to 12 feet tall. I would classify an eight-foot tall person as a giant as well, as long as they don't have giganticism. Right. That's a completely different thing. Right. Gigantism is a disability. This candor-hard giant story is very crazy. Because what's interesting about it is the people that I've talked to that have been in Afghanistan, that were deployed in Afghanistan, not just Devon, but other people. They don't dismiss it. They say, well, first, we're chit about that place. And the thing that they always say is, you've got to realize, like, Afghanistan is an old country. It's old and it's very remote. Like most of it is very mountainous. It's controlled by warlords. Look, what are those, are they Greek or Roman, those structures that are there that they look like Greek temples, that date back to Alexander the Great. And archaeologists can't study, though. They can't go there because it's too dangerous. It's one of the most remote places on the planet, specifically because it's so dangerous. You can't just go strolling around to Afghanistan. You probably would be easier to go to Antarctica than Afghanistan. So the story of the can to hard giant. Yeah, let's tell the story. This story has grown into a mythology over the years. Years ago, I was working with a gentleman named Steve Quail and we started a production company called Gen 6 Productions. And we were making documentary films mainly about giants, mainly on the topic of giants. Giants as, like, referred to in the Bible, in ancient history, the Smithsonian giants. That's right, biblical and historical accounts of giants. So I was traveling around the world investigating giants and Steve is known for his investigations into giants. And he got a phone call from an elderly woman who told him, you need to talk to my son. My son has a story he needs to tell you. And she had to convince her son to talk to Steve. And ultimately he did. And he was active duty. He was a C-130 pilot, active duty. He actually went on coast to coast with Steve. They went on coast to coast together. And he related his story, I believe, at George and Ori, him, Steve and George. And then later on, we flew him into Bozoon, Montana to put him in our documentary film that we were making. And he did not, he wanted to be filmed in silhouette. He did not want his face out there. Even though he knew that they're going to be able to mark him just by his voice. So he flies into Bozeman. We meet with him. He shows us his credentials. He was active duty C-130. And then he told us the following story. Among many other things that he told us. He said back in 2005, he was deployed in Afghanistan and Iraq running missions as a C-130 cargo pilot. And oftentimes, they would have him fly into Bogromere field. And these were routine missions. And so on one of these missions, he's flying into Bogrom. But this time when he landed, he was met, soon as he complained, he was met on the tarmac by some individuals that he describes as the babysitters. He calls them the babysitters. He thinks they were either Army Intelligence or Air Force Intelligence guys. They didn't tell him. But this was different because when he disembarked, they told him no photos, no mention of this ever. This never happened. So he knew that whatever was about to happen was top secret. And he had flown classified missions before, usually retrieving Taliban guys, what he described as high-valued assets. But this was different because the intelligence guys on the tarmac waiting for something. And it turns out what they were waiting for was the cargo that was being delivered on a forklift to the C-130. And the pilot says that the first thing that struck him, as this cargo was moving toward him and his crew, was the odor. He said it smelled like this, like, musk, BO, and death. And it was extremely pungent. And when the cargo arrived, it was on an air cargo pallet, which is seven by nine. And there was a, he could see that there was a person on the pallet in the fetal position. And this individual was so large, that his hands and his feet and part of his head were hanging off a pallet. And he and his load master and there were some Marines who accompanied the pallet, who accompanied this cargo. They were actually putting their feet up to this guy's feet, this dead, giant's feet, and seeing how small their feet were compared to his. Now, the giant head right here, he had six fingers on each hand, six toes on each foot. His feet were wrapped in, like, a crude canvas foot wrapping. And he was solid as a rock. Again, most of his body was covered by a tarp, but the pilot and the guys around him were hitting him with their fists. And he came up to about their midsection, laying in the fetal position. And the pilot told me he was solid as a rock, this guy. And he asked the Marines, what happened? What did this guy come from? And they told him that they had heard that there was a team that was out in Afghanistan that was looking for Taliban or something. And they came upon a cave because there was a nearby village and the villagers were bringing food and other artifacts to the mouth of this cave. And so they thought that they're aiding and abetting the Taliban. So they went into the cave and rather than encountering the Taliban, what they found was this enormous humanoid who killed them all. And then, according to these soldiers, they deployed another team to go look for that team. And when they found the cave, they found the traces of that other team. They were ready. They were prepared. And they were able to kill the giant. In fact, the soldiers told the pilot that the giant was eating on members of the team who he had killed previously. But these new guys, they took him down. And then they had a transport helicopter come in and airlift him to Bagram. Did you ever try to find records of who was there and casualties that were reported, deaths that were reported? It's very difficult. The Pentagon actually released a statement some years ago, which is bizarre to me. Basically saying in paraphrasing, the Kandahar giant incident never happened. There was never a giant that was killed in Afghanistan. The Pentagon. Yes, it was a recent, it was like a spokesman from the Pentagon or something or a release from the Pentagon. Because this is available online. Yeah, they actually felt the need to debunk this. That's hilarious. Now, that gets me sketchy. Well, I believe the pilot because he was a very credible guy. He did one his name out there. He didn't want fame or notoriety. He was very nervous. He thought there's a good chance that they're going to recognize me by my voice. He was on coast to coast to am. And then he's on in our documentary. There's a good chance I'm going to get recognized. And there's going to be some reprisal. He was nervous. Now, they weighed the giant before they loaded him on the C-130. Because they have to load everything that goes under the C-130. The load master weighed him. He weighed 11 hundred pounds. And they estimated his height at 10 to 12 feet tall. And so they loaded him onto the C-130. And then they flew him to Qatar. And then they unloaded the Khargong Qatar. And our pilot told me, he heard through the grapevine that the body ended up at Wright Paterson, Air Force Base. He said, I don't know. That's just what I heard. So this is a firsthand account from the C-130 pilot who flew the body himself from Bhagramirfield to Qatar. Why does all the weird shit go to Wright Paterson? That's a good question. Because that's where the weird shit goes. Wright Paterson used to have the blue room. I don't know if they still have it. But they used to have a room there called the blue room where they had all of the alien artifacts that had been recovered, that they were studying. And it was completely off limits to anybody except for people who had access, the very few who had access. And but the candor-hard giant, that story, a colleague of mine, Elie Marceouli, he had another guy come to him, a different guy. We interviewed the pilot, Stephen I. Elie had another guy come to him that was, I can't remember the details. He was a special forces guy. He had firsthand knowledge of the event as well. And we're not sure if it's the same one or a different one. If there was just one incident with the giants or if there were multiple incidents. Now years later, this would be just a couple of years ago because we published that film, I think back in 2016. But just a couple of years ago and I do have to be very careful here. I ran into a gentleman who was very high up, let's say, in the operations happening out there during the Iraq war and in Afghanistan. And this individual had, he flown a lot of missions. And he was a commander. And I asked him, we were having a casual conversation and he starts to walk away. And I said, hey, you were in flying missions in Afghanistan. I said, have you ever heard about the Kandahar giant? And his wife was standing next to me and he's sort of walking away. He turns around. The blood rushes out of his face and he literally goes like this to me. Points to his phone. And his wife whispers, he can't talk about that. So later on I was able to, we agreed to meet it later on and in a very controlled environment. And he related a story to me, that's the most wild story I've ever heard of my life. And I'm sorry, I can't relate. I love this guy, I want to protect him. But it's not the giant of Kandahar, it's the giants of Kandahar. There's more than one, the military has known about it. And aside from him, I talked to other soldiers who've also, who've also had knowledge of that specific incident that I cited earlier. But then also in general, the giants in Afghanistan. And I have a friend of mine who I met some years ago, actually I was with Lu Elizondo at Lu's Bar in Wyoming. And there is a friend of Lu's who's now a friend of mine there. And we were talking about the Kandahar giant. I was just telling him the story told you, and he just couldn't believe it. He thought, this is nuts, this is crazy. And I said, okay, do something for me. Next time you're talking to somebody in government or in the military who you think maybe might know something about this, bring it up. See what happens. So he called me one day and he said Tim, you're not going to believe it. He said I was talking to, I have to be very careful here too. He said I was talking to a certain individual who works for a senator. He's a staffer. I believe he's one of the chief of staff for the senator or at the very least in advisor. And he's got a military background, special forces. And he said I was sitting there, we're really good friends. He said we're having a casual conversation as we always do. And just in the midst of this conversation, I said, hey, what do you know about the Kandahar giant? And he said his face completely contorted. And he was no longer just being happy and laughing. He became very stern. And he said, what have you gotten yourself into? What are you looking into? He said you need to be really careful. And he wouldn't tell him anything else. That's the kind of reaction that I get and others get whenever we try and get information on this story. It's a very fun story. I don't know why it's so fun, but it's very fun. But the question is, what would be the reason why they would want to keep something like this a secret? I don't totally understand it. I don't either. I mean, if there really were a race of giants that survive, let's assume that what we're talking about is what's referenced in the Bible. Let's assume, or at least the book of Enoch, the Nephilim. We're talking about giants. Like the thing about giants is like Native Americans have stories about redheaded giants. They talk about the same thing about them having six fingers and six toes. They have the same myths. Like how is it that people from the Middle East and people from North America have this same ancient story? And what is it in reference to? Like why does that? It's ubiquitous. I mean, the legends of giants are universal all over the day. Why hide that? That's what I understand. The stories about the Smithsonian are always fascinating. Because the stories are, there have been archaeological digs and they have discovered enormous femurs that they thought were like woolly mammoths or something. And then they realize like, well, this is a giant human. And they find hair and the hairs red and that they take these bones and they talk them away somewhere. I mean, this is always the myth. They talk them away in the basement of the Smithsonian or somewhere else. And for whatever reason, the general public is not allowed to know about this. And I don't totally understand. What is it about giants that they would try to keep from us? Like if they find a new species of dinosaur that's extinct, they'll let you know. Fascinating. Amazing. They find Homo florias, theensis or however you say it. The little Hobbit people. Yeah. But you know, look, we found a little Hobbit people. Pretty cool. Giants for whatever reason. You know, it is a conundrum. And if it's real, it's, do you think it's real? Giants in general? Yeah. Oh yeah, 100%. What makes you think it's real? Okay. So let me tell you why I think that this thing's being covered up and then I'll tell you why I think it's real. And we'll go to Sardinia for that. So I like you have been wondering for a long time like what is the big deal? And initially people in my field, especially people who are coming from a biblical perspective. The common answer is, well, the existence of giants would affirm the biblical narrative. And so the secular, atheist types don't want the biblical narrative affirmed. I can't be, that can't be right because the existence of giants doesn't just affirm the biblical narrative. It affirms the myths and legends of every ancient culture across the globe, including the Bible. So it's not something that's specific exclusive to the text of Scripture. So it would just affirm all these legends in general. So the only thing that makes sense to me at this point, and the other line of thinking by the way would be that it would somehow conflict with the theory of evolution by natural selection, which I don't really buy into that either because they would just say that this branch of humanoids, they descended from Gigantal Pithicus or something like that. I don't think it would be that difficult of a problem for the theory of evolution by natural selection either. I'm not myself an evolutionist, but I don't see them having that difficult of a problem here. So the only thing left on the table for me is that there's something very sinister going on in regard to the remains of giants. And if you study the mythology of giants all over the world, especially in the ancient areas, you will discover that there was, in fact, a cult of giants, that there were cultures that venerated giants and that there was a very particular belief about giants. And this goes back into the book of Enoch. And the idea is that this race of beings who are not entirely human, they're hybrids, that when they die, you can still make contact with their spirits, with their souls. They can be summoned. They, in fact, these are the demons that, these are the, in the New Testament of the Bible, these are the demons that possess people. This is the origin of demons, by the way, in Hebrew cosmology. So there's this pervasive idea, again, especially in the ancient Near East, that dead giants can be communicated with and can possess living human beings, their spirits. And so you have a cult of giants in the ancient Near East, especially among the Canaanites. And the Canaanites, they had, actually, there's various customs and rights related to giants. But one of the specific ones that we know about is called Kismum, the Right of Kismum. And there's a fantastic book written by my friends, Derek and Sharon Gilbert, called Veneration, where they detail the Right of Kismum. And this idea of making contact with the spirits of dead giants and the veneration of giants. And the Right of Kismum was, it was practiced broadly speaking in the ancient Near East, but specifically among the Amorites and other Canaanite clans as well. And what they would do is they would hold a feast and then they would invite the dead to come and join them at the feast. So this was a necromantic right, and they would evoke the dead, and they believed that the dead would come and eat with them. Now the kings, and specifically the Amorite kings, they would invoke the spirits of the mighty ones, the great ones, the giants of old, the refine, the biblical account names various different clans of giants that inhabited the Levant during and after the conquest by Joshua and the Hebrews. And you had the Anakin who descended from the Nephilim. You had the refine, the Zamsumim, the Amim. These are various clans of giants that are specifically named in the Bible. Of course we get Goliath of Gath. Gath is a Philistine city. After Joshua entered the Promised Land, they drove out and eradicated a lot of these giant clans. But some of them remained. Some of the individuals remained and they were primarily went to the Philistine cities of Gasa, Gath, and Ashdod. And so you have Goliath of Gath who David encounters later in the biblical text. So it's these heroes of all, these descendants of the Nephilim, that the Amorites and the ancient Near Easterners are attempting to make contact with because they have knowledge and they, these are possessing spirits. And so the right of Kispoom, the kings, would summon the refine by name. And you can find this in the Eugaritic texts. Eugarit was an Amorites city state located on the shore of the Mediterranean in what is today northern Syria. And they have uncovered documents where the Amorites kings are summoning specifically by name, summoning dead giants, the refine. The idea is to summon them and then to become empowered by their spirits, their possessing spirits. Again, this goes back to the tradition of Enoch, but the giants, when they die, their spirits are in sort of a state of suspended animation and they can be revived. They can be resurrected as it were and can be made to inhabit the bodies of human beings. So there's this ancient cult that existed in the ancient Near East and another parts of the world. And it's associated with the cult of Baal. So you have Baal, the giants were thought of as the warriors of Baal. So today we know that the cult of Baal persists. I mean, the Epstein files. We know that the cult of Baal is still being practiced. When you say the Epstein files, what do you mean? There's references to Baal. And there's this recurrent theme of Baal worship. And Baal, Jesus refers to Baal as Satan in the New Testament. So it's basically Satanism. It's a satanic cult. And how's it referenced in the Epstein files? There's some references to Baal. I can't remember the exact references, but there's apparently a cult of Baal. And the elites are obsessed with some of the elites. I don't know who or how many of them, but it's becoming increasingly apparent that there's a, that there's an infatuation with these ancient Near Eastern cults, specifically the Canaanite-ish cults. And so the reason why I'm going through all of this is because I think it's still alive and well today in society. And I believe that they're using the bones, the remains of giants in these practices. I think it's extremely dark. I think this is part of the reason why part of the reason why there may be a cover-up around it. Nothing else makes sense to me. Nothing else makes sense to me. In terms of the cover-up? In terms of the cover-up. We're talking about it. It makes sense to me that you have incredibly powerful, wealthy people that don't want to be exposed as being perverts and whatever the fuck they were up to. And there's all the weird shit with beef jerky and pizza. You know, there's these very strange references that seem to not be talking about beef jerky and it's some kind of code. And there's also the fact that he brought an enormous amount of sulfuric acid. Like right after he was indicted to the island. Like I forget how many gallons of it. But barrels of sulfuric acid, which is what you would use to dissolve bodies. So it seems like there's a lot of reasons for a cover-up. If this guy was running some sort of blackmail operation and had information on powerful people. That would make sense that that's why they would cover it up. Well, that's the cover-up of the pedophilia. Or even if it's not a pedophilia. Even just adultery or drug use or whatever. The ball thing apparently comes up on a bank file and it may have been misinterpreted. It does say B-A-L-dot name. But people who were digging into this say that it might have just been a misinterpretation. That's the only mention of it. Misinterpretation? Yeah, I mean it's another page here shows that here's like the document. It might have just, I don't know, it doesn't even say it there that I can see it. Yeah, I'm not sure exactly here's where it says it. Exactly where bail is referenced specifically. Yeah, right there. There for one place for sure. Bank document. I don't know if that has anything to do with the occult specifically. Just imagine if it's the name of Satan and this is the name of your bank account. Yeah, that's quite odd. Yeah, that's at least creepy. Yeah, for sure. At least creepy. Yeah, so you have this scenario in which let's just say for the sake of argument that it's true. Okay. Okay, that the legends are true. The giants are real that you can make contact with their spirits through their bones, through maybe through their remains that or at least people believe this. And so there's some sort of a method that they use. Well, okay, so this will get us into Sardinia. So whenever anyone asks me what's the best evidence you've ever seen for the existence of giants? Now, you've already cited some historical context around this. The legend of giants is everywhere. It's an every continent. And you have giants aside from the biblical account, obviously all over the Mesopotamia, the cult of giants in the United States, they're in the era of the Smithsonian Gate, the Smithsonian's apparent, the Smithsonian institutions apparent cover up of giants, especially the ones that were being discovered in the mountains here in the United States. But it's pervasive in Peru. There's legends of giants. And the natives, the indigenous peoples absolutely believe there was a primordial race of giants. The same thing in Central America. They believe there was a primordial race of giants that was destroyed in the cataclysm specifically, a flood. That's what the income believed. But Bita Kocha, the guy Bita Kocha created first a race of giants, but they were stupid and evil. And so he destroyed them in a flood. Same story down in Mexico and among the Aztec and the Native Americans, the six-finger red here giants and so forth. So there's a lot of historical context. And of course, it's anecdotal, but how much anecdotal evidence just, at one point, does anecdotal evidence just become evidence? And it's so pervasive all over the world. Right. So as I was traveling around the world studying giants and researching this topic and investigating different stories and legends, I went to Malta, which is very interesting. Obviously, lots of legends of giants in Malta associated with the megaliths. And then I kind of hit ground zero for giants, which is the island of Sardinia. The island of Sardinia is located west of Rome. It's part of Italy. It's in the western Mediterranean below Corsica. And many people don't realize this about Sardinia, but Sardinia has the highest, has the most megaliths anywhere on earth. It is the highest concentration of megaliths anywhere that I've been, so as I'm aware of. There are these massive megalithic towers called Newragy that were... Anywhere that I've been, as far as I'm aware of, there are these massive megalithic towers called Newroggy that were constructed allegedly by the, or conventionally by the Newrog, the Newrogic civilization, Bronze Age civilization. And there are today still at least 7,000 of these things stand it. You can go to Sardinia and see 7,000 Newrogate towers. There at one time 10 to 30,000 of these megalithic towers. And some of these towers stood over 100 feet tall. Chamecoolece's pictures of the... Yeah, how would he look? Newroggy. Sardinia, Newroggy, Newroggy, Newrog looks a little bit of a three different thing. There they are. So I don't, I guess this is it. Is that, yeah, that's what it is. So what is the timeline of this neurologic, how do you say it? Newrogic? The Newrogics civilization. The Bronze Age. Yeah. So what is that? 3300 to 3300 BC to about 1200 BC. And that's what this stuff is for us. And they say it was, they say that these were built in the Bronze Age. That's the conventional idea. And again, there's 7,000 of them on the island today. But they're up to, I've seen estimates up to 30,000, including the museum in Sardinia. And aside from these towers, they also have, these are, by the way, these are megalithic. So these are, these are megalithic towers that are constructed in the Cyclopian style. And Cyclopian masonry, Cyclopian architecture is the trademark of megalith world wide. And Cyclopian, this is the, this is the, the archaeological term for the technique. Cyclopian referencing the great cyclopies of, of great mythology who are believed to be the inventors of tower building. And, you know, the builders, the offspring of the gods who are the great builders and masons. That's the, that's the mythology. But the trademark of Cyclopian architecture is that these are large stones that are fitted together without the use of any binding agent like mortar, without any kind of mortar. And you have, you have exquisite examples of Cyclopian masonry in different parts of the earth like in Peru, the walls of Saxaewamanar are absolutely amazing. Ethically beautiful in regard to their design and the polygonal, tightly fitting blocks, immense blocks of stone. Whereas in Sardinia, these are crude blocks that crudely worked blocks of basalt and granite and limestone that are fitted together without the use of mortar. So they are built in the Cyclopian style. Again, some of them were a hundred feet tall. And they had some of them were for defensive purposes. And they, some of them had a wooden platform that crown the top. And that platform was buttressed by other very large stones that were, that were finally cut sometimes basalt. I've seen some of these stones in Sardinia. I've been to the island a few times researching the towers and giants. And aside from the towers, these megalithic towers, you also have megalithic tombs, which are called to this day, the tombs of the giants. And you can go and visit them. There's 800 of them, extent today. And archeologists believe there were many more in the past. Someone knows exactly how many. But oftentimes it seems to me that the towers and the tombs are closely associated. If you feel a function, I think that is interlated. The megalithic tombs of the giants, the legends and according to legend in Sardinia, they were associated with the bodies of giants. But of course, today you have armed chair archeologists who say, that's just a myth. You couldn't even fit bodies inside of these tombs. Yes, you could. I mean, none of these guys have ever bothered to go to Sardinia with a tape measure. I did. And yes, you can. You can fit the bodies of nine, eight, nine, ten foot tall guys in these tombs without a problem. And there's two different styles of megalithic tombs in Sardinia. You have the steely style, which it's, there's a large steely stone, a monolithic stone in the front with a little doorway in it. And a doorway is almost like a little doggy door at the bottom. But it's big enough. I mean, a young person could crawl through it. And then you have the triloth on doorway, this style of megalithic tomb, which is a larger doorway. You still have to, like a guy, my size would still have to bend down to get inside. But the tombs are configured the same. They're shaped the same. These two different styles. And what a lot of people misunderstand about the tombs is the tombs were not built to house the bodies of giants. They were built on top of the interd giant. So the giant was in Hume beneath the tomb. It was buried beneath the tomb. And then the edifice was built on top. So that opening. Where are you getting this information? This is known in Sardinia. I spent a lot of time researching the tombs of the giants in Sardinia and talking to various experts. And who are these experts like local historians? Some of them. Yeah, one there's, there's, you can go to the, you can also go to the museums in Sardinia and read a lot of this stuff. Now the, I have a friend named Paula Loy, who's, she's a, she's a, I think she's the best tour guide in Sardinia. And she's extremely knowledgeable about all this stuff. She'd take you to the museum and you walk through all of this information with her. And they have little models in the museum of the tombs of the giants. And there's a legend in Sardinia that it's, it's called the, it's called the right of incubation. This is a necromantic right that was practiced by the Sardinians. And it describes the purpose of the tombs. So the tombs when you walk into the tombs, again, they're megalithic, the walls are megalithic, some pretty large stones incorporated in these tombs. When you walk into the tombs, there's a gallery inside. And the, the gallery is rather large. You could fit a body of a giant there, but that's beside the point because that's not the purpose of the tomb. The purpose of the tomb of the gallery inside the tomb is to, is for the, it's to accommodate a young person during a rite of passage. And during the, during the Bronze Age, you're talking about boys from 12 to 14 years old, right? Generally speaking. And they would go into the tomb alone. And they would be sealed in the tomb. So that little doggy door that's in the Stelae, the Stelae version of the tombs of the giants, they would crawl in there and then they would be sealed inside. And there's a little, on most of those Stelae tombs, there's a little hole at the top as well. So there's, so it's not like there, there's sealed in there and they can't breathe or anything. No, they, they, they would go in there and they would spend some days in the tomb alone. Does what it looks like? That's one of the doors with the Stelae monolithic stone. And they're all shaped the same. It's hard to tell because they've been disassembled. Many of them have been disassembled. But you can see they're the trilothon. That's a trilothon tomb. That's a, that's something else. That's a well. But the tombs are all, you can see down there, see right, the picture right below that one. There you go. See how the tombs are shaped. Yeah. Now that's all, all these tombs are shaped that way. This has to do with the right of incubation. So the young person would go inside the gallery, they'd be sealed inside that young boy. And they were, the purpose of this was to incubate inside of the gallery in order to be empowered and energized by the spirit of the mighty one buried beneath the tomb. And again, according to legend, the mighty ones were giants. So I don't think it's coincidental that the tombs are actually shaped like a womb. If you look at that, the, the, the view of the tomb from above. Originally when I was researching this in Sardinia, I thought it was shaped like a bull said, which would be something like a, I kind of graphic of mole like or something like that, keen and hitish. But I realized that actually this is shaped like a womb. The tomb looks like a womb. If you pull up a womb, you'll see what I mean. It looks, it looks like a womb, it's shaped like a womb. And, and this was to accommodate the right of incubation. And so these young people, the, the ideas they're in there, they are communing, incubating in the presence of the dead hero buried beneath. And they're absorbing their spirit, their prowess. And then the tomb is unsealed. And the young person emerges from the womb as it were. It's like a new birth. They're not, they went in a boy. They're now coming out a man empowered by the spirit of their ancestral heroes. So these are, these are called to this day, the tombs of the giants. Now, you can say, well, that's just, that's just mythology. It's just Sardinian legend. The problem is, you can interview people at least you could, in times past, interview Sardinians all across the island who have themselves dug up the bones of giants or encounter the bones of giants and in some kind of a, in some context, usually around the towers, the neurogytowers. I interviewed dozens of people in Sardinian, most of them elderly who have themselves encountered the bones of giants in different contexts while plowing in fields, they, they pull up bones, or they would find the bones in the tombs or whatever. And it's very easy to dismiss the whole thing as well. They're just digging up megafauna, right? The bones of mastodons and giant sloths. The problem is some of these bones had jewelry. Some of them had Roman coins associated with them. Some of them had rings on the fingers and necklaces around the neck. They were the collar. And they would actually, the, the, the, and most of these were old timers because this doesn't, it's not really happening anymore in Sardinian. This is something that was happening in the 60s, 50s, 40s, 30s, and back. But especially between like post-World War II, when the island was undergoing a process of industrialization and they were building new roads and digging for foundations and stuff, they were digging up the bones of giants. And there's a, there's a particular church called Santanastasia in Sardinian. And it's in the region of Sada-da. And I interviewed two gentlemen in Sardinia, two guys who were officially employed by the municipality and by the University of Kajetti. Kajetti is the capital city of Sardinia. They were specifically employed to excavate the ruins, the neurotic ruins on the premises of the church of Santanastasia. Santanastasia is a small, little Catholic church. But if you go there, you'll see that even today you can see the remains of a neurotic settlement there. There's a, there are neurogy towers there. It's just, it's, it's an archaeological site. And these two individuals, one of them, his name was Giuseppe, the other's name was Roberto. And Giuseppe worked there from, he worked there from, I believe it was 1979 to 1981. And then Roberto worked there from 1982 to 1984. Both of these guys employed officially in an official capacity from the municipality of Sada-da to do this excavation. And so they would be there. The protocol was you go and you excavate the ruins and all the artifacts you find get put into the church. So all the artifacts went into the church of Santanastasia and you can see this church by the way, if you pull it up, it's called Santanastasia in Sardinia. All the bones were put into the church. All the artifacts were put into the church. And among the artifacts that were being collected were the skeletons of giants and not Mastodon's not giants. Those are the graphs of these things. These guys, they, well, of course not. But these guys were very reluctant to talk to us. The one guy, Roberto was very nervous. He said, we were told never to talk about this. This never happened. Again, this was back in the 80s. He didn't think anything of it. He wasn't told, go to Santanastasia and look for the bones of giants. He was just told go excavate the site. He was one of the excavators of Santanastasia. And the whole thing was being supervised by the municipality and the university. And he dug up. Personally, he said he dug up the bodies. Two bodies, 10 foot tall guys, full skeletons. And he laid them out in the, these ones he laid out in the courtyard of the church. And he said he notified the people in Cajeti of the discovery. And what would happen is all the artifacts that would go into the church or in this case outside of the church. Somebody would come at night and take them all away. So they get there in the morning. All the artifacts are gone. He didn't know where they went. The other individual Giuseppe, he also excavated giants from Santanastasia. Various artifacts related to the giants, gigantic plates, gigantic cups and goblets, chalices. They excavated, they excavated a lot of different artifacts, rings and, and, and, and earrings and necklaces and all kinds of, all manner of artifacts. And he told me that he remembers a particular case in which he and his wife, his wife was helping on this particular day. They're excavating in the ruins. They found a skull that was so large that the skulls were three to four times larger than ours. He found this skull that was very large and it had part of the vertebrae attached. Some of these remains were not just skeletal. There was like almost like mummified and, and he and his wife together carried it into the church. He told me that while they were digging, they, they unsealed a compartment inside of one of the towers. There's this large room that was sealed, like that it was just, it had collapsed or whatever seal and they opened it up and they went inside and there was a giant, this very large person sitting at a table and, and there were, there's a really large plate and an oversized chalice there and he even had, he was eating oysters and mussels and clams that were still on the plate. And he was very large. I mean, these guys are, they're, when I say larger, nine to 12 feet tall, that's all tall these guys are. And they were, it was remarkable. He was extremely well preserved and because apparently he had been almost like her, her medically sealed in this thing. And so they, they took all the artifacts and the bones and put them into the church and the next day they were all gone. I mean, this was the procedure was that these guys uncovered a lot of interesting stuff at those, at that, that one particular, that one particular excavation, the church of Santanastasia, in Sardhara, in Sardhara. And he, they were filling the church up with so many artifacts that Giuseppe told me that he went over to the mayor and he told the mayor, is there anywhere else that we can put these bones, these artifacts because we're running out of space in the church. And he was surprised at the mayor's response. The mayor looked at him and said, mind your own effing business, put the artifacts in the church and shut your mouth. So these are the kind of stories I would hear all the time in Sardhanya. I mean, I could go on and on and on. I talked to one guy that was Sai Virgilio, it was his name. He was a hundred years old, very, very interesting guy. And Sai had been on a site when he was a young man. He told me a couple of stories, but he told me that he was working in a vineyard one time and they were excavating and they were, they were, they were, they were, they were telling the soil to plant a vineyard. And as they're telling the soil, they start to dig up bones and they realize he's a very large skeletal, skeletal remains. And they were, they found like 20 of them and they were laying on top of each other in a crisscross pattern. And so as soon as they started to find these bones, the owner of the vineyard said stop, stop. I have to notify the authorities. So he notified the authorities and he came back to the workers and said, you guys have to get out of here. The authorities are coming. You have to leave now. And Sai said that everyone left, but he hit in the bushes until everyone had left and he went back to work in the field because he wanted, he said, I needed the money and I wanted to actually get paid for the days wage. So I went back and I worked and I kept telling the field. And he said all the sudden, well, the owner of the field came back and he said, what are you doing here? I told you to leave. And he said, I needed the money. So I'm going to keep working. And the guy said, no, no, I'll pay you double. Just get out of here. And while they're talking, the government guys pull up and they pull up in some various vans and they come out and they start taking pictures of all the bones. And they take pictures of the bones of these skeletal remains that are laying in these cross configurations and then they load them all into the vans. And then they went up into the nearby New Rage, there was a New Rage, they're one of these megalithic towers. And they were inside the New Rage, looking at something, taking pictures. And Sai said that they sealed up like with cement. They sealed up this tunnel, this something inside of it. And then they left. I heard dozens of these kind of stories in Sardinia, dozens. These people have no reason to lie to me. I mean, these are most of these are old timers. We didn't pay them. They live on the country. I don't know if you've ever been in Sardinia. It's like going back in time in Italy. These are very simple people who live on the country. But as I said earlier, these giants are being found with artifacts. I'm looking at a story up there. They're talking about finding skeletons there. They're calling them skeletons. They're calling them giants, but they're referring to statues. And they're, those are the giants of Montepraut. Those are, those are just statues. They're giants of Montepraut. I mean, there's New Rage tools, goes back to the 70s. Yeah, those are just statues. Those are in a museum there. But they call them skeletons. There's a one thing I would say. there's like a little bit of a... No, they're, they're stone. They're in the museum. I know, they're about seven feet tall, I think. Some people wonder if those are actually... I don't know. ...covered skeletons. I saw another article here, it's still like they found two giant skulls, but they're talking about the statues. Yeah, those, some people wonder if those statues actually represented the, you know, the anatomical proportions of the giants. I don't know. I don't know that that's the case. Yeah, that's about all you're going to hear if you go through. It just seems insane that there's not a photo, something of all these things or that some wealthy crazy person didn't get a hold of someone and say, listen, I'll give you $10 million get me a hand. You know, I want to put it in a glass case in my house. We know that they've done that with Egyptian stuff. Like a lot of Egyptian artifacts with pilfred. Yep. Artifacts from, a lot of artifacts from Peru. Yes. Essential and something. Yeah. There's a very robust black market. Which is so wild. Like who are these people that have these things? That's a good question. Well, I was told and certainly they told me that in some cases, they, the bones were confiscated. They were gathered up and thrown into vehicles and carted away. Cy told me another story where he was digging a foundation for a house he and he and an associate. And they came upon a very large sarcophagus and they pried it open and he said there was a body of a very large person inside and had a black, it was wearing some sort of black fabric. And there were coins that were, that were minted from Antoninus Pius, Roman emperor from that time. And they reported there was a local priest and they told the priest that they found a body. We found a dead body. What do we do? And so the priest came over and he looked down to the pit. He said, give me the coins. I gave him the coins. He said, break the bones up and distribute them in the foundation of the house. I mean, this was, you know, if you went to start any of today, I think you would think to yourself, okay, yeah. I can see how there's no one's taking pictures or anything over here. This is like going way back in time and it'll in Italy, especially back in the 40s, 50s and 60s when most of these things happen. Now the excavations at Saint-Tentestasia happened in the late 70s, early 80s. But all these other stories are coming from the, you know, 60s, 50s, 40s. So I mean, there was just so many people who I talked to. You know, random people would tell me, as I interviewed them, that oh yeah, yeah, I was digging in my basement one time and, you know, years ago and I dug up a hand. It was a hand, five fingers and, you know, it was three times the size of my hand. No, that's random. That could just be, you know, megafauna something. I don't know how many of what a giant sloth hand looks like or whatever. And let me say this, there is no question, none, no question that a lot of the accounts that you hear about giants, not the ones associated with coins and jewelry, but a lot of the accounts that you hear about giants and the skeletons of giants, they do have prosaic explanations. A lot of them do end up being megafauna bones, especially giant sloths and stuff like that. There's a case in Peru, actually it was an Ecuador. This is referenced in the Chronicles of Peru that there's a place called Santa Elena and it's a peninsula in Ecuador. And there's various chroniclers who talk about this. And these are the chroniclers who chronicle the history of the conquest of Peru, the sado and the conquistadors who defeated the Inca. And they say that, you know, there was a race of giants that there's giants came up, the natives told the conquistadors and the chroniclers that according to legend, giants came over the sea on large read boats. And these giants were, they were very, very large and they had, they had red hair and some of them were naked and some of them were dressed in very primitive clothing. And they landed on the shores of Santa Elena, one of the places they landed and they began to terrorize the local population. The indigenous people hated them because they were eating all of the food. I mean, they native said that they consumed 50 times. The amount of food is a regular sized person. And so the natives hated them. They said that the giants built these deep wells, they dug these really deep wells, which you could still see, the conquistadors said we could still see them today. They built these houses with very large blocks and huge beams of wood, which were still there when the conquistadors are writing about this in the 16th and 17th and 18th centuries. And according to legend, these giants, they were sodomites and they didn't have any women with them and they were basically struck down by God. And the natives have that and other legends regarding giants being destroyed by God in various ways. But it turns out that Santa Elena is one of the most important sites for megafauna bones. And there's tons of megafauna, especially giant sloths. So you have lots of megafauna bones in Santa Elena. And I have no doubt that the natives and the people living during that time in the aftermath of the conquest of the Incan Empire thought that those were the bones of giants. Right. Because there was no giant sloths alive at that time. Exactly. And in some of the accounts you can see where they're saying in the giants and we uncovered a giant that had a deformed body. And I thought, oh, that's probably. That's probably a giant sloth or something. So yeah, there's a lot of that unquestionably. It has to be very careful as a researcher. And in the beginning, when I, when I, this was years ago and I first started out researching this stuff, I made the mistake of just taking that story literally and believing, oh yeah, they were digging up bones of giants, Santa Elena, until I realized that that is like one of the best places in the world to find megafauna bones. So obviously you have to concede to the facts of reality. They're digging up megafauna there. However, however, there are other stories that come from the chronicles in Peru where there's no way they're talking about megafauna. And these stories come from the same chronicles from which we derive from the same text from which we derive the history of the conquest of Peru, the same guys, the guys like Bernabe Kobo and Antonio de la Calancia and Pedro Cesar de Leon, all of the famous chronicles. And there's one case in particular I find very intriguing. There's lots of them. By the way, when I was in, I lived in Peru for 10 years at some point and then later on I went back to Peru and doing various investigations when I was looking into this, making documentaries about giants. And when I was in Peru, I was in Puneau some years ago, probably back in 2015, 2016. I was in Puneau and I met with an archaeologist in Puneau. His name was Edmoon de la Vega, very well known archaeologist. I asked him, hey, are there any accounts of giants in the historical records here? And he said, yeah, I think there's a couple accounts of giants. And I said, okay, he said, I don't think there's many, but I think there's a couple. Okay. Well, the next morning he comes walking into my hotel in the lobby and he's got a big smile on his face and he hands me a disc. And he said, I went after we talked, I went into the archives. They have access to the digital archives. And I did a word search to try and see if I could find some of these accounts of giants. He said, I cannot believe how many references to giants there are in the chronicles. And he handed me the disc. And I opened the files and indeed there were many. Now, some of them were in reference to Santa Lina, but some of them were much more remarkable. For example, give you one example here. There was a Jesuit priest named Pablo Jose Arriaga who was going around Peru and he wrote a book called The Extrapation of idolatry in Peru. I think it was 1602. And he's going around Peru with the, what I call it, what we call the BC Thalores, who were the, these were officials, they were clergymen that were dispatched to Peru, who were extirpating idolatry. These were the, they were very fair of these people. These BC Thalores, he's official idolatry hunters basically. They were brutal. And what they would do is they would go with the priests into the villages. They would find out what are their natives worshiping and then they would destroy it and then force convert the population. And they, they chronicleed everything. They, they, everything they found because they had to, this was an official assignment, right? So they chronicle everything that they find. This village, they go into this village or worshiping this. We, we, we broke it into pieces or we burned it in the fire. And these are official records. And among these records, and this is, this comes from, as I said, Pablo Jose Arraga, but also later on on Tony La Calancha, who is a Augustinian monk. In, in large is the story he expands on the story using other documents, including, including, um, Ariaga's version. And the story goes that Arraga and the BC Thalores, they went into the village and they were led, they inquired, what are, what are you worshiping? Where are your gods? And the indigenous people of Peru, they, they worshiped walkas. And the walka could be anything. It could be an idol. It could be a mountain. It could be a hill, it was just walkas, even to the state, they go and walk us. And so they inquired, where are your walkas? And they led them to the other side of the village where there was a large cave. And they go into the cave. And when they went in there, they, So they acquired where you walk us and they led them to the other side of the village where there was a large cave and they go into the cave. And when they went in there they they record that there were many dead Gentiles and among them were two giants dressed in kumbi and they were enshrined. Now that's very interesting. Kumbi is a very fine fabric that is it was used exclusively by the incandobility. In fact it was illegal for anyone else to wear kumbi only the incandobility could wear kumbi. It's a very fine fabric so it's very ceremonial and it belongs by law to the noble class. So these indigenous people they can't wear kumbi but yet they dressed these two and said that the bodies were well preserved almost like mummified. They dressed these two giants in kumbi and they were enshrined in this tomb. And so when they realized that they were worshiping these giants, these dead giants and the natives told them that these were their ancestors. These were their progenitors. That's what they told the the biseetheauorees of idolatry. They took the bodies out of the tomb and they burned them in the village. Now that's very interesting to me because you have two bodies, not just skeletal remains, bodies of giants, decayed with time but still quite well-preserved, dressed in kumbi. This doesn't sound like a giant sloth to me. This doesn't sound like a mastodon. This is something else and it corresponds to all the legends among the natives there in Peru regarding the existence of giants who wear their progenitors. So those are just, those are some historical details and historical accounts that I find very intriguing. There's so many of them, that's what's weird. And there's also this very bizarre desire that people have of destroying things from the past. We find that with, I mean, the Taliban did that. There's a bunch of different incredible archaeological sites that were destroyed by past civilizations. We just talked the other day about the chilasa temple in India about how they tried to destroy that for a couple of years. They sent a thousand people and they could barely put a dent in it. Who was trying to destroy that? Who was it, Jamie? Do we remember? Some, who they came upon this temple that they didn't like, that someone else had built it and someone else owned it and someone else had constructed it. You know, the chilasa temple that was built entirely out of stone? Yeah, the one that was built like literally carved into the ground. In the side of the mountain, emperor, say that name, you could say, you're really good with words. What's his name? Looks like Mughal to me. I've never heard of it. What's the second one? Orange. I don't know. Orange, Zeb. How do I say it? Historical figure widely reported to have ordered the destruction of the chilasa temple. In 1682, however, his mission failed because the monolithic temple was carved top down for the single solid volcanic rock. His army could only just figure some sculptures before giving up. Oh, this was in 1682. But it's just wild that people have always had this inclination to destroy old, fascinating things. Yeah, that's right. Especially you find this really sad as in Central America among the Aztec Māya. There are many codexes of the Aztec and the Māya that were intentionally destroyed by the Catholic Church, but various agents of the Catholic Church. When you're potentially destroyed these codexes, could you imagine the information that was stored in those things? Well, how about the Library of Alexandria? Yeah. I mean, who knows what was in there? Yeah. And they burnt that several times. Yeah. And so there's the historical accounts in North America are interesting because there's actual newspaper stories from God. It was like, I believe is the 1800s. Do you know what I'm talking about? Yeah. There are all kinds of newspaper stories about giants in the 1880s. These paper stories about giant skeletons that have been discovered and excavated. Yes. From the mid 1800s to the early 1900s. And somehow or another, they all related the Smithsonian. Most of them are associated with the mounds and the mound builders. There were thousands of mounds east of the Mississippi. I mean, people don't realize how many of these mounds there were. And these are, you know, the monumental mounds in Earthworks. Some of them still stand today. Not all of them are burial mounds. You have different kinds of mounds. Some of them are effigy. Some of them are platform mounds. But many of them are burial mounds. And many of them contain contain very prosaic things like the bones of native people. But some of them were said to have contained some very, very interesting artifacts. And among those artifacts were the bones of giants, according to the newspaper reports. Now, sitting in fine. There's a lot of them from the 1800s Yeah, I mean, 15 feet high, 1872. Yes. Especially in the latter part of the 1800s. How tall was it, Jimmy? I mean, just it's a giant over 10 feet high according to Lewis and Richard Collins history, history of Kentucky. Now, the contention is, of course, that these are wildly exaggerated and that the newspapers were engaging in hyperbole. And that's true to some extent. I have no problem with I think that hoaxes have brought this to some of them were hoaxes. Sure. Some of them are hoaxes. And then, you know, these are the periodicals in the United States at the time were very competitive. What is that photo? Was that bullshit that far left photo? Yeah, that's fine. Now, now that far left one, that one was actually that's a disputed one. Some people believe that that one is in fact was proven to hoax. Other people think there might be a conspiracy that in fact it wasn't a hoax because it was actually on display for a while. I don't know, I don't think there's any way to know, but so many articles during that time were discussing these astounding discoveries of the bones of giants and mounts. In fact, I don't know if you're aware, but even it appears that even Abraham Lincoln references this and some lecture notes. He was waxing poetically in some lecture notes about Niagara Falls. And he says in those notes, you can still read them today. You can pull them up and read them now. He says the eyes of that extinct species of giants whose bones fill the mounds of America have gazed upon Niagara as ours do now. Those are from Lincoln's lecture notes. Really? If it's 1845, the date of those notes. Oh, I gotta read that. No, now, here's the contention. Okay, this is interesting because here's the contention. Okay. The contention is that he was talking about mastodons and mammoths megafauna. Right. That's what people say because he does mention mastodon and the mammoth later on in the lecture in the speech. However, what they won't tell you is before he mentions that he's talking, he's in a biblical context and he's talking about he references Jesus and Moses and Adam. Right before he references the giants whose bones are found in the mounds of America. See? So the eyes of that species of extinct giants whose bones filled the mounds of America have gazed upon Niagara as ours do now contemporary with the whole race of men. Older than the first man, Niagara is strong and fresh to today as 10,000 years ago. The mammoth and mastodon now so long dead that fragments of their monstrous bones alone testify that they ever lived have gazed upon, gazed on Niagara in that long, long time never still for a single moment, never dried, never froze, never slept, never rested. That seems like he's talking about mastodon. Well, it very well. Well, can we very well could be talking about the thousands of miles of water that they all would have seen. Well, he could be talking about mastodons and mammoths. What look what he references before he gets to the giants, Christ and Moses, whereas an Adam. He says there's still more it calls up an indefinite pass when Columbus first sought this continent when Christ suffered on the cross and Moses led Israel through the Red Sea, nay, even when Adam was made. And he's talking. So here he's in this kind of hand of his maker. He's in this now, Niagara was roaring here. The eyes of that species of extinct giants whose bones filled the mounds of America. That's what's weird. Yeah. Now, the bones filled the mounds of America. So here's the question. Did where the mounds of America filled with the bones of mastodons and and giant sloths and no, no, they weren't. Now, there have been some fragments of bones from mammoths and mastodons found in the mounds. That's true. They were they looked to be ritual pieces that people were buried with that were used for ceremonial purposes or something like that. Maybe some of them were carved or nately. But like people weren't digging up the skeletons of giant sloths and mastodons and mammoths in the mounds routinely. That was it was very rare. But it seems like if you found dead giants in the mounds that it would be more specific, you would talk about it more than just that. I don't know. I don't know either. The reference is ambiguous. So we're less to wonder. Is he talking about dead giants in the biblical context, which he's clearly in a biblical context for you to or is he talking about mastodons? And the issue is that there are giants in the Bible. And also that when he wrote when he penned this these lecture notes, there were newspaper articles circulating in the United States announcing the discovery of the bones of giants in the mounds. Right. So it's it's it's it's up for debate. I don't know the answer. There's got to be somebody who works at the Smithsonian. That is sick of this. Yeah, we're at someone. We need that guy. It's got to be some whistleblower that just take your fucking camera phone. Get down there and fill something, man. It just it seems like if there really are some remnants of some of these things. And the thing that's interesting is, you know, what is the museum that John Reeves has issue with? I don't know. It's in Manhattan. I don't know. So my friend John Reeves, you aware of him? He owns the the bone yard in Alaska. No, okay. So this is the area of a lot. John's a minor and he museum a natural history. So he's a minor and he bought this land in Alaska and they're doing gold mining and they're blasting into the permafrost with hoses and they have found an enormous amount of mammoths. Cave bears, animals that weren't even supposed to be living in Alaska at the time. So now they have to like reformulate their idea of what the population of this, these lands were at this time. But also a layer of like dark carbon that indicates there was some sort of an event. All of this is sub 10,000 years ago. So he's finding, I mean, he has warehouses. This is like fully, go to the bone yard, answer and please. He has warehouses of this stuff that he's pulled out of the ground. He won't let anyone take it because the museum of natural history has some of this stuff from the previous owners. They have tons of it and they would not release it to him even though it's his property. So this is, I mean, he's finding enormous mast, dawn skeletons, mammoth tusks. I mean, they find tons of them, tons. I mean, he has warehouses. He built a scientific research facility there. And he's like, people can come here and study it, but I'm not letting any post Malone was there. Shout out to post mastodon teeth and bones. He actually gave me this. This is a mammoth tooth that they take some of these things and they carve artwork into him, which is that very cool. The artwork is kind of fucked. It's kind of weird that they do that because it's but this is a map. This is like a picture of a moore. It's a moore. A molar rather. Wow. That is really cool. Yeah. Amazing. Yeah. So this is all from his property. So I mean, why? Why is there such a distribution of megafauna bones that his belief is that there were some sort of a mass extinction event that happened whatever year it was, you know, that coincides with the younger dry sandpack theory. And he and when they're going to 11,000 BC and when he's had some of these things tested and dated, they're post, they're around this time. And he thinks that there was some sort of a mass extinction event and the flooding led them all to be washed away into this one very particular area because it's a deep concentration of these bones too many that seem to have died around the same time and all preserved. So it seems like because they're preserved in the permafrost that this is something that happened with this enormous event. The bodies are washed down into this one area and because of the landscape because the contours of the land, they they they're collected into this one area. And it's not a big place. I think it's four to six acres that he's pulling most of these things out of. And there's several other places that he's now finding things in as well. You know, I find really fascinating are the the specimens that they find of mammoth and mastodon that are frozen solid with chewing food. Yeah, with broken legs sometimes right. Yeah, yeah, there's some sort of an impact, some massive shock wave that kills them all instantly. Yeah, instantly freezes them. Yeah. And I think one of the hypotheses that I've heard is that, you know, you had referencing the younger driest impact event. You had a potentially a comet or comet that we're ripping through the atmosphere at such high rates of speed that they were pulling in the vacuum of space that that subzero temperature air and like blasting it down on the earth. Yes. And that that air was was so cold that would instantly freeze whatever was in its path. You know, as these comments are breaking through the atmosphere. I don't know if that's true, but it's it's very difficult to explain how you can flash freeze something like that. Right. And then in other parts of the earth, you have apparent biomass burnings. So you have you have mastodons over here freezing, right, solid. You have other megafauna over here that were clearly swept up in a flood. You have other megafauna and other kinds of extinct plants and stuff that have evidence of burning biomass burning. So it's like some sort of absolutely unimaginable cataclysm. Yes. That that struck planet earth at some time. Circle 11,000 BC. And it seems like there's a lot of physical evidence in terms of a ridium and soil samples. Yeah. It seemed that it's very common in space, very rare on earth layers of a ridium. And then the dark carbon layers of burnt material that seems there was incredible fires. Yeah. We were probably hit by asteroids. They also find that nuclear glass, the same stuff that they found during the Trinity explosion. Yeah. They find little particles of that everywhere that seems to indicate a huge impact that happened. And you know, this is what Randall Carlson also believes the same timeline was what caused the melting of the ice layer over North America and created the Great Lakes. Yeah. And it caused the massive flooding and the the land features that you see from space. If you look down from satellite imagery, it clearly looks like there was just immense amounts of water that washed over the land. Yeah. And yeah, Randall talks a lot about the impact of those comments on the ice sheets. The Laurentide Ice Sheet, for example, two miles thick. What happens when you slam a comet into a two mile thick ice sheet? Right. You superheat the size of a city. Yeah. You superheat it. Then you have all the ejecta coming off of it. Uh-huh. And landing in force and igniting the forest. And of course, if you have advanced civilizations at the time, which I believe they did, you have a mass extinction event where everything gets annihilated. Nothing left. There's a few people survive somewhere in the world and it takes thousands of years to reinvent civilization. Especially the civilizations living on the coastal areas or banks of rivers where a lot of civilizations are. Right. They're gone. Right. I mean, they're gone. They're gone. And not only that, the level of the ocean rises significantly. Yeah. And that's all documented fact, historically accepted. Everyone, you know, geologists, archaeologists, everyone accepts that. Yeah. This is something that happened. And then that the ice sheets in North America were a mile two miles high. Three quarters of the entire continent covered with ice. Yeah. That's wild. Recently, in terms of like the earth, when you're going back 11,000 12,000 years ago, that's not a long time ago. And this whole thing covered in ice. And then you also have the almost instantaneous extinction of 65% of all North American megafauna, which is kind of crazy. Yeah. Kind of crazy. Which what caused that? Yeah. Which some anthropologists still maintain today that that that that's because the human people killed them. Yes. They hunt to them into extinction. That's cute. It's absolutely absurd. With out of laddles. It's absolutely absurd. Spears and out of laddles. We don't even know if they had bows and arrows yet. It's just crazy. Clearly something catastrophic happened in the in the relatively recent past. Yes. And this is, as I said, it's the same with giants. You know, you have this ubiquitous testimony about giants. Well, concurrent with that, you have this ubiquitous testimony about cataclysm. Have you seen the work that there's this Italian gals, any of the article, Jamie, there's this Italian guy that is proposing that the All Senate to you, Jamie, that there's a way of measuring the erosion on the outside of the pyramids that he believes indicates there, at least 10,000 years older than we believe so far. All Senate to you, Jamie. Here. But this is, you know, obviously disputed. If there are 10,000 Jews older, super controversial, at least. He's talking about the erosion on the granite and that there's by studying erosion and by studying the timeline of erosion. And this is something that Ben Van Kirkwork has talked about when you look at the older, non updated versions of some of the sites in Egypt where it's clear that there was original stone and then there was stone that was built on top of that. Well, that shows some better. Okay. Here's here's the article. So the heading of the article, please. So it says, could the Great Pyramid be far older than we thought a new study says, yes. And if you go to it down there, what he's saying is, so this is from January of 2026, go up a right there. Big bigger. Paper released January 2026 Italian engineer Alberto Donini presents an unconvaged, unconventional dating approach known as the relative erosion method, which he argues may challenge the long accepted chronology placed in the construction of the pyramid of Kufu around 2005, 160 BC, according to Donini's calculations, erosion patterns that the pyramid's base could suggest a construction date tens of thousands of years earlier, potentially as far back as the late paleolithic period. The claim of substantiated would have far reaching implications for the history of ancient Egypt and early civilization yet it also raises immediate questions about methodology assumptions and how such results could be interpreted within archaeological science. But I don't think archaeology is a science. I just I think what archaeology is is they're looking at stuff and they're guessing and they're using science and then they're also they have timelines that they establish that they're very reluctant to let go of. And we've seen this with the dating of Gobekli Tepe. We've seen this with the erosion around the the temple of the Sphinx. They're very reluctant. While simultaneously disregarding the ubiquitous testimony of our ancient antecedents who say that their ancestors were far greater than them. Look at this right here. Other points yield far higher values. Several measurements suggest erosion equivalent to 20,000 to more than 40,000 years of exposure. While the arithmetic mean of all 12 points produces a result of approximately 24,900 years before present corresponding to roughly 22,900 BC. I mean, holy shit if that's accurate. Yeah. And then you have also Felipe O'Biondys work where they're looking the radiotomography below the pyramids and they have these structures that go 1.2 kilometers down into the earth. Yeah. Did you see my I did an interview on I made an appearance on Pierce Morgan's show and Pierce had on how he's at was. And I didn't know that I was going to be interacting with how he's at was. Sorry. Was I was the other way around. I didn't know that I was going to be interacting with him. I was just told that they want him to come on and talk about pyramids and stuff. But then Pierce loves a good scramble. Yeah. Yeah. He loves this. So he set me up like here's your opportunity to say whatever you want. You know, it was me and Jimmy Corsetti and some other people. Here's your opportunity to ask Zahi, whatever you want. And I'm thinking of myself. I don't I don't really have anything to ask this guy. But then it occurred to me. I actually have me, my team are in possession of some state of the ground penetrating radar technology that we used to great effect in Peru. And so I'm thinking about this discovery, this alleged these alleged megastructures under the pyramids. And I'm thinking, you know, it wouldn't be that difficult. You don't have to you don't have to detect them all the way down. You just have to verify that there's something there, right? And so I posited this to Zahi and you know, told them, look, I've got this equipment. Would you facilitate us coming down there? And it's it operates off of a drone platform. So you don't you don't have to drag it. It's it's a fly. You can fly it around the pyramid. You don't have to touch the pyramid. You're just fly it around in the vicinity of the pyramids. And see if you can detect something. I mean, there's there's no there's the you know, you would do no injury to any sort of any artifacts there. And he seemed like he was very open to the idea, you know, on camera and said that basically told peers get your people in contact with him so that, you know, give him my information so I can reach out to him. Of course that never happened. So it would not be that difficult to verify that. And that's why I'm wondering why you don't have to dig. Right. Why wouldn't you want as much exploration? Exactly. That's the most spectacular site. Yeah. That human beings have ever erected on the face of the earth that has a very controversial timeline. That's right. I mean, even the conventional timeline super controversial because like how the fuck did they do it? Even if you just accept that it's 2500 BC. Okay. Great. Yeah. How I mean, I don't know why it being older is more controversial because it's still the same because the same it's human beings that lived a long time ago. That's all we're talking about. But why are they sticking to 2500 BC? It's because that they've always said that they know they've always said with great certainty and from a position of authority that this is what we know. We know Kufu did this. We know this guy did this. But you don't really know. And there's also incredible amount of evidence that these guys wrote their name on everything. When they were in power, they like to put their names on everything. A recap of the head of this things. Yeah. Well, that's definitely true. Yeah. It's definitely different. There's some controversy about that as well because there's layers of stone that have different gradients like different hardness and there are different types of stone and the face the controversy is that the face is like a harder stone and it wouldn't have rode as quickly. Promo that is like the stuff that's eroded for a long period in history was covered in sand. We know that for a few. So there was no erosion going on during that period of time. Yet it's massively more eroded than the face. Well, I think that one of the fundamental problems that we have as Western as modern Westerners looking at this stuff is we have an inversion of the timeline of history. When we look at the timeline of history, we generally view our antecedents as like cavemen. Yes. These are very ignorant people that basically, you know, chimpanzees with better brains. And as we progress through the timeline of history, we're becoming increasingly more intelligent, increasingly more incapable of building and of building these monuments and technology and so forth. So we see ourselves as the pinnacle of the human species like we're the smartest, we're the greatest. That's not the way that the ancients viewed the anti-deluvian world. That's not the way that they view their antecedents. They see the, for them it was the inverse. For them, they were always trying to recover the glory of the people that had come before them, the majesty of the civilization that had come before them. So when they look back down the timeline of history, they're the dummies. And the further you go back, the more extraordinary people are because they were closer to it. Right. And they all have a, they all have a myth of the flood. All of them. And they all have to kind of be a world in general. And they lived in a timeline that was closer to that and more accepted because they probably had a knowledge, an understanding at least the earliest ones, that they didn't make this. And so they probably passed that down. Yeah. Well, they, I think they inherited traditions from their ancestors about these things. You know, I mean, you have, you have this, this idea of a golden age among the ancients. The golden age, meaning there was a time on earth, the Greeks coined that particular phrase, the golden age. The Egyptians, the ancient Egyptians called it zipped epiphy, the first time. There's a time on earth when the gods descended to the earth and cohabited with human species and to some extent, commingled with the human species. And that it was during this time that, that knowledge was transferred and that great cities were built, this was courses where the myth of Atlantis falls into this category. And, and then their world was suddenly and catastrophically destroyed. And what we've been doing since that destruction, the mind of the the agents, what they've been doing since that destruction was attempting to rebuild, to rediscover the lost knowledge from that age, to recover it and to try and try and emulate their, their superior ancestors. That's what you see everywhere, everywhere around the world doesn't matter if you're in Egypt or if you're in Peru, you see the same sort of thing. Same thing applies, by the way, for the megaliths in Peru. I don't know if you've, have you been to Peru? No. Some of the most astounding megaliths that you'll see anywhere in the world. I referenced earlier the walls of Saxai woman, absolutely phenomenal, cyclopian architecture. And of course, the construction of those, of those walls is a tribute to the Inca. So if you ask archeologists in Peru who built Saxai woman, who built Machapitu, who built on John Taitambo, it's always going to be the same answer, the Inca, the Inca built it. Now, the problem is there's no record of the Inca building, those walls. And if you ask the, the, the ancient ketchup people, if you ask the actually the ketchup people, the, the the ketchup people who continue in their ancient traditions, the ones who are there today, and they still wear their, their typical vestments and, and they still speak ketchup. If you talk to them, and you ask them, who built the walls of Saxai woman, specifically Saxai woman, they'll tell you a race of giants. This goes back to those, you know, our progenitors, the giants, the giants, the giants built Saxai woman. If you go up to, if you go up to, to decock, a Lake Titti you ask the, I'm out of people who built Tijuana, which is on the other side of the Lake Titti Kakka and Bolivia, who built those megalithic edifices? to the I'm out of people who built Tijuana coup, which is on the other side of Lake Titicaca and Bolivia, who built those megalithic edifices, the giants are progenitors. That's what they'll tell you. So, and I don't necessarily think that giants built all this stuff. I don't necessarily think that at all. I just think that there's everyone is acknowledging that that something extraordinary happened in the past, that that the our antecedents were much more impressive than we've given them credit for. I mean our ante-deluvian antecedents. And that in many cases, like you said, there's no inscriptions on megalithic stuff. Anyway, you go to Machu Picchu. And it's apparent that in Sacce Caiwama Machu Picchu, a Gentletambo, in other places in Peru, it's apparent that the Inca certainly built on top. And they took advantage of these megalithic foundations, right? Anyone would. I mean, if you're going to build an edifice, you would use the superior foundations here of massive stones and you'd build on top. And you try to emulate that style of building. Because it's anti-sisemic for one thing. So, Machu Picchu, it's evident to me, and I think anybody who walks around that complex, you can see, and we have to keep in mind that much of Machu Picchu today is a reconstruction. It's an archaeological reconstruction, except for the foundations. We have pictures from Hiram Bingham, original pictures in black and white of what Machu Picchu looked like when he discovered it accidentally. And what's there? The megalithic foundations are there. That's what's there, the megalithic foundations. And you see, and the Inca built on top of those foundations. That's what a lot of the archaeological reconstruction today reflects. So, if you walk around in Machu Picchu, I remember I've been there several times filming and doing different things. And I remember one time I was with my colleague, Ansel and Pee Ramblin. We had a guide with us. And he was an older gentleman, very, very knowledgeable. And he was one of their official guides at Machu Picchu. And we're walking around and he's telling us different things about the Inca and how they did certain things. Certainly the Inca built a lot up there. There's no question about it. Inca were impressive. No, I'm not taking anything away from the Inca. But if you look at some of the edifices at Machu Picchu, you can see these magnificent megalithic foundations, big stones, polygonal, fit together so tightly you couldn't pass a butter knife between the joints. And then you have on top, but sometimes people describe as Inca slop on top, where it's like they kind of kind of trying to match the style of below, but it's not as precise. It's not as fine. And you can see the clear delineation, clear delineation between the megalithic and then with the Inca doing and then also the archaeological reconstruction. And I remember asking this guide of ours. I pointed across the courtyard to some beautiful, this exquisite polygonal foundational wall with just sort of crude Inca stuff on top. And I said, why are there two different styles here? Why do you see this large megalithic blocks fit together so precisely? And then you have this other style. And keeping in mind the archaeological reconstruction, but there was enough of this site there that they could model what they did based on what the Inca had done. And he said, because they like the way it looked, that was the answer. They liked the way it looked. And I said, you can't really believe that. I mean, you're not an idiot, right? They didn't do that because they liked the way it looked. The reason why there's an inferior mode of building on top of those megalithic foundations is because they didn't know how to do that. They did the best they could. And they were very good, right? Attempting to adopt the cyclopian style. They were good. The Inca. But the only reason you would do that, the only reason you would put inferior architecture on top of superior foundations is because you don't know how to do that. Yeah, well, it's also just the sheer size of these blocks. It just gives you so many questions because it's not like you could recreate that with whatever the Inca had. That's what's confusing. In order to move those stones into position and then put them and construct them in a way that it appears like they've been melted into place. Yeah. You're like, how? How are you moving them? How are you placing them? You should go to a Jontitamba. Okay, so you go to a Jontitamba, which is in between Cusco and Machiapecher. You have to go to a Jontitamba to get on the train to go up to Machiapecher. It's the only way to get there. And a Jontitamba has some of the most exquisite megalithic architecture on planet Earth. It is so beautiful the way that they were able to... And it's large megalithic blocks. And there's two different styles represented there. You have the polygonal, like at the walls of Saxe-Waman in Peru. And then you have the interlocking blocks like a T1 Aku. Both of those styles are there. And there's this one spot at Jontitamba that I love to take people to because you're going up the stairs. And the wall curves as you're going up the stairs, the wall curves. Now, if you and I were building a wall today, even if we were like the best... we were the best masons in the world and we're building a wall for, I don't know, for some billionaire in his house. We would interlock the blocks in the corner, like everyone does everywhere, right? Or if it's cement, you could take cement because it's cement is pliable and you could make whatever shape you want. But if it's blocks, you're going to interlock the blocks into that corner or do something like that. You know what they did on Jontitamba? They curved the stone into the wall. They curved the stone. So they took the stone. Yeah, they were going to pull up stones like that. And they cut the stone so that it curved into the corner. Who would do that? That is so intricate. That is so difficult. And by what technology? By what technology? But here's the interesting thing. You find that same fingerprints of these builders all over the world. You find the same thing in Egypt. They curved stones. Some of those stones are curved into the corners and other places where there's megolithic constructions. I mean these guys, there was like a ubiquitous knowledge of masonry in the world. The fingerprint is everywhere. Everywhere you go. It's interesting because one of the things I was trying to try to convince this guide of ours at Machu Picchu this one time of was look. Here's a problem. You guys come over to Machu Picchu. So yeah, that sucks that woman. Is that what you're talking about though? No. I'm talking about a stone that's curved. See that there where it says Inca Stone work. In the middle. Yeah, it sucks that woman. They'll take a large stone. That one looks like it's curved in the wall. But that's not a very large stone. So it sucks that woman will take a large stone and they'll curve it into the wall. I don't see sucks that woman in any of those. You have to type. I'm sorry, not sucks that woman. Oh, John Taitambo. Oh, John Taitambo. Oh, L L A and T O L L A and T A Y T A M B O O L L L L A and T A Y A Y T A M B O. Whoa, that's that's a O John Taitambo. And I'm looking for that curved. What is the nubs? What are the nubs? I don't know. There's another fingerprint of this architecture everywhere. No one really knows. I mean, there's a lot of interesting theories out there. But I think at the end of the day, nobody has any idea what the heck those nubs are. Those things are so spectacular. Look at the wall right there at O John Taitambo. Look how exquisite that is. That's nuts. I mean, it is just absolutely astonishing. And the weight of these things. And the fact that they're carved and placed in a way that would absorb the energy of earthquakes. Yes, they're anti-sisemic. Yeah, they're anti-sisemic. That's why they do it that way. Which is, now I want you to talk about technology. Think about this. Okay. So you are, you are with Francisco Pissarro. You're a conquistador in the 15, 1530, three or 1530 to a 1534. I can't remember exactly when he landed. And you're walking through Peru. And you, you, you, you see this. You see this kind of architecture as you're conquering Peru. You overthrow the Inca. And then you go to build, which they did, they overthrew the Inca. Capital city of Cusco, they go to build their cathedrals. They built lots of cathedrals and palaces for themselves, right? So you have the Inca palaces and cathedrals. They took the blocks from Saksai Waman. They took the upper layer blocks and they use them to build their cathedral. Okay. There's a couple cathedrals downtown Cusco that were built with the blocks from Saksai Waman. They didn't build it like that. They didn't build their cathedrals like that. They took those blocks and they just put them together with mortar like they do in Europe. So here's a question that I always ask people who think that, you know, the Inca, we're, we're doing that. If you were an architect at that time, why in the world wouldn't you have forced the Inca to teach you that style? Right. You could build your cathedral. I mean, you would be the greatest architect in the world, right? Right. You could build, you could build the most magnificent cathedrals in the world in the Cyclopeian style. If you understood how they did it. So if the Inca were the ones who built it, why didn't they force the Inca to teach them how to build the Inca? Just look at that. That is so crazy. That's really sanded down, right? Well, those were the process. That's Ojante-Kambo. That's the Temple of the Sun at the Summit. I just let it look there. The faces of it look so smooth. That's Ojante-that's Ojante-Tambo. And this was in the process of being constructed at the top when it halted. You can see the blocks there. Those blocks that you're just looking at were- So in the Summit process happened. Yes. Those blocks were in the process of being transported and they were being, they were being worked right there. They were being prepped to be incorporated into the walls. And it just halted. And the conventional explanations that it halted because the Spanish arrived. That's what halted the work. But I think what halted the work was cataclysm. Personally. I think that's what halted the work. Something like a younger, dries impact. What's that, Jimmy? See right here it looks like the face of the wall. You know, like it looks like it's all uniform and fits together, right? But if that right here is part of the wall. Yeah, there's filler in the backing. The nuts like, yeah, they have filler in the backing. Some of them. Yeah, some of them the blocks are just gigantic blocks. Others it's like the facade is exquisite. Like what we have here or what we have. It's like a brick. You know that brick in the background. You said just be a brick at the other studio. Uh huh. Kind of like that. Right. Right. You know what you're saying? Yeah, but except these are enormous. Sure, sure, sure. Or yeah. Yeah. I mean, they're in place and sanded down. Oh, there is a point of the guy standing. There is a picture of the guy standing in the corner. There was a guy standing in the corner that I was referencing earlier. You just had, there it is right there. That guy. No, the one below it. I don't think you can see the corner very well. That right there. The middle. You see the guy in the blue standing there? Yeah, yeah right there. Behind him. There's this, you can see how the stone below him. It's curved into the corner. That's not a separate stone. That's, it's literally curved into that corner. It's, it's, it's just so. It's my bending. The knobs are weird. They are weird. And it's weird that they occur all over the world. And it's like, it speaks almost to like, is that how they carried them and placed them? Is that a part of the construction? Is that something about how they made them that they left these nubs? Like what is, what are the knobs? No one has any idea what the knobs are. That seems so weird that we have no answer to a feature that occurs over and over again. And all this. Everywhere. All over the world. Yeah. And I think he was showing these through those knobs. They kind of look like the knobs that they look way different. Yeah, they're a lot rougher. See those, see those smaller pieces of stone there in between the large blocks? Mm hmm. That's an anti-sisemic property. That's a technology that they use so that the rocks can shift and move and, and, and not crumble. That's, it's ingenious. And like I said, you have two different styles here at Ojantec Tom where you have, you have the polygonal. And then you have the interlocking rectangular. Those are two different styles in the same site. That's one of the things that makes Ojantec Toml fascinating. And that rectangular interlocking style comes from Tijuanaco, which is another amazing Megalithic site in Bolivia. What's interesting is when you combine all these sites all over the world and you have all these questions that are very similar. Like how, how do they do this? Why, why is this stuff the oldest stuff? Why is this stuff the bottom stuff? Why is the base of it the most spectacular construction? And why does it seem like more primitive stuff is on top of that? Because I like the way it looked. Yeah. But it's, but, but it's the same question over and over again. And the, the reluctance to propose that perhaps the oldest stuff is more complicated because the civilization was more complex. That's it. That's it. That's what they're unwilling to, they're unwilling to open up that door. But that door is the only door that makes any sense. Not only was the civilization complex, the knowledge was universal. That's a problem. That is a problem. The knowledge was universal. Because that means you're talking about a seafaring traveling civilization. You're talking about something that's a lot more impressive than cavemen. Right. Right. So especially if this guy, this Italian guy is right in terms of his, because 20,000 BC, we're, we're supposed to be, which is brutes. Mm hmm. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We're wearing animal skins, we have spears. You're, you're in panzy with a better brain. Yeah. Back then. And, and, and as I said before, you know, you look at that kind of architecture. And you and I were we to encounter the Inca, go back in time. In the late 1500s. The Inca still around. The builders, the, the alleged builders of these monuments. I mean, they were building, oh, John, they tumble right. When you arrive, they quit building. Why did the Spanish architects not incorporate any of that? Right. Into their buildings. Why did they not learn the techniques? That's superior technology. Yeah. That's anti seismic. And the point is illustrated because in Cusco, they built their cathedrals. Right. They knocked down the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, they raised the cathedrals in, uh, in Cusco. And guess what happens? You get a big earthquake. The cathedrals crumble to the ground, except for their megalithic foundations, which remain unmoved. Earthquake comes cathedrals fall. The walls of Sucks, I want them to stand. And it's happened various times throughout history. Who, what architect would not have taken advantage of that knowledge had it been available to them during the time of the Inca? Yeah. I mean, like I said, you could build the most magnificent cathedrals on planet Earth. And you could make the Inca build it for you. And now you can say that the, the Inca refused would have refused to, to, to pass this knowledge on. Okay. Maybe. I mean, there was a, there was a society within the Inca, you know, they were taught by the grandes, al-Malthas, they called them, who were the, the great teachers of the Inca nobility and the keepers of the secrets and so forth. They had, they, they didn't even have written language. They used Kipus. Kipus was a, it's a system of ropes and knots of string and knots. I mean, I've written language. So it's absolutely extraordinary. And there is, nobody can, it give me an adequate explanation as to why such amazing knowledge is just forgotten. Wow. I mean, would we forget how to build computers? No. So, so why would we just forget how to build megaliths? Why? That's not something you forget. These things don't fall down in earthquakes. That's something you pass on carefully from one generation to the next. Unless like our ancient antecedents tell us, there was a cataclysm that rocked the earth and eliminated the civilizations that were inhabiting the earth. That's, to me, that, that's the best explanation. Well, certainly the most logical explanation if you weren't attached to a timeline. If you didn't have this timeline that these archaeologists insist upon, then you would say, okay, clearly we know that a cataclysm occurred. Clearly we know the younger, driest impact theory is accepted. And especially now. So, becoming more sober times. More likely, much more likely that there was something going on that we don't totally understand tens of thousands of years ago. Yeah. I mean, I think we would do very well to listen to take serious the myths and legends. Well, it's also weird that like the Aztecs, like I used to think that the Aztecs created those temples in those pyramids. And then I found out fairly recently that they never even claimed to have. No. They say they found them. And that these were the birthplace of the gods. Yes. See, that's what I was going to say about Machu Picchu. So, Machu, you know what the name of Machu Picchu is now Machu Picchu and catch what's Ejampu. And Ejampu means the abode of the gods or the dwelling of the gods. This is how they viewed the Megaliths. I mean, this is how if we were primitive people coming upon these Megalithic structures, what would we think the gods must have done this? The gods lived here. And so then we would rebuild. We would re-inhabit the habitation of the gods. Yeah, why would you live anywhere else if you live there? Right. And it would be the no-list architecture you've never imagined. Exactly. Why would you let some idiots take it over? You wouldn't. Give me that. That's mine. You wouldn't. Yeah, of course. You know, there's also the weirdness of Peru, like the Nazca lines, like what the hell is all that about? I don't know. I don't know. That's a great mystery. There's a lot of weirdness to Peru. There's a lot of weirdness in Peru. And how about those ancient tapestries that show those three-fingered, three-toed, big-headed people with big eyes? And it's ubiquitous. And these are a thousand years old. And then you have the Peracas culture, with those massive elongated skulls. Right. And the Peracas culture, by the way, you know, people see these elongated skulls on. And I've been in the process a lot. They've done a lot of research down there on the Peracas culture and other things. It's made some interesting discoveries, by the way, with our drone, with our GPR unit. But you see these images online. You think that the Peracas people, their skulls are so large and elongated. These must have been big people. Right? That's what it looks like. No. They were tiny. They were really little. They were bizarre. They're more, the more, the more, the more, the more, the more, the more body was different than ours. Do you pay any with big heads? Yes. The Peracas people were very small. And they had a proclivity to live in underground. They had subterranean dwellings. And their eye sockets of some of these elongated skulls. The eye sockets are like 25 percent larger. The orbital socket. So they big eyes elongated skull, very diminutive people, in some cases living underground. I've heard people have theories about Neanderthals. Neanderthals with larger eye sockets as well might have been able to see at night, like the way deer can. The way other animals that are nocturnal can see at night, that they have a different kind of eye structure. Obviously, we don't know what the eye structure was. But if you have a significantly larger eye socket, get a significantly larger eyeball, we know that nocturnal vision exists and cats and exists in a bunch of different animals. But the idea of it existing in primates, we kind of dismiss that. Yeah, I mean, a bigger eye gathers more like. Yeah. So it's an nocturnal feature. I don't know that we have no idea what the soft tissue structure of their eyes was like. No. No. Now, granted for all the skeptics out there, yes, many of the elongated skulls in Peru and other places around the world are the result of cranio deformation. So yes, they were deforming their skulls with the headboarding, cradle, headboarding, binding and so forth. There's evidence of that. And you can see the evidence when you're there, if you know what you're looking for on the skulls. But I don't believe that that explains all of the elongated skulls, not just improve other parts of the world, but especially in Peru. There are some examples of elongated skulls that I mean, look like a genetic alteration is the best way I can say it. So there's a, and you can pull this up, Jamie, if you can find it. There's a mummy, I'm trying to think of the name of the museum where it's housed. I think it's the San Marcos Museum in Lima. There's a mummy, the first mummy that was discovered by Julio Tejo. Julio Tejo, or one of the first, if not the first, Julio Tejo was the imminent archaeologist that discovered the Praacas culture. And he's like their greatest archaeologist in Peru was a phenomenal archaeologist. And he discovered all kinds of things about the Praacas culture. And he dug up this mummy. And it is, it is the most bizarre mummy I've ever seen in my life. It has a massive elongated skull, massive. And we showed a few of those the other day when Cassie Compers methos on, we showed a few of these ones that don't have the sagittal suture. Yeah. They're weird. Just the actual structure of the skull is different. But this one has the skin on it, except for part of the face is gone. But it's got the skin on it. So you can actually see what this skull look like with the skin on it. And then the morphology of the body is just weird. I mean, I think it's in the museum, if I recall the museum of San Marcos and Lima. So these are how tall were these things? Oh, they were small. I mean, we're talking four foot tall. Wow. These guys were little giant heads and four feet tall. Yeah. They're little. Everyone thinks they were big. No, no. They were little. Some of them. I mean, I think they were four and a half, maybe averaged four to four and a half feet tall somewhere in there. Very small. Maybe from four to five feet tall. I don't remember. But they're significantly, they're very small. They're diminutive people. Yeah. I was on the one that I've never seen one with skin on it. That's not really. That one's nuts. There, the one that Brian Forster's looking at right there. Yeah. That right there is just absolutely bizarre when you look at the look at the look at the tall that for it is on it. That skin on there. Very well preserved. And if you look around the back, you can't see it here in this image. But if you look around the back side of it, the neck is very bizarre. It's sort of curved. That is so weird. I mean, imagine cutting upon somebody here in Austin that has a skull like that. I know there might be a few of them here. Right. And that. I mean, that does not look like cranial deformation. That looks like a totally different kind of hand. It looks like a genetic anomaly. What is that one in the middle? Yeah. What is that one? Jeez. Yeah. There's this. Well, kind of very interesting specimens like that. And as you said, Bruce, a very, very strange place. The one on the far left is the craziest one to make. It's a jungle skull. That one was discovered at the jungle's necropolis. Like what the hell is that? I mean, just the volume of the brain is so much larger than a human being. That picture might be elongated. And someone might have altered that picture. It is very impressive. That one might be elongated. The picture, I mean, that's more like it. But the skull, these skulls, many of these skulls, that's in the Museum of Eekah. And the city of Eekah in Peru. That's absolutely insane. These skulls, the jungle skull, was taken from the jungle's necropolis. If you go over to the jungle's necropolis today, which is on the desert, you see these things sticking out of the ground. They got red hair. Auburn hair. We were over there with our crew. And there's a pyramid there. But it's an Adobe pyramid. And it's called the jungle's pyramid. And nobody really goes to this area. Because it's sort of off the beaten path. It's not well-known. We were actually working in an area further down the road because at the time we were looking for treasure. We were filming like a TV show. Looking for treasure. And there was this pawn that had a very interesting UFO story attached to it. Further up the road. And so we were working up there. But every day when we drive by the pyramid, the jungle's pyramid. And it's an Adobe pyramid. So it's not super impressive. It's made of large Adobe blocks. But it was a large urban center. It was some people think it was the capital of the Praeces culture. Very large urban center. And it was in a crop list. There's tons of remains. And the elongated skull, some of these Praeces people, the nobility for sure, they were buried in burial bundles. And they're in the fetal position. And these burial bundles are usually layers of fabric. And there's various items in there. And they're just under the surface of the sand. They're right there. And you get a lot of grave robbers, walk edoes who go in there and steal all kinds of artifacts and stuff. But we're driving by and looked at the pyramid. And I thought, I have this intuition. There's a tunnel under that pyramid. There's a tunnel system under that pyramid. I don't know why. I just had this intuition. So we decided to go over there one day and fly our GPR drone around the pyramid. And we did an extensive run around that pyramid. We did like a cross configuration with the drone to make sure that we get a good reading. And we found two massive artificial tunnels under the pyramid that intersect. A hundred feet below that pyramid. You could drive a semi truck through. And we don't know how far they go. But they go. And we actually spent some time trying to find a way in tune. We ran out of time. But it's remarkable because Julio Teijo remarks in his writing about the progress culture that the paracas people seem to have a affinity for living under the ground. They had subterranean dwellings. And I've explored some of these subterranean dwellings out in the practice reserve. And they're really cool because you'll see like these hills. They look like long houses that are buried in the ground. You see like this elongated hill. And really what it is is its whale bones. They use like the vertebrae of whale. So you got whale bones. And then they would pack on top all kinds of they pack on earth. But then they would also add in organic material. And it would create like an insulating effect in heathy interior. But they were subterranean. So what you see are the roofs of the dwellings. And then they went down into the ground. And there were tunnels. And there was all kind of stuff. This is where these weird people with the elongated skulls were living. It's absolutely bad. And it's absolutely bizarre. How old are these mummies? I think the practice culture of Jesus goes back maybe to, I don't remember 200 BC or something like that. I can't remember maybe not that far back. I really don't remember there. That's that can't be accurate. I think it goes back to definitely to the first century AD. I don't remember all of my questions. Because it's what happened. Where those people go. That's that's the question. I mean, the, the, I think that the prevailing theories that they became the Nosca people that didn't go anywhere. That, that essentially the, the Nosca people were the practice people. Let the Antebread. Know that the culture just sort of migrated and, and, and became the Nosca people. So what happened to those genetic features? Well, there are some among the Nosca, but not as much as among the the prequests. Others think that the prequests, they just disappeared. Like they were either exterminated or there's, you know, there's multiple theories. But there's no question that they were bizarre, bizarre. And of course there's physical evidence of this. Like we're talking about the, the mummies before, excuse me, the giants before. And we know like it's just stories. This is actual physical evidence. You can be longer skulls. Yeah. Oh yeah. They're everywhere down there. As I said before, many of them are the result of, many of them are the result of cranial deformation. But what about these motherfuckers? I don't know. Not all you long gay. I mean, yeah, how do you long gay? They get a balloon and someone's saying. Before many of them are the result of cranial deformation. But what about these motherfuckers? I don't know. Not all elongated. I mean, yeah, how do you elongate that you get a balloon in someone's head? I've seen some really big heart shaped heads. That is simple. I'm heart shaped meaty. That guy. That's not all compared to someone's I've seen. Like some of the ones I've seen like look like a heart, really big. And that's actually that particular skull was exceptionally large when I saw that look like a heart. Yeah, so just keep in mind. Yes, cranial deformation is what you mean. It says that these two in the front left row are from the bill of bait. And now I don't know what the hell that means. Bill of bait? Yeah, that's what the picture says. What does that mean? Do you know what that means? No. Yes, these girls from the front are from the bill of bait. The whole all-sized. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that one on the left and the middle. Those are nuts. That is just imagine meeting that cat. And here's the other question. This is his eyes. Here's the other question. The why bind the head. Right. And this is all over the world. It's they do it in Africa. They do all they native Americans. The flathead. Drive up in Montana. They're called the flathead because they would cradleboard their young and they get these flat. They would have these very distinct skulls. So why? Why are the amulators doing? They're emulating something. Yeah. Who or what are they emulating? That's the question. And of course you have an ancient Egypt. You have figures with elongated skulls like nephertite and her daughters who are depicted with very pronounced elongated skulls. Now is that the result of cradlehead boarding? Probably. I don't know. But why do that? Well, the problem is some of these skulls have actual larger volume than the humans. That's true. Some of them do. That's that's where it gets really. That's true. So you have 20% 30% even 40% more volume. Which is like, OK. Yeah, 40% more brain is nuts. What does that mean? There's a slight explanation for what we were just looking at. And that was what you're doing. I got to do with male and female. So it's this biolo, biolo bait that thing you were talking about. Tubular erect was the most common among both sexes. Biolo bait skulls are observed that a much higher rate in female skulls. This association with sex has evidence that some paracas ceramics were men and women are depicted with distinctly tubular erect or bile bait heads, respectively. And then it even goes into this. So the bile bait is then the heart shape. Fuck under weird bang. It is weird. It is extremely weird. And then of course you have those, the alleged alien mommy's down there. Yeah. What do you think about those? Because there's a lot of people now that are saying that those are elaborate hoaxes. I went down to Peru. I was invited to go down there by Dr. Roger Zuniga, or Professor Roger Zuniga. Go down and look at the specimens that they have the e-commuseum. They have four specimens that the e-commuseum. The most impressive specimen that they have. There's called Maria. And Maria is in the fetal position. She's one of the larger mommies. Then they have a few other ones. They have two of the small ones. The ones that high name a son famously revealed over there in Mexico during that thing that he did over there, that press thing. And then you have one that's called Waluita, which seems to be like some kind of a combination of different things. And so I went down there to the university and walked up to these things. And at first, I have to say, my first impression of Maria, I didn't really care about the little ones. I never believed that the little ones were ever. The little ones look squirrely. Yeah, I never believed that they were living organic beings. They're very rigid. Yeah, they're very rigid. I don't think that they're more a biology really could have worked in the real world. Like, monster out, like that one. On Sirat and Maria and a bunch of them, those are very compelling when you're standing next to them, they were compelling. So I looked at the mommies and then I interviewed Roger Zunigan. And he's very, very convinced that they're 100% real. Sincerely. I mean, I like Professor Zunigan. And he really is convinced. I don't think he's not trying to perpetrate some kind of a hoax. Neither is anybody at the University of Ika. There's a good faith effort going on there to try and investigate this and continually do testing. And it's an open field. Have they done genetic testing? Yeah, they've done all kind of testing. So what do they find? Here's the problem. There's been a lot of testing done, but I don't think the interpretation of the data has been competent. And so initially, I was pretty impressed. I thought it was more likely than not, I even said this on the Michael Knoll show. That it was more likely than not in my mind that the larger mommies like Maria were real. But I've since reversed that position. I think it's more likely than not that all of them are a hoax. That's my personal opinion. And there's a hot topic, like an exit stuff. There's a lot of people who are absolutely sincerely convinced that these things are real. The problem is that this entire thing started with a grave robber, a very shady individual. And the very first mommies that were brought forward were hoaxes were fake. That's how it started. And this is a whole saga. We don't have to get into it. But it started with fakes. It started with a hoax. And then allegedly they started to produce the real ones. And I just have a hard time believing that this is an elaborate hoax. Now, I've talked to some of the individuals who've done some of the scientific work on these. They don't want me to mention their names or anything. They're trying to just sort of stay neutral. They don't want the press. And they also doubt that they're real. They think they're really, really elaborate hoaxes. And I know that a lot of money has exchanged hands regard to these things. Maria was up for sale for a million dollars, one point. And if you're approving grave robber, a million dollars is like a billion dollars. I mean, so that's to me that's, can we see what the Maria one looks like? That's not, that casts a lot of shade on the whole thing for me. Now, I can't say scientifically the DNA data of this, that the other, but there's a lot of debate going back and forth on this thing. Well, I think one of the problems is anatomists, experts in anatomy have looked at the structure of the feet in the hands and they, it doesn't seem to drive with what they understand about the structure of feet. That's true. That the bones are not in the proper position. They're not the proper size. It doesn't look like it makes sense. But damn, that's amazing. That's Maria. Like here's the thing. If it is a hoax, like what an amazing job they did. Yeah, maybe, maybe the greatest hoax ever perpetrated in the history of archeology. Who did it? And like what talent this person has? There's a new note because this website was there's a tridactyls.org. I got up, there's a little note that popped up and says they have ongoing research that just got updated. This is a great website. What is the ongoing research? They just, they just, they might be a male. They're just, they're a male. Maria might be Mario. Yeah, Mario, they call them Mario now. It's a dude. Yeah, maybe he's not binary. Bunch more data down here. I don't know what all this stuff is. Interesting. That's a great resource there. So it's tridactyls.org. Tridactyls. Go to the images of it again. Go down like right there. So this, okay, this is a 3D scan. These are all scans. These are videos of the scans. Fuckin' weird, man. Look at the length also of the fingers and the toes. But you think that's a hoax. You people say they wouldn't work that way. You know, I would say Jamie. People said that like, you can't grab stuff. There's pictures down here. They have a people trying to, where was it? Trying to like grab stuff with, I might have been looking at different. Yeah, I was looking at this. These are the fingers that you couldn't bend. They wouldn't bend or something like that. It's hard to like this person trying to grab stuff with long fingers without bendable appendages, I guess. Well, we're assuming that they had to grab things. What would you have fingers for? Well, maybe they put them on a spaceship. That's how they pilot it. Maybe they've gone past the idea of picking things up. Maybe they lift things with their mind. Maybe that's how they move the blocks into place. I don't know. I'm more convinced than that, that there are hoax. I can't say definitively. Yeah, I would lean in that direction because I want them to be real. But also, whoever did hoax them, like Monster Odd, whoever hoax that, like what an amazing job you guys did. And also there's some of them that have weird implants in their heads. They have metal implants. Yeah. And then one, a couple of them have them in the hand, other have them in the forehead. Very weird stuff. Some of them have fetuses apparently. Although that's, there's some dispute about that. They say the fetuses look like, you know, that they look the same as the adults, which would be remarkable of true. But that's disputed. Everything's disputed. Right. There's a factional battle here between the believers and the naysayers. And they're both looking at the same data, interpreting it differently. So that's why I just sort of stand back and say, I don't know. I mean, I can tell you how it started. It started with grave robbers, very CD people. And it started, the initial ones were not real. I know that because I know the individuals who were involved in that whole thing. So just out of loan. Yeah. Just that alone. But then how did they make the skin? How did they cover it? How did they make it look like that? They're really good. I mean, you know, if you're selling these things for hundreds of thousands, if you're making $100,000, just $100,000 than one of these mummies and you're a poor grave robber, you would do anything. Take whatever time it, whatever it took to produce one of these to sell it to make $100,000. But how did they age them like, and they're really old? They harvest the pieces from the graves. OK. From the Nosco-rockest graves. So great. You can struck this somehow from really old skeletons pieced it together. That's the allegation. And also from old llamas and stuff like that. Yeah. One of the other weird things about these elongated heads is that they have, that we're connects to the spine is in a different position than a human skull. Yes. There is some indication of that. That's why I was pointing out on that, the one that with the skin on it. There is a very interesting morphology with the neck where it connects into the spinal cord. Now, I'm not an expert on anatomy. I don't know. All I can look at it and say is that's freaking weird. I mean, really. It is weird. And all I mean, I always just remind people, just you can argue about all the dad all day long. But if one of those people walked into this room right now, it wouldn't just be a little weird. It would be utterly bizarre. Yeah. And an actual real human mummy or whatever it is, mummy, if that was alive today, it would freak you out. Yeah. Larger orbital sockets. Very small, extremely elongated head. Yeah. And freak out. I just mentioned wonder, like, what was the world like back then? What were these people like? Was there a separate branch of the human species? I don't know. I think I'm pretty sure now I'm recalling the date 2,000 and 2,500 BC somewhere around there is where the Crocker's culture goes back to. And then I think it existed until 700 ADM. I'm not sure that those numbers are accurate, but that's what I remember. Yeah. There's a lot of weird stuff in Peru. A lot of weird stuff in just ancient history in particular. What do you make of things like zep-tepi in the Sumerian Kings list where you go back in time and you have these incredible ages of some of these rulers that ruled for thousands of years? Well, what's interesting is that if you overlay the Sumerian Kings list with the list of patriarchs, pre-flood patriarchs, and Genesis 5, it's like a one-to-one match. So I'm not convinced that I think that the Sumerian Kings list is that the ages is mythological. I don't think that they were ruling for thousands and thousands of years. Like I said, I see this very interesting overlay over the Genesis 6 genealogy. These are the patriarchs from Adam to Noah. And specifically, I mean, these are the patriarchs who live before the flood. The flood came in the time of Noah. And there's a lot of debate right now, especially online. And I think you've had people here on your show as well. That talk about the Sumerian story being the oldest story and being the original story of the flood and of the anti-deluvian world. But I actually, I have a different view of that. I think, actually, the oldest story is the story of Enoch. It's the Anochian story. I think that's the original story. And maybe some of this strangeness, maybe some of the bizarre things that we see and the stories of the flood and of the giants and all of that, maybe something like the book of Enoch is actually an accurate account of affairs, of things that happen in the anti-deluvian world. And certainly the writers of the biblical narrative believe that. I mean, the right of Genesis and the New Testament you have references to, to what I call the Enochian tale. And so when you think about this, the anti-deluvian world, the cataclysm that destroyed it seemingly overnight, the great civilizations that existed back then, you see a series of parallels in all the stories, all the ancient stories, whether it be the Sumerians, whether it be the ancient Egyptians, the Hebrews, the Greeks, the Romans. There are parallels in certain details, great civilizations in habit of the earth, or at least a great civilization. That doesn't necessarily mean that they had the kind of technology that we have today. I think that's a mistake that some people make when they're thinking about the anti-deluvian world and a lost civilization, they think, well, that means that there were skyscrapers and automobiles and aircraft and things like that. That's not necessarily what it means. And so I think it's very, very interesting that you have all of these parallels, a cataclysm, giants. You have a fract recital war that's discussed, for example, and you have the Vedas and some of the ancient Indian origin stories. And another component that you find everywhere is this idea that the gods descended to the earth, commingled with human species, progenerated a race of demigods in many accounts, giants, who then govern the earth, and depending on what version of the story you're reading, they were either good guys or bad guys, leading up to the cataclysm that destroyed everything, the biblical, a concrete, great flood, and other accounts record various kinds of cataclysm, all over the world. So the question is, I think, any tricky question is, is it true? I mean, are these basic constituents of these stories, is it true? And I happen to believe that, I happen to believe that the book of Enoch is, the beginning of the book of Enoch, the oldest portion of the book of Enoch called the Book of the Watchers, is the earliest account of the anti-deluvian world. And I don't mean necessarily the book of Enoch that we have today. I mean the tradition of Enoch. Was there a manuscript that Enoch wrote himself? Enoch was the seventh from Adam. So he's one of those individuals on the Sumerian Kingsless. I believe he corresponds to, and Demeranki, I can't remember how to pronounce the name, and the Sumerian name. But again, you have this overlay with the pre-flood patriarchs. You have all of these details that correspond. Now we have evidence of cataclysm, refining evidence of cataclysm, right? We talked about the younger, dry impact hypothesis. So are some of the other details true as well? Were there giants? Were there beings who descended to the earth in the anti-deluvian world? Did they copulate with human women? I mean that's essentially the story of Enoch. Enoch begins with, this is first Enoch, Enoch begins with a company of 200 watchers, these beings that are designated as watchers. And they are heavenly beings. And the watcher designation is not exclusively extra biblical. You find it in the book of Daniel, a very interesting scene in which holy watchers are judging Nebuchadnezzar, the Babylonian king. And they sent in Sim to a period of time of madness where he's given the mind of a beast and he's eating grass. And this is a judgment from the watchers. He's eating grass like an animal. And his hair grows along, and he's basically like a beast out in the field. The hotty king of Babylon humbled in that way. And so the watcher designation is, you find it in Daniel, but then in the book of Enoch, it's much more specific. These were 200 of these watchers. These are non-human celestial entities. You could describe them as extraterrestrial entities. And they begin to lust after the daughters of men. And they desire to pro-generate families. They want to have families. Do you think that this is a simplification of genetic engineering and that this depiction of it is just like the game of telephone. You're telling the old story through oral tradition for a long period of time as it gets relayed over time, post-flood. So you get this sort of distorted version of what the actual thing that was. I think it's possible there was genetic engineering involved. But we certainly look different than everything else on the planet. Well, the book of Enoch, at least the Hebrew account, both in the book of Genesis, because there's a verse, Genesis 6. It says, now came to pass that when men began to multiply in the face of the earth and daughters were born to them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were beautiful. And they took wise of all whom they chose. There were giants or nephilem in the earth in those days. And also afterward when the sons of God came into the daughters of men and they bore children to them. These were the mighty men of old, the men of renown. That's the reference to the origin of giants and nephilem in the book of Genesis. And so in the Bible you have these angelic beings, the sons of God who are lusting. They're looking down at the daughters of men. They see that they're beautiful. The book of Enoch is even more explicit. The book of Enoch says that the angels have had the watchers, lusted after the daughters of men, and they desired to pro-generate families. So they descended to the earth on the summit of Mount Hermann, and they bound themselves by a pact of mutual implications. In other words, we're all in this together. They knew what they were about to do, was going to be very grave sin. So they bind themselves with an oath. That's why Hermann has been known since time immemorial as the mountain of oath. Then they descended into the plains, and they began to choose wives from among the daughters of men with whom to copulate. But first, these were maidens that they intended to marry. And there was a transaction that happened because in exchange for the maiden's hands in marriage, their fathers were given technology. So the watchers taught men the knowledge that they were already striving to learn. So that's implied in the text. It's not explicit, but it's implied because the watchers give technology, they give knowledge, which results in technology, and they get in exchange the maidens that they desired to marry. And then they copulate with them. They have sexual intercourse with them. The women conceive and give birth to giants. And then these giants begin to terrorize the earth. They're cannibalistic. They begin to devour men. So maybe a hybrid sort of like a liger. You know how a liger is a combination of a tiger and a lion that's much larger. Very large. But they can't reproduce. Right. So the result is you have these watchers, yeah, their DNA, mixed with the DNA of human women produces giants. And this story, by the way, is a test in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Not just in the Bible, not just in the Book of Enoch, but in the Book of Enoch, of course, a fragments of it were discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls. But you find this story in, for example, you find it in the Book of Giants, the Book of Jubilees, the Genesis of Pacrofon, and other texts as well. And so this story as bizarre as it is is foundational to Hebrew cosmology. This is what the ancient Hebrews believed in. Literally happened. Like this was in their minds. This was a historical event. You go back in time. You go into the anti-deliving world, the world before the flood. What are they in vision? They envision the watchers, these gods living among men, copulating with human women, giants who were cannibalistic. And then God decides intervene because the giants are, there's a very bad scene on planet Earth. And people begin to cry out, petition heaven. God decides to intervene, according to Enoch. And he dispatches some angels. And one of the things that they do is they set the giants against each other in a fratricidal war. So they make the giants go to war with each other. Now, when I envision this scenario, playing with the idea here that this actually happened, in the anti-deliving world, I don't imagine big dumb giants bopping each other over the heads of clubs. I imagine a technological war. Because what I see unfolding here, and I think, again, this is implicit in the Enochian story, is that the watchers are essentially creating a dynasty. They are building an empire called the Empire of the Gods and the anti-deliving world. They are each portioning the earth among themselves. And their hybrids are ruling each of their kingdoms. And then they go to war with each other. And again, I see this as a technological war, because I don't believe that in the biblical account, angels never have wings. Only in prophetic iconography, but in the historical narrative of the Bible, angels are never depicted with wings. They are depicted as operating what I would describe as advanced aerospace vehicles, the chariots of God, the church of Yahweh, the church of fire, variously denominated. And I think that these are vehicles of conveyance. And so the watchers, when they descended to the earth, I think they descended to the earth in some kind of a vehicle, like that. So they would have the knowledge and there would be some technology. And so when they're offspring, the giants went to war with each other in this fractal side of war, it would have been a technological war. Now, the reason why I say that is because you have the story of the watchers as chronicled in the book of Enoch. But then overlay the story of Atlantis. You have the same story. So of course, the story of Atlantis comes to us from Plato's Tameus and Credius Dialogue. And he has a soul and of Athens traveling to Egypt and interfacing with the priests of sites. And they tell him, you don't have any history, that's horry with age and so forth. And then they begin to relate to him, the story of Atlantis, because they told him that his ancestors were remarkable people. They were the Athenians. And only they could resist the war like Atlantis. And then we get the story of Atlantis. How does the story of Atlantis begin in Plato's dialogue? Well, it begins with the gods, apportioning the earth amongst themselves. That's how it begins. Here are the gods, dividing, giving up the earth. They're going to create what I again describe is an empire of the gods, divving up the earth and each one is going to take and a portion of the earth for himself. Poseidon, Plato tells us, gets the area of Atlantis. And what does Poseidon do? Well, he becomes enamored of a human woman in Plato. He takes her to wife. He copulates with her. She gives birth to 10 hybrid sons. Who become the kings of Atlantis? And I think there's reason to believe that they were giants in the myths. Atlas, for example, was chief among them. So you have these 10 hybrid sons ruling over Atlantis. Then what happens? Then you have, and presumably the other gods did the same thing in other parts of the world. They went out and married human women and gave birth to hybrid offspring, which is, of course, what happens in Greek mythology with a lot of these gods. They pro-generate hybrid offspring. Then you have a war that breaks out. The Atlanteans become very warlike. They go on a campaign. And they're steamrolling everybody in their way until they get to the Athenians. And they're locked in this conflict. So I'm hoping people are picking up the parallels here with the book of Enoch, with the story of Enoch. And in the midst of this conflict, what happens? Cataclysm ensues. Atlantis, but not just Atlantis. Atlantis in the insinuation is everybody gets destroyed in a cataclysm that erupts suddenly. And Atlantis is consumed in the waves and is no more. Well, the whole point of the Egyptians, when they're telling this story to Solon, one of the points that they're trying to convey to Solon is there have been many cataclysms, world-ending cataclysm. And every time a cataclysm happens, we have to start over like children. So the parallels between the book of Enoch, and I think it, by the way, I think Atlantis is an allegory of the anti-deluvian world in general. I think that there was something like an empire of the gods and the anti-deluvian world. And I personally believe that the biblical record is the faithful account of what happened in the anti-deluvian world and with the addition of the book of Enoch. Because you cannot separate, you cannot separate the Anakian narrative, the Anakic traditions from the Bible. Well, Enoch is referenced in the Bible. And the only reason why the book of Enoch is not in the canon of the Bible is because of some rabbis, right? Well, it's complicated. So the book of Enoch is a compilation of texts. And ranging from the fourth century BC to probably the first century AD, the tradition of Enoch, I think, is very old. I think the tradition of Enoch, that story I just outlined, that tradition of Enoch is the oldest story we have, the one upon which all the other stories are based. That's my personal opinion. Now, the actual book of Enoch that we have today, the only reason we have it is because it was preserved in Ethiopia. That's the only reason we have the book of Enoch today. The Ethiopian Bible. The Ethiopians preserved it both the the the bet Israel Jews, very, very ancient Jewish community. And the Talahito Orthodox Christians. Do you think they have the ark of the covenant? I think, let's put it this way, I think Graham Hancock makes a very compelling case that they do. I have you read his book, The Sign in the Seal. Yeah, it's the whole depiction of these people that are the watchers of this thing, get cataracts because it has some radiation properties. Very compelling narrative. Yeah, none of them live more than a couple of years after they get the assignment. Yeah. Watchers of this thing get cataracts because it has some radiation properties. Very compelling narrative Yeah, none of them live more than a couple years after they get the assignment. Yeah, it's I think it's a very strong possibility that they do That's crazy. It would be crazy Yeah, and I think that many people including Graham think that the arc of the covenant was there's something technological about it something radioactive about it But it is it's interesting though because you have the idea at the very least the potential for Technology in the anti-deluvian world right advanced technology. So what would I mean? Well, what if We're talking about the watchers who descended the earth They like I said the Hebrews believe that that actually happened that that was historical That wasn't mythological to them. That was historical that event Well, what if they did it arrive in something like like that like like a flying saucer, right? What if there was some level of technology introduced? But I don't believe that it would have been distributed broadly distributed, you know Talking about like an like an advanced lost civilization. I don't think that technology would be broadly distributed I think that the technology would remain in these family lines in these dynasties because their desire was to govern everyone So I think what we might be looking for instead of a technologically advanced civilization Maybe a technologically advanced fraternity within civilization. You see what I mean? Like a group that was in that was in control of Something advanced But the rest of the people maybe were iron age or something like that or whatever bronze age level Which is kind of a different perspective. Well, we see that today, right? I mean, there's plenty of people today that are Uncontacted tribes that are living like people live tens of thousands of years ago. That's exactly right now So it's not uniform even today, right? So we may so I think that's why when we think about was there a technologically advanced civilization in the anti-dealing world in the world before the great Cataclysm I think really what we're looking for what I'm looking for is a is a Fraternity who were in possession of technology that the rest of everyone didn't have Maybe something like that although I will say that I believe that the anti-deleveans were much more remarkable than we are in In every way. I think they were physically more robust than we are. I think that they were intellectually much more They were intellectually superior to us as I was saying before this how the ancient thought of their antecedents and so when I look back on the timeline the History the further you go back all the way to those pre-flood patriarchs you're looking at human beings who Who were so superior to us I mean certainly according to the biblical account They were living much much longer almost a thousand years. You're looking at human beings who who We would scarcely be regarded as as human like them because they would have been more human than we are because we've degenerated so I see a Degeneration I see a devolution in the human species We started as something really really remarkable and we've been gradually devolving over time so to speak we've been degenerating. I think that are Anticidians are anti-deleven antecedents. I think they were telepathic I think that they had these incredible abilities capabilities that that are perhaps latent in the human species today Well that might have been why these people has such large heads and peru to maybe right maybe everybody had your long-headed skulls at one time I don't know but I mean think about that though I mean if you were see from a biblical perspective Adam was created for two for two fundamental reasons He was created to govern the earth but more than that he was created to fellowship with the maker to Commune with the maker he was created for fellowship So think about that if you were created to fellowship with the maker with God You would have some extraordinary capabilities built into your anatomy into your biology You would be given the ability to interface with the maker and not just with the maker, but with With whatever whatever else is out there as well. So from the very beginning. I think that mankind was was imbued was it was in Trinsic in our design that we had all of these incredible capabilities maybe remote viewing maybe certainly I would say telepathy because telepathy is conversation with this be a thought Right, I mean we fumble around with words we we it takes us kind of a long time to try and say what we mean But but what if what you wanted to convey to me was done so instantaneously? How much more could you convey how much more information how much more? efficient with that mode of conversation be It certainly seems like if we keep evolving that's the future Or if we keep developing better and better versions of Technology one of the things that the gaps that we would bridge is we Elon said that he said we're gonna be able to talk without words Well the problem is that our technology is getting better, but our species is getting done right and our biology is getting We getting and we're poisonous. We curse, but it's not just because of poison. Yes We poison our environment. We poison our bodies certainly But I believe that there's it's clear to me that there that we have degenerating and we are degenerating ating we are degenerating so And this is genetic degeneration so we have what's called mutational load human beings all creatures We have mutational load and mutational load is all of the deleterious mutations all of the negative mutations that happen in our genome they compile and It becomes this it becomes this burden this genetic burden We have all of these mutations that were carrying mutational load and The further we go down the line the more mutational load we have and again these are deleterious mutations so You get all kinds of Problems from that. I mean we basically what it amounts to is we become less and less and less impressive over time And there's nothing we can do you can't reverse that you can't just have a good diet and and Get and regain the capabilities that were lost that's impossible so We're declining our technology is ascending. We're declining. So what we're headed for Essentially is a post-human future a future in which we have to we have to evolve ourselves Out of this condition. I would say out of Adam into something else and I'm not in favor of that by the way. I'm not a transhumanist but clearly You have this you have this conundrum where we are clearly getting dumber as a species There's no doubt about it. I mean I saw I can't reference it here But I saw some data on this the other day And it's astounding It's it's it's kind of alarming and not only that We've realized I'm I try to remember the reference to this this book. That's The details this but the human species is essentially becoming reproductively Inviable the sperm count of males in the west is declining precipitously as is our fitness So that is on the decline such that I think the projection is in 2045 or something like that We're gonna basically be reproductively and viable We're gonna need a technological intervention like artificial wounds. Well What's happening right now? We're developing things like artificial wounds So it's it's very interesting that these two things are running in parallel We're degenerating but our technology is increasingly getting better so the The result of this is going to be what I describe as post-human apocalypse. I mean we're headed for a future. That's not human that's what the You've all know a hirari is out there Prognosticating that in I think he says in 120 to 130 years from now There will be no more human beings left on planet Earth So why am I saying this because I'm illustrating that you go back in time Go all the way back to the beginning if you come from a biblical paradigm like I do you're in the first man Adam The prototypical man he has all of the incredible capabilities that are innate built into his system He can he kids commuting with his maker. He's governing the earth He's have he can do all of these amazing things and then as we become copies of copies of copies of copies of Adam all the way down We're little we're gradually losing these abilities But I think that some of them are still you know latent in the human species and I think that explained from a Remote viewing and telepathy and things like that I don't know how I got on that. Listen it makes a lot of sense and it's a fascinating conversation and I enjoyed this very much I did it as well. Thank you very much for being here. Thanks for having me. Everybody if they want to get ahold of your stuff They want to find you where they could find you on social media where they could find your website Timothy Elbrino on social media on Instagram on X I have a YouTube channel Timothy Elbrino, so I have a book called birthright and I also published commentary on commentary and Introduction to the book of Enoch with my friends. Oh, oh, yeah We're gonna have to get to that. That's another conversation. I'm next time we're gonna have to have that conversation I would love to thank you very much. Thank you a lot of fun. My pleasure. Bye buddy