So one of my midlife realizations is that people in my world certainly me ascribe too much to ideology and too little to money The financial dynamics of the world drive a lot more than we acknowledge that they do and we look at things We're like oh these people believe this and these people believe that and that's why they're fighting or that's what their allies or whatever But really we should all remember that the love of money is the root of all evil and money Really it's a huge effect on outcomes, but nobody says that And I miss it so often so you spent your life in the money business trading debt Tell us just just to start but like You worked in Ukraine you traded Ukrainian debt. What was that like I? Never worked in Ukraine. I've been to Ukraine on investor trip I have traded Ukraine deck. I traded emerging markets debt my whole life Until May of this year traded and sold it at a bunch of a bunch of different banks London in New York Ukraine was certainly one of the One of the instruments we traded traded through the Russia crisis Can you explain just for the truly ignorant me among them? What what is emerging markets debt? So emerging markets debt Originally the asset class grew out of the debt crisis in the 1980s When money center bags that we're hung with primarily which a lot of American debt after the After the 80s crisis Nicholas Brady treasury sector at the time came up with a plan called the Brady plan to Restructure the debt back it with collateral US treasury strips That would make it more palatable to a broader base of investors to get it off the balance sheets of the money center banks and To create a more institutional uptake of the debt and retail uptake of the debt so American debt American banks are left with loans from other countries that those countries can't repay correct I'm just trying to put it in terms like I can understand and so then the treasury secretary Basically says to those banks will bail you out by guaranteeing these loans with American treasuries It's one way to put it It's a way to clean the balance sheet up and to create I think there are two two impacts one you clean up the banks balance sheets get it off get it off their their sheet and create a marketplace and a dynamic that allows liquidity for this debt and then creates a whole new Marketplace and about it to issue and clean up the countries now so you're doing good for the banks and you're doing good for the countries and theoretically doing good for a whole new investor base and That started in the early 90s and I kind of walked into Wall Street in the early 90s at a college and and I just fell into this market that was starting and really boom for a while and so what does that mean to attach a treasury to foreign debt? Can you tell us lemons terms with that means to treasury strips. What is that treasury strips is your coupon bonds effectively? And so you have collateral you have risk-free collateral That's attached to the bond so that to get investors who would obviously wary of Subinvestment grade emerging market at that time was called less developed countries LDC that it was then involved into emerging markets debt which actually is all is sort of a misnomer At this point because it it characterizes almost everything outside G7 from right single a debt to default to debt so it it's grown over the last 30 years to incorporate sovereign debt debt of countries Primarily issued in in hard currency dollars in euros down to investment grade corporates government owned debt like Oil companies say nationalize oil companies that would be that called quasi-sharrence Down to corporate debt all the way down to default to debt. So it's all of credit all credit products went in a number of countries. It's ballooned, but at the infancy it was really a It was a evolving asset class to got to clean up the balance sheets and open access back to lending to these countries and instead of just being relied on major money center banks for loans that really sat on their balance sheet and weren't that liquid didn't trade much Let's open it up to global investor base create trade euro bonds putting your Not necessarily putting your 401k but putting your pension funds and then hedge funds traded it from there to fall from Dollar debt into the local currency debt became a much more fashionable So investors can buy the Turkish slurred in how many debt or Can you shilling to nominated debt and then obviously driven by Kenyan debt in Kenyan currency? You can it's not that easy but the harder it is to trade the more the banks make money at Trading it so it's certain countries are harder to access than others so all so all of this debt originates from the desire of Countries to raise money from the world correct so if I'm Kenya and I want to you know fund the operations of my government I issue bonds. Yeah, you should locally issue local bills to local banks primarily trade local bank treasuries Foreign investors can access that through You typically plan vanilla kind of derivatives and they'll issue dollar-to-date euro bonds that are open to the world to trade in dollars So if you're the treasury secretary, that's a huge power that you have you can bailing out other countries certainly I mean I saw it my first job For about a year I was an analyst on a trading desk and it's like six months in they gave me a Trading book the Mexico book there's 1994 and they gave it to me because I was a kid and it was the safest book He could you can hurt yourself too much with it about six months after that the Mexican pays took crisis So yeah, that was Robert Rubin and friends. I lived through that whole experience of what did they do What did who do what did Ruben then treasure secretary? What did under Clinton? What did he do with the Mexico? well, what's interesting is You I don't know if it's a It's a function of just how the human brain works and you look back and you're like oh, yeah The we basically bailed Mexico out and cleaned it up and everything went on as was but you forget as you're going through that These things I'll take a lot longer your memory shortens up right It took a lot longer and it took a few go rounds and what I learned to that whole thing was Because I went through a bunch of these crises there was the 94 Mexico peso 97 the Asia crisis tie-bought and a few room tie-bought crisis and create child balls and all that in the 98 was Russia 2000 was Argentina peso crisis and then we had the you know GFC so there's there's role There was a series of rolling crises and all in like the first 10 years my career So that definitely you had a wounds your ability to stay permabolish when you're going through a bunch of rolling crises But on what I learned through these series of crises is that What you have to kind of start with is the bazooka The the go with the the moab of bailout that you have to go with way more than the market things you need because what In the Mexico peso crisis my memory serves properly They kept coming with not half measures, but sort of just enough of what they thought would would bring back smart good stability or market confidence and just enough creates a bit of spike in confidence and then Starts to start to panic again and then come back again until finally they come back with the The megabazooka swap lines bailout all that sort of stuff. So now that was us early and sort of the Washington Census era foreign policy and There was a I guess my the macro point I would make or the conclusion of reaching is this is a huge feature of our foreign policy It is and you know the IMF is funny. I've been you mentioned you crayon and the trip I went to Ukraine was an investor trip and part of the purpose of an investor trip is to go and to meet with their finance ministry Their debt liability people meet with banks meet with locals Get an assessment and you know you go to You always go to the IMF the IMF there and ask what the likelihood is of the next tranche being delivered and and Perhaps it's a bit cynical but 30 years of trade in March market So make it pretty cynical But I'd always go into those meetings and walk away from those meetings like what are we talking about here? Of course they're gonna of course they're gonna disperse the next tranche. That's what they're in the business of doing they're in the business of lending money to these countries because That's what they do and that's where they make their money. So it's very rare that They won't or they don't unless it's a real sort of Turn your thumb up turn your turn your nose up or thumb your nose at the IMF and and Is the purpose of the IMF to bail out Miss Manage countries. I think it's simple terms. Yes. I don't think that's the I don't think that's the most euphemistic way of putting it or how they describe it, but effectively yes I'd say backstop or to keep them Keep them afloat and take offer them Guidance as to how to Run austerity programs and get themselves back on the rails so that they can move towards Prosperity democracy Well, sorry Does it work? Typically no why because one It's very Politically unpopular as a domestic politician to be taking orders from any firepower, but certainly The West and those orders come with strict austerity because how did they get themselves in those problems in the first place right? Certain but distinct lack of austerity living beyond their means correct. So You know, that's not That's not particular to emerging markets countries also I'm all sovereign to do that right everyone the West is doing that as well now living beyond their means But some of us like the United States are able to run what's called counter-cyclical monetary policy because We have a reserve currency. So we have a special privilege to be able to maybe be somewhat more profitable get than others But the money rounds runs out a lot faster in emerging markets countries when you can't find it's your debt and you have a dual crisis of both your currency Anorent streets Running out of control and at that point you've got enough you got nowhere to go other than to Your friends in DC Brussels and ask for the backstop But in return for the backstop you need to make some promises about how you can conduct your business going forward and As you can imagine cutting expenses raising interest rates slowing the economy Doesn't generally get people reelected Exactly Hey, it's a brag, but we're pretty confident. This show is the most vehemently Pro-dog podcast you're ever gonna see We can take or leave some people, but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best They really are best friends and so for that reason we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch pet It's the fastest growing pet telehealth service Dutch dot com is on a mission to create what you need But you actually need affordable quality veterinary care anytime no matter where you are They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately It's offering an exclusive desk count dutches for our listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year Visit dutch.com slash talker to learn more use the code Tucker for $50 off that is an unlimited vet Visits 82 dollars beer 82 bucks a year We actually use this Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance In a 10 minute call. It's pretty amazing actually you never have to leave your house You don't have to throw the dog in the truck no wasted time waiting for appointments no wasted money on clinics or visit fees Unlimited visits and follow-ups for no extra cost plus free shipping on all products from up to five pets It sounds amazing like it couldn't be real, but it actually is real visit dutch dot com slash talker to learn more use the code Tucker for 50 bucks off your veterinary care per year Your dogs your cats and your wallet will thank you So you really you've got a democracy problem these countries overspend because They're democracies and they're trying to meet the demands of their voters and then it's impossible to fix because Their democracies trying to meet the demands of their voters That's probably a little more euphemistic than I would say yes, that's one factor, but there are other factors It plays well how many countries have been bailed out by the United States over the past 30 years that you're aware of Mean there's hard bailouts and soft bailouts. So I couldn't really put a number on it like how many are running and IMF program right now We have to be in the dozens how many like strict bailouts I really don't know at the top of my head. I mean we can go through the We can go through obviously Mexico Argentina excuse me Argentina in the in the in the age of crisis there were a whole host age and countries that had to post up So there's there's the hard bailouts and then there's like the softer bailouts are sort of coming back Staying on the staying on the the teeth so to speak who makes money from this uh Who makes money from this so? The IMF theoretically makes money From the interest on the loans, but it's typically below market loan, so It's not a real profit motive Banks make money from this from facilitating the debt. So the trading of it the issuing of it the fees of issuing of it investors make money From higher interest rates obviously And then there's a subset of investors like distressed debt investors that will Buy a bunch of defaulted To fault the paper sit on it and then do workouts like the most the most Probably stark examples recently would be Argentina And You know right now Ukraine will be Pretty significant one as well. So if the workout is with that What would you do with Ukraine as a banker at this point like what's likely to happen to Ukraine? Not not on a military level, but Ukraine Ukraine is a different one than saying Argentina because it has the moment more of a geopolitical put so to speak then Pick a random country. I yeah, Bolivia or Argentina although now under this administration clearly there's more What sort of Monroe doctrine part two there's more of a geopolitical puts Argentina, but But Ukraine's a tricky one because there are You obviously up until recently you had the entire West behind that right and there's This this week alone. You've got You got Larry think we're coughing Kushner over there working on you know stage two what's gonna happen the peace process But also the rebuild So that's an it's an odd one. I think that's gonna be a combination of public and private Because they'll be so much rebuild to do and they'll be They'll be a lot of money to be made in the rebuild What does a debt crisis look like? What is a debt crisis? Well a debt crisis typically is not a debt crisis alone accompanied by a currency crisis uh At the debt crisis the external debt and then a local market interest rate crisis which is also dead in itself So the local local T-Vils local interest rates will skyrocket at birth to try to raise interest rates to try to attract Money to the currency to stem the route on the currency and that can work up until a point to you lose control of both So what a debt crisis looks like is Currency runaway currency devaluation Run away higher interest rates which clamps down the interest rates clamps down any lending locally clamps down any local growth creates the fall defaults on domestic businesses The currency running away depending on the country, but all countries it causes inflation but countries that Relay on imports certainly even more right everything you're bringing in It's gonna cost far more in your local currency So it's really a spiral And then current typically what happens is bonds will drop to a level that's called recovery value and recovery value Effectly what is a term or really more from See the corporate credit markets where if you were to strip everything down and sell it for parts what could you get? What could you get for the cash value interest rates spike bond values Drop collapse. Yes. What does this have to do with debt? Why is it described as a debt crisis? Because no one could function without borrowing No, it can function without debt. So if you can't borrow you can't exist And there's no country that's not true of I Mean there's there are countries that don't necessarily need to borrow as much as they do, but they still do why? Because one because they can cheaply I would argue The GCC countries Don't necessarily need to borrow as much as they have the Gulf yeah, but they have recently you know, Saudi for example because they're going on a massive expansion To diversify themselves away from their Core business, which is oil, which is actually Is actually a very wise thing to do because if you look at If you look at countries historically then as well as probably the most extreme example That had an offer there's a single rate of country in the 80s If you I went there in the 90s and gleaming infrastructure like incredible highways beautiful hotels amazing amazing place And they never took the oil wealth and diversified away from it in a meaningful way And then when you have an oil shock And you've taken out too much debt against the Let's make up a number a hundred dollar oil price and oil drops at 30 year all upside down And so that's what you know, that's what nbs Is looking at for a multi-decade plan to build you know build these cities technology innovation centers and so forth which Is clearly learning from from the past But uh, but they're borrowing to do that. They're borrowing to do that. Yeah, but they're borrowing it fairly cheap rates um There's also a concept that you want to borrow as a soft to sovereign level to set a benchmark against which your Companies can borrow in international markets. It's it'd be the broad of the investor base theoretically the cheaper the interest rate So they'll set a they'll set a benchmark level and then a corporation can borrow at that rate plus 20 basis points or 50 basis ones Some Americans have become cut off from the things that once kept us grounded are land The skills that tied our families to nature Goldiers get his next spot And tremendous who made a new six-part series American game tails from the wild We follow the sports when we're keeping these ancient traditions alive We follow a permanent neighbor seal into the mountains of Texas Donald Trump junior across the ridges of lead nigh That's what we call from going from is he really to hero and wander with me with the quiet woods of Maine I have just three dog commands and then as I direct the dogs find the bird And then dead bird obviously I don't use as much as I'd like to We cast for steelhead on the to shoot server in Oregon Oh first one up on a while trek new deer in the Utah high country Spearfish in the waters off montage chasing striped bass and wolf in tune of sea on the other side It's called the American game tails from the wild outdoor series Watch it tucker pearlsome.com So if every country is indebted I mean debt decreases your sovereignty your ability to make independent decisions That's correct. Yeah, so if every country is in debt then there are no fully sovereign countries then right Can't just it's not no country is free to do exactly what it thinks it should do in its own interest They're all connected. No And again back to us. I mean Theoretically we we are or we're based on the fact that we have the global reserve currency But there is a limit to everything at some point So what's the limit for the United States? It's hard to say What the limit is the limit is what loses the global reserve currency status right and as I alluded to before these things don't happen quickly They happen over Much longer period of time than anyone would think So How do you You know in simple terms to me. Let's look at some global current global reserve currencies historically Dutch Gilder birch pound Viewst dollar probably the most obvious examples in relatively recent history and what did they all have in common? They ruled the seas military dominance right and you know you'll see memes online and they're good what you know The pictures of fleets of aircraft carriers in the Gulf and displays a military power in the that's what Bax my currency and then that's you know that that is true But you know at some point You got to ask yourself a question like where you'd also what it had it empires from Rome To the Dutch to the Brits like in period of overreach to an extent was what undid them right and yeah If we continue to I mean what what concerns me What concerns me longer term of the potential luteers the reserve status is if we lose our military dominance That's not happening Obviously tomorrow the next day There's a few things that that could obviously I mean you're More versed than I am in this whole notion of modern day drone warfare, but that's certainly levels of playing field very very quickly You see what the with the hooties we're able to do Yeah With not so sophisticated and not very expensive drone technology. No But that's you know that's that's the That's a purview for for some military expert not me The other thing they consider like the structure remains the same so the United States can Continue being indebted to the degree that it is because it has the world's Reserve currency and it possesses that Because of its military dominance does but if Yes, I think what's very important was a very important moment however was the seizing of the Russian reserves At the beginning of the Russia Ukraine I felt that And I think we'll look can you tell us what happened just for people? Yes, so quite simply The Western power seized the Russian reserves that were sitting in In the New York Fed believes 300 billion is the number that they seized and you know the euro europeans still want to use that for For rebuild so forth in the Ukraine Now not to get into who's writing who's wrong in the Ukraine Russia conflict that's not that's not the point of this the point is it sets a precedent That's a scary precedent that is your money that sits in US treasuries or gold in our Federal reserve is not safe if you run a foul of the powers that be so There's an a very obvious and natural reaction function to that which is Powers like India China and Russia Stop buying treasuries and start buying gold though. They the gold call was certainly we have inflationary you know inflationary Pressure as we can talk about but even more to the point has seemed obvious at that point that that's the trade It's yes, it's an inflationary. I bought gold that one remember. Yeah, and I've done better than the stock market's done Well, it's funny if I Move and gold this year I won't get her after the top of my head by so over the last 20 years I think now is this gold's now beat s and p now when you compare the tip. Yep It's really effective. It's the debase one trade when you look at it. What's the debase one trade? The base of trade is that the currency that we The currency that we all use and think about every day has been debased against gold right the value of the dollar I think oftentimes people look at the the dollar is dollar stronger the dollar week and what people are looking at is Effectively the DX why the dollar index and that's a basket of major currencies or it's heavily weighted to the major currencies euro yen Canadian dollar aussie dollar and It's really at this point kind of a ridiculous comparison because all of those countries are sort of in a basket case with their debt issue in their growth But if you look at the dollar versus Bitcoin or you if you look at it versus gold over the last Ten years it's pretty clear that the currency's been debased in those terms So if you look at in that terms the stock market returns don't really actually look quite as As great as wonderful if you're looking at it and what a dollar would have any how many dollars it took to buy it? I also gold ten or 15 years ago versus today and All of that you think or some of it is downstream from the decision by the Biden administration to freeze Russian assets because that's scared the crap out of the rest of the world I think the gold move is for sure the dollar week the dollar weakness against gold. Yes But there's also I mean I think the big move in the mean if you look at if you look at what we did after the GFC in terms of interest rates and global financial crisis where what we did bailout Extraordinary measures fiscal and monetary keeping interest rates and zero Emergency measures keep rates at zero that remain in place for a good 10 year Like I don't know how you state emergency measures at zero interest rates when The stock market when I've quadruples over a triple square group of over 10 years So what I think it was that bad all those Investors got rich everyone's happy with their 401ks like why is that bad well, it's bad for a number of reasons one is If you believe in a free market capitalist system you believe in the pricing mechanisms and the free market pricing is everything The price of Needed the farmers market is set by the free market who it's willing willing Pricing mechanisms and the free market pricing is everything. The price of meat at the farmer's market is set by the free market. Who's willing, willing buyers, willing sellers at a fair price? Once you start to put in price controls, also of your union, it's definitely, we don't have free market capitalism. At the core of free market caps are the price of money. So we artificially put price controls on the price of money. So we all look at it. We artificially kept interest rates way too low. At zero, when the market didn't necessarily demand the conditions, maybe at the time, certainly five years hence, 2015. I don't really see why we needed to keep interest rates at zero for that long. So yes, I think the reason why, in my opinion, the reason why the people at the Fed did dozens and dozens of PhDs that the Fed making these decisions, probably to a man, to a woman wrote their PhD on the Great Depression and what the Fed did wrong. That was the horrors of deflation. So really the depression was really a result of deflation. So that's the greatest boo-y man of all. So anything you can do to fight deflation. Deflation is the real killer, especially what you have in excess of debt. What I'm going to stick to the dumbest possible questions. I hope I don't offend you. What is deflation? Deflation is prices going down. What you kind of want is a gentle inflation to help inflate away the debt to show a gradual, the benchmark, the target Fed target for a long, long time has been 2% inflation. They soft up that to three recently. And as you know, just cut rates this week, even with core PC at 2.8. So they've kind of abandoned that 2% target. But what I think in that time, why wouldn't I want deflation because that makes the value of my paycheck higher? It depends on who I is, who's who the I asking that question is. Right. So if you're you and your wages are constant and you've paid off your house, certainly deflation would be great. Go to the store every day and things are cheaper. I mean, there's deflation certain certain sectors. For years, there's been deflation in all technological goods. Right? You get a free price going TV for $400 bucks. Yeah. So for you, Tucker Carlson, it would be wonderful for the economy as a whole that's really run on hyper financial hyper financialization and debt. If you have a deflationary spiral, you are going to be left with a bunch of default debt. So where we are right now, you know, to pivot, I guess, to where we are here with the US is I think when this administration came in, they they message pretty clearly that the move was going to be away from the Biden administration and more towards some austerity. There would be some tax cuts, but we offset with spending cuts. Doge, Elon, et cetera. People got very excited about potential, central cuts. And then I don't know what happened shortly into the administration, but there was clearly a pivot that I didn't see coming. And it was around the time of the tariff, the tariff tantrum and the big sell off in the stock market. But out of that seemed to come that there was a shift towards what people are now calling run at hot, which is forget about tamping down, spending, little tax cut, maybe we'll take some slower growth, but we'll reduce the deficit for that would be good for the long term. And instead, let's let's just run it both ways, fiscal and monetary. So let's let's cut rates and let's cut taxes and let's spend more. And I don't know what what happened or if that was always the plan, but or someone's songs under the hood and said, look, the only way typically there's two ways to get out of a debt problem. You grow your way out or you can float your way out. Right. And it seems to me we're going to all gas, no breaks on both. Like we're just, we're going to we're going to grow. And we're going to we're going to let some inflation go. And that's the way we're going to get out of this debt issue. And I Trump this week was saying I could see 20, 25% GDP growth. I mean, that's it's a nice number, but that would certainly help our certainly help our deficit issues. Well, what's that long though that many Americans thought they were inherently safe from the kinds of disasters you hear about all the time in third world countries, a total power loss, for example, people freezing to death their own homes. That could never happen here. Obviously it's America. People are recalculating unfortunately because they have no choice the last few years have taught us that or would the power grid in Texas failed in the dead of winter. Yeah, it happened and it could happen again. So the government is not actually as reliable as you hope they would be. And the truth is the future is unforeseeable and things do seem to be getting a little squirrely. So if the grid does go down, you need power you can trust. Last country supplies newest product is designed for exactly that. The grid doctor is a 3,300 watt battery backup system that will power full size appliances, medical devices and tools with clean, reliable power. It's even EMP protected. That means it's shielded from lightning solar flares or an actual electromagnetic pulse event. There's no gasoline, no noise, no emissions. You just plug it in, charge it from the wall, from your vehicle or from the included 200 watt solar panel and keep going day after day taking care of yourself and the people you love is solely up to you. And the amazing thing is with these new batteries, we use one at home by the way, is there a super easy to use. There's no inverter you need to figure out on the front of it or anything like that. There's like three buttons. It's very easy and totally reliable, highly recommended. We literally use one, as I said, visit lastcountrysupply.com to shop the grid doctor for power you can trust this winter. Lastcountrysupply.com. Have you ever seen any country try that? Really? Well, in 35 years of watching. Oh, I was 20, 25% CDP no. No, have you ever seen any country approach a debt crisis with that? Sure, sure. I mean, Erdogan's probably the most famous in Turkey. Did it work? No. What happened? He tried to keep cutting rates into an inflationary environment and put pressure on the central bank to cap rates, but the free market always, you know, I think, I always say you can suspend the laws of of science and physics of gravity, of market economy for a time, but ultimately, the gravity always always works. So the free market always always works. So no, it didn't work. They have run away inflation and extraordinarily high interest rates. And he's under, been under a lot of pressure domestically for reelection obviously. So what's the rate window approach it? Well, as I think was it, Talas Solo says there are no solutions, only trade-offs. Yeah. There are no solutions when you're in this situation, when you're in this situation, $37 trillion deficit. Is that a lot? Sounds like a big number to me. I'm not even sure how many commas are in there. It's a big number. It's hard. It's really hard to grasp. But I think you go back, you started with ideology. The answer is always going to depend to an extent on what your ideology is and what you're willing to sustain in terms of paying short-term to long-term. For me, I was more, I was more proponent of what I thought the plan was going to be, which is some deficit cutting through spending cuts. And from what was coming out of Doge early, it seemed like there was plenty of fat too cut that would have been politically rather popular, I think, especially with the rate. PR guys behind it, you know, guys were getting out there every week and on Twitter and going on podcast and talking about sort of the absurdities now, maybe it's a drop in the bucket overall. But I think it was worthwhile, exercise to go with. I don't know. Again, I don't know. I'm not on the inside. So I don't see what it feels to do. The idea always was that federal bureaucrats, public servants, as we call them, were serving and they were making less than their private sector counterparts. And there was suffering involved, but patriotism impaled them to do it. So they did. And now you look at the numbers and it's like, no, no, no, no, you're your federal employee on average makes way more than your private sector. 2x, 2x. So they're the most privileged people in the middle class. And by far, that doesn't count their gilded pension plans. Is it really 2x? I think it's I think the number is average medium private sector family. It comes 70,000. I think it's 110, 115 for federal and say not including the benefits which are ridiculous. Work from home for five years. But then, you know, of course, the population of federal workers or federal contractors, which are, I mean, that probably is many federal contractors, no one ever says that. But there are. Delight is a federal contractor, right? So there are so many of them now that we maybe have reached that tipping point where no administration can pivot against its own employees because they're voters. Maybe. Maybe. But, you know, I'm sure you've alluded to many times and you can't have what is it seven and the 10 top zip codes in the United States or all and sort of in and around Washington, D.C. I mean, I went to you, you grew up there. I went to school here in the early 90s and I hadn't been back for 15 years. I it's night and day. It's a gleaming gleaming office towers. Rose Rose, I remember having an internship to Boston White House and you were passing you had to pass sort of bombed out. Oh, there are like buildings and now it's just from the 1968 riots. They never were rebuilt 1992. They were still there. Like literally two or three blocks on the way I remember and it's crazy. I mean, it's um, and flashes of Roman Empire. He's like, you go to, you go to Rome to collect your tribute and so I don't know. I don't know. I'm not is privy to that world as you are. I don't know what people see when they get into office and realize that there's potentially no way. There's no way around it. All our intentions are, we're great, but this is the way it's going to be. I don't know what okay, but you're also suggesting if this is not a solution that you can't spend your way out of a debt crisis. I don't I haven't seen it done before. Right. How much magic with that sense? A very talented individual. He's a lot of experience in markets. Very successful. The right guy to have it to help. If he thinks this can be done, I guess I'm going to have any choice, but to see what how it plays out, but maybe that's the play. The play is this is our only way out. If there are people on both sides, people I speak to, people I knew in the markets, friends of mine, people who's opinion I respect on both sides of the aisle. The one thing we all agree on is that this is not a technical situation. It's not some MMT was a bit warren. People were talking to you. This is like normal people that say like, okay, at this point, we're kind of boxed at 37, 38 trillion. So maybe that's the issue. Maybe there were so box that we got to run this experiment because it's only way out and hopefully growth kicks in, but it doesn't, the growth scenario, the current growth scenario in the US is really hard to get your hands around. In one part because it's such a polarized economy, people are calling it a case shaped economy, which I think is a pretty accurate term. Case shaped meaning the lower end is hurting and continues to hurt more in the upper end gains and continues to gain more. Now we've seen through throughout history, that's not a tenable situation. No, it's actually what happened about in Swale. It's how they got you go, Trump. It's a powder keg, ultimately. And it's also extraordinarily difficult to get a real handle on where the numbers are because we're not releasing any numbers right now because the government shutdowns. So you know, the feds flying blind to an extent, you can rely on certain private sector indicators that are kind of shockingly bad, frankly. When you look at a consumer loan, defaults, credit card, balances credit card, the late credit card payments, auto loan defaults. I think October was 185,000 announced private sector layoffs and it could worsen so wait. So it was a situation where you've got a, you know, the US economy is 70%, 69%, 70% consumer lead. So if we're going to rely on the top 10%, continue to spend on Gucci bags and trips at St. Bartz. I just don't know how sustainable that is when the lower end is, you know, swapping out the New York strip for poor coin and Walmart numbers are great because middle and upper middle classes shift in from the publics to Walmart shopping, like everyone's getting squeezed. So I don't know. I don't know that the growth is there. The growth can come. Maybe the growth can come with these tax cuts, with the industry cuts, with certainly with deregulation will help and all this promised foreign investment. But there's a lag to all that. It does seem from an ignorant outsider standpoint, which is mine, that there's an awful lot of emphasis on the public equity markets and like stock markets, the measure of how we're doing, whether or not that's a good measure, you know, I don't know. Maybe not a perfect measure feels like to me. But how safe is the stock market in the United States as a place to put your money? I can't tell this is not comfortable question. He is diplomatic as you can be. Well, it is the largest, most liquid stock market in the world. It does attract not just domestic savings, but huge foreign investment. There's expression that says money goes, capital goes, we're treated best and we still do treat capital the best in this country. Historically, dynamic markets from venture cap, the private equity to public markets. That's something we should all be very proud of and it helps grease the skids of global commerce. That's great. There are some concerns, clearly concerns about the value, current valuation and equity market and the structure or the economic structure of the flows. So one massive concentration risk was the fangs down to the max seven, the top 10 companies in S&P 500, I think, have accounted for something like 42% of the gains. Year to date, the big get bigger. You had new Nvidia at one point, tipped over $5 trillion market cap, which is again a hard number to really get your head around. At that point, I think it was larger in market cap than every market in the world except for US and Japan, entire market cap of any other trade in any index in the world. Wait, bigger than the entire index of any country? Yes, bigger than a cumulative total of the value of all the companies traded on those indexes. On a random exchange, yeah, except for I believe US for sure and I think Japan again, it could be wrong, but something in that you get the idea just one company worth all these economies. That's right. And that, we don't need to go into all sorts of the price to book and price to sales and expectations of future revenue, all that sort of thing. You get into a market psychology event where stocks that go up continue to go up because people chase momentum. I read something yesterday that the explosion in options trading, the volume options are now three and a half trillion a day, which is larger than the entire market cap of the Russell 2000. So like the 2000 small midsides can be 300 million to two billion market cap companies in the United States. And that doubles, I think from 2020 to 2022, and then doubled again. So you've got an insane amount of leverage. You've got Martin debt at all I ask why is it significant to the options market is huge? Because it's not just the options markets huge. It's also the structure of the options they've moved to zero date expiry options. You can use to be weekly or monthly options. Now it's one like same day options. So the retail with the gamification sort of of yeah, so an option, my understanding of an option is an option is a bet on in what direction the direction with and you get an instant and immense amount of leverage. I'll not smile at leverage. So how does that work? How do I? So let's say that you want to buy a call betting that Nvidia is going to go up between now and the close. And at the money in video call meeting, let's say it's trading at 177 right now. And you think it's going to go up. And the price of the at the money, the 177 call is till now to the end of day is 75 cents. Let's just say. So you're betting that it's going to go up more than 75 cents. If it goes up $1.50, you've doubled your money. You're not just making 75 cents on 177, which would be whatever, 31 percent. You're making 100 percent of your money. So you're getting all you can lose is the premium to 75 cents. You pay for that option. But everything over 75 cents starts to run exponentially in terms of profitability. So people are making an insane amount of money on in this run up on options, zero day options. And they're doing it from their phone to pretty easy with the that's not really investing though. That's betting. Yeah, that's gambling. But that's just one component of the structure of what it sounds like. It's now a huge component. It is a huge component. But again, with the gamification of crypto trading and options trading and Robinhood and with gambling, you know, Draft Kings, all that stuff. It's sort of part of the culture. And I'll start in covert people at home with extra steamy money and not much to do. And the market was ripping and people got hooked on it and people keep doing it. Generally people are doing quite well. I think, you know, retail is done better than institutional largely speaking. This year, but the other part of the structure of the market that's somewhat concerning is just this passive flow. So then there's a guy named Mike Green. He should probably speak to you. He's done the best work on this. And passive flow, basically, 401k, if you put your money in every two weeks, your money's automatically going to your 401k. And it's you collect to that it's auto invest. If you go and you look at most companies, 401k options, their options and what to invest. And then you break down each one of them. Basically every single equity option fund you have has the same high concentration in the same five stocks. So, you know, Apple Microsoft's and video. So you don't know that necessarily. You don't really know what you're buying or what percentage of the fund is in those. It's very highly weighted because the higher the market cap go higher, weighting, the higher the weighting goes and on and on and on. So it's an automatic machine like underlying bid to the market that continues to the big, the big, get bigger and bigger and bigger. And you can say, okay, what's wrong with that? These are great companies. They're multinational. They have great business models that were low capital intensive and high margin and they're basically a lot of them are monopolies in their space. Okay, well, two things can happen. If unemployment rises, if you lose your job, you're not putting your money in 401k. If you lose your job and inflation keeps ripping, you might have to withdraw from your 401k to create a vicious cycle the other way. Then it's too much concentration and too much concentration and the structure of it is perpetuated. And then you add on the leverage of the option trading with momentum that keeps this trade going and going and going until where you get to five trillion dollar market caps. Now, there'll be a whole code of read, Wall Street analysts that will justify why five trillion make sense because of this, that and the other thing. But I'm not sure. What if they're of the five, eight, 10 companies that have the bulk of the value, the plurality, the value of the entire S&P, if one or a couple of those companies dramatically reset in its value and it's share price, what would happen? Well, you're seeing it at kind of right right now as we speak is the AI trade is starting to lose a little bit of favor. It's starting to be some questioning on the AI trade and the market can't continue to trade up when it's trade up if one or two of the major components are falling out of bed. This week it's been Oracle and last night's Broadcom like to mark it down and Vidia is starting to weigh a little bit. So we're very tech, sector heavy. And the other thing that concerns me to an extent about not just for public markets, but for private credit markets is that with this AI build out and this data center build out, obviously an extraordinarily capital intensive. And when I was speaking about before, about how a lot of these mags in the countries had companies had a great model of being capital like, they're now becoming quite capital in France. It's not writing software. It's building physical things. Exactly. You're building physical things and you're spending, you're borrowing a ton of money. And this is what the problem with Oracle is right now is that borrowed a lot of money. And now they're borrowing a lot of money to build things and build things that did appreciate value over time. Right. Like a chip that you buy a lot of this, a lot of the financing that's been going on too has been people have been using collateral. These chips is collateral to borrow a guest. So there's borrowing a borrowing a borrowing, but you're borrowing against a chip that naturally is going to be replaced by the next evolution. Of course. So that's a bit of concern about the value of the collateral and when that daisy chain unwinds it could be ugly. The other thing is that there's so much, there's so much borrowing in the private credit markets for these hyperscalers and these data centers that it crowds out, there's a finite amount of borrowing available. So it's crowding out borrowing and investing in other areas of the economy. And that concentration risk concerns me to an extent as well. And the different, a lot of people have made the analogy to the 99, 2000 tech bubble. And you know, the good news coming out of that down the line is that, okay, we all got hyped up on the internet and we got carried away with pets.com. Things like e-toys. But the truth was in retrospect, we weren't hyped up enough about the internet and what it would do and how it would change the world. But there's still a cycle that comes along where there's the forex cycle and then the crash cycle. And then on the back end of that, you have the winners that survive like the Amazon's, right? That you could have bought for practically nothing in 2002. And then there are, you know, companies like the similar to me to this the hyperscale data center were the fiber companies like global crossing, world calm, right? And those were bubbles that crashed. But what were they doing? They were laying fiber, fiber cable for the internet, which, okay, we had a malinvestment boom, the companies crashed, but the cables still exist and the cables are used today and the cables were very valuable and the cables didn't depreciate because the cables have a useful purpose. So the people are making the same argument now is like, okay, we may go through that cycle as well. It's maybe get a little for work. There'll be, there'll be winners and losers out of this and it'll be fine down the road and AI is not going away. I'm not here to disagree with that. But there's a slightly different component where you, you're building these things that are, that could, you know, you're buying all these chips that could depreciate. It's not exactly the same. True. No, and the nature of technology is hard to forecast. Very hard to forecast. Yeah. I mean, so they were telling us six months ago that AGI was right around the corner, nobody thinks that anymore. So for example, and so all of these infrastructure bets are predicated on predictions about what the technology will require in 10 years. The thing that we're really running up against. We know that. We don't, you're exactly right. And I think there's the worms turning a little bit on the efficiency a lot of these. Yes. And what they can't and can't do and people say, you know, I saved a half an hour or I saved an hour coding something, but then it took me three hours to check to debug the work that the, the actual, you know, clutter, whatever it did. But the real thing that we're going to run into is we don't have enough power. We don't have an electric and we don't have water to to heat and cool all these things. That's just point blank. And even the, you know, Jensen and Altman and those guys will tell you that. And that's why they're going out and handed DC and trying to make, you know, trying to make try to make the case that this is a critically important industry that may need some government backing. But even if you get that, the fact of matter is the only way you can really power these things without spiking electricity bills another 300% and then creating a whole other political problem domestically is you need nuclear power. And, you know, we can't, we have plenty of natural gas that can work as a stop gap, but you need nuclear power and it's a 10 year build out minimum to get the nuclear power that you need. So when do we hit the summer between there here in that 10 years, we hit the wall in terms of our ability to to to get the electricity for these at this growth rate. Now, will these this growth rate, accurate projection? Maybe it's not. And if it's not, then we need to see a lot of these companies bring off and value. So also there are a lot of concerns about climate change. Yes. Jackson, maybe it's not. And if it's not, then we need to see a lot of these companies bring off and value. So also there are a lot of concerns about climate change. Yes, so just kidding. That kind of ended quickly, didn't it? Yeah, I haven't heard that phrase in months, have you? Climate change. No, I did see I saw something about, I saw something that nature had, nature magazine had to revoke a paper they did a few years ago that said that climate catastrophe was going to create an economic catastrophe and that was all based on false premises. I think the new idea is we're going to have an economic catastrophe if we think about the climate catastrophe in any way. Okay, notice Larry Fink's not lecturing as much about the climate anymore. Climate, climate in ESG is not as fashionable as it was a couple years ago. That's for sure. So how did that like as a guy who has dealt in markets like emerging debt pretty pure, it's like a debt trading, it's like a pretty pure market, right? Fears and interesting choice of words. No, I'm not saying unsullied. It's pretty plain vanilla, if that would you mean? I mean like they're so willing, seller willing, buyer. What I really mean is the price is an organic price. It's like what people will pay. Correct. So that is the definition of a market, right? How do you get to the price? Correct. So as someone who's spent his life in that world and who clearly, you're clearly committed to the idea of markets, like you believe people should be able to decide what they're going to pay for or something and what they're going to sell something for. How do you explain ESG? I don't know that funnily enough, I don't know that even the experts can actually define it. And I'm not joking when I say that. When I, in my last job, we would do a conference every summer in Europe for investors and we'd have a series of roundtable topics. And the one topic that was standing room only sold out every summer in Europe was the ESG without question. It seems the US has definitely faded, faded quickly from that, but Europe still seems very very hooked and very hooked in. And it's not faded there at all. It's definitely a part of the investment process. But what's fascinating is if you go to 20 clients in London and you talk about ESG, you will get a different answer from each ESG specialist as to, especially in emerging markets. It's a very difficult thing to to work your way around the ESG constraints when most of what emerging markets are based on our hard commodities. And there's also obviously the governance component, the G component. It's not always maybe up to Western standards with the G. So they're with the G there. They're a little light on the G. The G is not great. The S, no one really knows what that means and the G is highly questionable. So it's funny. It's just, it's there, it's still I guess what I call a work in progress. But just like conceptually, the idea that factors that are not really relevant to your fiduciary responsibility, which is to maximize returns for shareholders or something related to that. Like I don't know, that's just it's just an interesting concept. Like how did that happen? It's that my personal guilt as like an educated Westerner supersedes your right to have me handle your money responsibly. Well, it's straight government intervention is what it is. It's government. It's government. It's ideology. If you are of that mindset where you believe in control economy, it is the dream of all dreams to incorporate your ideological bent into the last thing that should be left alone, which is the free market. You now incocate all of this ideology into every decision making process all the way down to the setting of price of money, which to me, I know a run of foul of plenty of people on this, but to me that that's a bridge too far. That's not the place for it. But it's one in once in it's impossible to get out. Once once you go into that's involved in all the processes, it's really hard to take it back out again. So back to the AI infrastructure boom in the United States. If that slowed down or if people lost confidence in it, or you can certain about a cascade effect on public markets. In the short term, yes, the question is how quickly does the market rotate? How do the rotation trade? We're starting to see that actually the last week or two. You're starting to see small caps really rally, Dow components really rally. All the economy stuff really rally as tech is being soft. There's the way you can thread the needle there. But with the concentration risk and with the size of just actual size of these companies, it's going to be a drag on the overall market as a whole best case scenario. One of the reasons to stock market is my theory is so big, is because it's the easiest and you said most liquid way to park your money with some hope of return. I don't really think Americans are encouraged to think of other ways. I just have always noticed that. Absolutely. As an emerging markets guy who's been able to look into other countries, frontier markets, etc. There's always from, if you're an Argentine or Brazilian or Turk, you're always looking outside of your domestic economy, domestic market for opportunities. We really don't too much. No. It's so easy to participate in the public markets in the United States. As you said, you can do it on your phone. You can make bets on market movements from your phone, which just seems like it might have unintended consequences maybe. There's yeah, crosses a line from, as you said, from investing in straight gambling. But okay, so it's easy to use as like the key to any scale, I think. That was Amazon. That was, yeah. There's a lot of there's a lot of applications to that. Well, yes. Yeah. That's true. Yes. Yeah. Well, that's by the way, why tobacco use when absolutely crazy, as soon as someone figured out an automatic rolling machine for cigarettes, people used to have to smoke pipes, cigars, to snuff up their nose. The second you made it super easy to burn tobacco, the whole world became addicted to it. It makes a lot of sense. Right. And that's what the stock market is in the United States from my perspective. But if you're trying to be a little more creative or hedge a little bit in your future, your family's security, where else do you put your money? Again, it depends on who you are, net worth, etc. Let's see. You have an extra 100 grant. What would you, what would be a good call? Well, the problem is the great obvious trades run a lot already. Gold and silver started a run at ton. So long term investing has tried to look at stuff. The ideal cross of, you know, what sort of fairly valued or cheaper distress or out of favor that people haven't really cottoned on to because you see a trend that's about to emerge right now we're in full-throated recognition of the debased one trade and silver is breaking out for not for that reason, but also there's a notion that there may not be as much physical silver out there as Torreira has been written against. So there's been a bit of a bit of a squeeze going on two weeks ago that the Chicago mercantile exchange shut down for a cooling issue overnight just as silver was spiking, which was kind of convenient. So there's some some technicals in that market. Wait, so you think it's possible there's more paper against over than there is silver? Yes. So yes, they're definitely more derivatives written against alcomodities than exist, but no one ever asked not knowing, but to typically if you're an investor, you don't ask for physical delivery of the commodity. I do. I know you do. I do. And I'm going to find out where that stuff's buried. So you don't typically ask for the physical delivery of it when you're trading in in tens and hundreds of millions of dollars of derivatives against you cash settle your derivative against my cash settle. The loser pays the winner and you move on. So where do you go? At this point, given where valuations are, I think I think you go abroad. You look in multiples on you, a stock market where we were trading historically, extremely high PE ratios for the index on a historical basis and very high against farm markets. I think what this administration's doing in Latin America particularly is mentioned early sort of in road doctrine two. There's clearly a movement of foot to to stabilize region and to partner with those that are critical to us. I would imagine that open up a ton of investment and growth there. There's plenty of Latin American countries that offer pretty cheap historical PE ratios. So I think it's probably time to diversify a little bit out of the US and diversify out of tech heavy stuff. That's where I would go simply. I think you still have to own some some golden silver just have to own some but just not as much as you you wanted three years ago, giving out far it's from around. So but you're basically making a pitch for the Venezuelan stock market. Not specifically, but there may be a there may be a catalyst coming there that could create a create a big move on where the other it seems in the next in the next couple weeks. About real estate land real estate land for sure. That's why I asked like depends on who you are I think productive agricultural real estate anywhere is always a good investment sort of a disaster hedge. But yes, land is a whole yes. I don't think I'd want to be rushing into blue cities and paying high interest rates and taking out a bunch of debt on auto repressed co-ops in New York City, no sir. What about buying a 70s era office building on Sixth Avenue in midtown, New York? If you can convert it to residential perhaps and get a lot of tax breaks. When I may want to see, I may want to see what our friend, mom Donny, says the first couple weeks. So you made the point that for a bunch of different reasons you crane war, but other structural reasons we are on the path to losing our privilege as the holders of the global reserve currency at some point. Right? Well, because all empires are yes, right. So we know that. The question is when does that happen and what replaces it? And my read is as of now there's no obvious like national reply. We're not going to like adopt the British pound or the euro or the the rule. But instead gold is the stop gap as it has so often been, but crypto seems like the next global reserve currency. Is that fair to say? Yes. Yes. I mean, I would say this, there's kind of I think people bundled together the notion of blockchain and cryptocurrencies. And what I'd say I can't necessarily make it here a prognostication on a one particular crypto. I mean, it's been a phenomenal exercise and wonderful to see is sort of like it, it adher into Austrian economics. Yeah. See to see the experiment work. I don't think we want to get into like the dynamics of individual cryptos. I think, you know, at some point, probably Bitcoin as a crypto will be usurped just by sort of a better technology. But put that aside. What to me unequivocally and the next venture I'm going into is related to blockchain is blockchain is is here and is not going to go in a way whatsoever. And blockchain is going to transform the financial services industry pretty much every everything we do financially transaction was. And fortunately, we have the winner of banks and the administration and Dave Sachs and genius act, etc. And nobody who maybe was somewhat skeptical three, four years ago is it all? I mean, Larry Fink and as an example, which I think we just keep continues to say all assets are going to be tokenized. Just this week DTC see said all assets are going to be be tokenized and put on the chain. And that's going to remove a lot of little frictions in the system, extra costs that don't need an extra time lags that don't need to exist. So the crypto currencies like crypto currencies exist with the layer of the blockchain. You can't have crypto without the blockchain, but the two are somewhat distinct. So a couple of questions. One is it safe. I mean, it's reliant on electricity. Yes. But so is so is every, and I guess mentioned the CME went dark right the other day. Chicago Marce. So the NASDAQ shut down. Right. Everything we do is rely on except for you coming over in your golf cart with a bag of gold coins for me is is that is relying on energy that extent? Is it safe? Is it hackable? The theory, you know, one of the theories being proposed of Bitcoin, I'm not really sure if this is, you know, Bitcoin's had a pretty decent drop from high 120s to around 90. You know, part of the part of the thing being floated is that with quantum computing, making the leaps that it's making that Bitcoin might be able to be hacked at some point. Perhaps. But again, I'll put that separate to the blockchain. The blockchain deeply encrypted safe. These are the rails on which everything's going to run. Okay. Will it eliminate corruption? Or curtail it? I think, I mean, because it's kind of, I think the question coming from you is is a funny question because you know that if nothing will ever eradicate corruption or human. Unless it changes the human art right now, of course. Yes, it should eliminate corruption because what it's what what the blockchain is going to do, what it does is it creates a permanent electronic, unhackable ledger. So right, think about something's basic is like title insurance. I don't know if you've already deal with that. But first of like, why do we need to pay? Have I ever deal with that? Yeah, I pay constantly. Okay. So why? Like it's an absurd notion. Right. There's a title. You on the title, you put it on the blockchain. It's there forever. And why buy my house from you? The title gets transferred to me. It's registered on the box. The transaction's there. Now it's mine. It's there forever. We don't need to pay a couple grand or whatever. Sorry. One of my best friends runs a title company in Maryland. But you know, he's my, so he's probably almost done anyway. But that's just an example. Like, why do we need to pay five grand for title insurance? I just sold a house in Westchester. And I found out that there was from two owners ago, there was like the according to paperwork, there was a 650,000 mortgage still in the property. And that never got exponged. But the the tie, the brokers just kind of waved it back and forth and everyone just kind of stamped it like that stuff. That's just an example, ain't that everyone can kind of relate to. But also like why we'll be able to send money immediately. You know, with no, you know, if I send money to you, you'll immediately get the money, get the get the care, get the interest on it. Why should I be paying $30 cent of wire from JP Morgan? Like that's pure $30 of margin. Like all that kind of little stuff. And so the company that that I'm starting, it's going to be starting with channel, channel one is called liquidity.io. And we, we have one of only six fully registered licensed alternative trading systems, which is a trading system that's going to be able to trade all these tokenized and financial assets. And what we want to do is help democratize the financial markets and tokenize all kinds of assets. But we're working with our, with our backer just made some acquisitions with a couple of consumer loan businesses, auto loans and manufactured homes, mobile homes, for example. Like there's a great story. These two young guys in Dallas, they're working at JP Morgan. And with their fourth bonus, they said, we're not, we're going to, we're not going to blow up this time. What's by some rental property? And they couldn't find any of the property. They're in Dallas. So they just cold called like 250 mobile home parks. And they found one put in 50 grand turnaround was a $6 million trade. They were going to do a bigger one. And what they realized they were better off doing was revolutionizing the lending business for mobile homes. Because guess who the biggest player in that is was Warren Buffett. So great business, obviously, how much in business. But what I didn't learn until recently is that there is no refi on a mobile home. And there is no lending available on a secondary purchase. So if I take out a loan from my mobile home and then want to sell it to you, you can't get a loan. You have to buy it for cash. And if rates go down from eight to four, I can't refinance it. So they're going to, with their business and tokenization, they're going to eradicate all kinds of costs, which can create these two separate markets, which is a solution to is a partial solution to the home affordability crisis. Like that's something everyone can get about it. How does this new technology figure into like monetary policy? Like, wow, that's a great question. So you familiar with the stable coins? Yeah, I am. But will you describe what they are? Sure. So stable coins, let me think about it this way. Simple terms say a crypto like a Bitcoin, it's sort of a free floating currency. The market dictates. The stable coin is more like a pegged currency. So pegged to fiat. In this case, like tether circle, they're pegged to the US dollar and try to keep it stable at parity one to one. So what they are is, and their national currencies like this, their countries like your Bahamas or whatever. Yes, pegged one to one. Exactly. Yeah, Panama is dollarized. Stephen Hanky was a big dollarization component. They tried to do it in Argentina and didn't work. Hong Kong's got a dollar peg. So the stable coins, they try to keep parity with the dollar and they're back theoretically backed by treasury bills. So money comes in. The money gets invested in treasury bills. One for one, you're backed by triple A rated short dated no risk. But it become these become a conduit for all these transactions on the chain, automatic through these. So it could go through, go through the stable coin and into other things from there as it's sort of a conduit. Now, that's all good and well. As long as they we're sure that those stable coins are taking dollar for dollar investing in what they say they are without a lag or without moving too far away from that. Tether at the moment, it seems to be diversifying away from strict tables and they've been moving into gold, which is working for now, but you know, you have to be determined how that works. So does that make does all this make the US dollar stronger or weaker? Oh, sorry. Yeah. So the good that creates a natural bid for our treasury bills, which is a great thing for percent friends because that creates a whole new demand vehicle for our treasury debt on the stable coins. And what the stable coins do allow for again, a lot of emerging markets, participants is allows them to quickly access dollars and avoid depreciation risk in their own country. So you're getting a lot of far and money into stable coins that will be bid for T bills, which should hopefully help with our funding. Is there any way for the US government to use stable coins as a weapon in the way that Biden administration used Russian assets at the New York Fed as a weapon? I don't know. I don't know. I imagine there is. I don't know what that mechanism would be. I don't think I mean, in the Russia reserve instance, it was the bilateral seizure. This would be a seizure of untold amounts of investors at your season that I'm much sure what the purpose would be other than just right, staying on the money. Well, we've seen that before. True. What do we know about global gold reserves since it's such a huge component now? Well, we know we don't know everything that we know because not fully transparent. But what we do know is the direction of travel, which is massive increases, particularly from India, China, Russia that doesn't seem to be a beating at any time. That means they're importing gold. That means they're buying gold and there has been a lot of movement of physical gold, particularly over the summer. But the movement appeared to be more from the London vaults back to United States rather than elsewhere. But we don't know, we don't have complete clarity on any of that stuff. How and why? So if you're going to have an ancient commodity that's like a huge part of the global system, economic system, how can you not have transparency? Maybe I may have a certain amount of questions. I saw you answer it for you. If it's so important, why are people being honest about it? Because it's so important. That's why we're that the Chinese wouldn't tell us exactly how much we only have in the vaults. Yeah. Yeah, there's no reason they should or would or have to. I guess my question, you don't actually show your hand on how much you're accumulating as you're trying to accumulate in acid. Oh, is that true? Well, yeah, typically. I'm learning a lot about markets from you. That's great. So I told you, I promised you stupid question. And I said there are no stupid questions, but I was wrong. So, okay, then let me reframe the question this way. If we got somehow full transparency on global golders, where they are, who has gold? How much would we be shocked? Is there a big spread between I think? I mean, we still don't have the auditing of for Knox that we were supposed to get a few months ago. So really, yeah, you might be shocked about that too. I don't know. I was eating for mocks, Knox just has a lot more gold than they're telling us. They may have 10 times more. I don't know. I really don't. I don't want to speculate. I mean, I like to speculate, but I don't want to speculate on that. I'm guessing if there is a spread between perception and reality, it's it's to the negative. But what do I know? Not sure. There's talk about revaluing the gold as well. What does that mean? That means if you automatically revalue our gold reserves to market, we automatically have a higher effective capital base that should make us more credit worthy for like a better term. So gold now, the US reserves are valued at like under a hundred bucks an ounce, something like that, something crazy, right? I'm not sure exactly what it is. But I mean, that's like 1933 level or something. And of course, gold is over for grand an ounce. So like, why would we continue to value our own gold reserves thousands of dollars blow with their actually worth? I have no idea. That's weird though, right? It is. Yeah, especially when every other metric and the county, we've cost the living adjustments based on the CPI basket. I don't know. That's so. So how much just to go back to your career trajectory in emerging markets debt? Yes, sir. How much, uh, chicane areas there in that business? Like, so if, you know, you're dealing with emerging markets. So some of those were like, you know, solid transparent well governed countries and some of them are Nigeria. Right. What's that like? Well, how would say there's two components in the emerging markets trading business? There's the the trading thereof in sort of the big money centers like Hong Kong London in New York. And then there's the domestic stuff that happens. Now, I could say in terms of chanery, there's a clear 80 BC line at the global financial crisis on how we conducted business across the street and all products preglop, pre GFC, post GFC. And I could say it was a lot more fun. Pre GFC. Was it fun? It was a lot of fun. It was as much. It was as fun as you could have having a job. Really job. What was so fun about it? Every day was different. You're on trading floor. Everyone every every day is different. You have a front seat. You have a front seat and you're participating in global events every day. Mark's moving up moving down. You're working with like a truly diverse bunch of people from all walks of life that was close probably to merit meritocracy on trading floors you could get. And it was very clear what the motivator was. It was making as much money as you could every single day. And there was no word hide from that. So as a young person, it couldn't be a better learning experience. Because every day at the end of day, there was a number next year name and whether it was through your good luck, bad luck, hard work. be a better learning experience because every day at the end of the day, there was a number of an extra name and whether it was through your good luck, bad luck, hard work, whatever, the number doesn't lie and that's the number. It's just a great way to learn and to have to face yourself and improve upon yourself. And you know, train for was guys, you know, like PhDs from Princeton to guys who dropped out of college and we were all kind of in as a team. It was really fun. And what were the personality traits that allowed people to be successful? Like what's the perfect profile of the trader? You know, it's funny, I've found that the best trader, saying there's there's investors and there's traders, right? Different. It's a different mindset. The best traders I've find were guys I had to think with thought more and two dimensions. So if you thought in three dimensions, you could outthink you, you could outsmart yourself way too much. The what else than oh, but and if you're in one dimension, you're just done at the IQ level to function. So the two dimension that kind of took the factors of play saw what the trend was, took it at face value, didn't overthink it, went with it and wasn't too much, had enough risk appetite, but wasn't too much of a cowboy, I guess would be the perfect trader they saw. The worst. Describing my dogs. Yes, the worst traders I saw were oftentimes the smartest people. Really? Yeah. Because they just overthink. So we're thinking way over trade it, you ever think it. You're always looking at the heroes looking at that. But this and that and I have all this for me, you're you the now sprouts is and or talking yourself out of a good trade. How did it change after the financial crisis? We were egregiously over regulated from all from all sides. Did that make market safer for retail investors? I don't think so. Because the picture you painted over the last hour and a half is not one of like impregnable safety. No, we just say that. I mean, there's obviously a lot of unintended consequences from the excess regulation. But it just, you know, it's funny. I'm on Wall Street. I think we were actually at the vanguard of hyper regulation, hyper monitoring. I mean, they were monitoring every blumbert chat every email, every phone call, everything was taped. Then they ran algos against it for keywords. You just like way more scrutiny and everything. You lived in a panoptic home before everyone else. Yeah, I did. And I think there's also, you know, a lot of going back to the global financial crisis such as San Momo in this country in a lot of ways because it actually we made this deal with the devil. And I, you know, I, I'm a beneficiary of the bailout. I worked at a big bank that got bailed out. And, and I make no, I won't, I'll never deny that. But in doing so, we, we led the Trojan horse in and we married the government effectively. And we, they came in and they basically wrote our policies. They wrote our policies for us and from HR policies to recruiting policies to uh, you know, all the regulation and the stuff that I saw from a distance in terms of sort of arbitrary, uh, finding, uh, for violations was kind of gangster-like. And I saw a lot of good people sort of thrown on the funeral pyre, sacrifice, um, just, just tossed out like, oh, let's, you know, this guy, this guy was in violation. These guys weren't, but they were on the same Bloomberg chat. So let's, let's give like 10 bodies. Everyone's fired and once career is over. It was, it was a, that was a bad, that was a bad time. It was a bad time. And so everyone started trading scared. People tried to trade and scared and it lost the, the joy and it lost the, but famously none of the, you know, the CEO, the executive level seemed pretty insulated from punishment. Yes. Um, you know, if I were going to give, if I were going to give a more sort of generous take on it, you know, the CEO's really didn't have much of a choice in some regards. like, look, here's the deal. You could keep your job and keep making 25 million hours a year. Or if you agree to this fine for mortgage backsecurities or guy, whatever live or rigging or whatever it is, this, this arbitrary number, you could keep your job and you can keep your salary or you can get fired in the next year. I will agree to it. So like, and they kept it a full and they had to be, they had to be in good stead with the government or the fines and the regulation would just come and come and come. But once you get bailed out, once you actually bail out, they own you and that's what happened. I don't always says what happened. They made the deal. Yeah. And it was like the tobacco companies, right? Like they kept it back a company's alive just long enough to keep bleeding them for fees. Like, then they figured out there was just, there was money there to, to take and they just kept coming back about. Yeah. And the country did not get healthier. Life expectancy went down. And if I can just be honest, I don't think the quality of the cigarettes improved at all. I'm serious. If you smoke a sort of pre settlement, Marlboro Red, not that they exist anymore or a current one. It's like, it's not even the same product. I was a pre settlement guy. quit. Yeah. Me too. I'm just, I'm just saying I've heard that. So no, I don't really think anyone won except for politicians. Right. I don't think I want a lung cancer. Yeah. Well, a lot of nice new regulatory buildings were built. And I think also one of the great stories that hasn't really been, maybe this was for you. One of the great stories that should be investigated is where did the proceeds from all those post GSC fines go? Because I saw some stuff in or around the time, those kind of staggering as to where it went. And obviously it went back into building more of the regulatory bodies, like more SCC rig or whatever. But I think some of the money flowed to some very specific political organizations. There's no question about it. It went to the swamp. Meanwhile, the whole pretext for this is justification for doing this was I lived here then. I did some of my house that year. So I was a victim of all this too, even though I never participated in it. But I lost my job along with a lot of other people. And because the economy contracted, so people lost their jobs, including those with four children. But the justification was, which I wasn't against, it was like these people are totally reckless. Like they're completely reckless. Like what is a mortgage, mortgage back security? What's their derivative? And like no one outside your world ever heard of any of that. I was like, I thought when I signed up for a mortgage, like the bank I signed with held the mortgage, like we had no idea they sold the mortgage. Like most people didn't know. Again, there's a lot of ignorance, including in my house, about the stuff. And so they did was like, this is crazy. And we need to rein it in. You've just described a quote, gamificate gamification. Yeah. Well, markets that it's like, that doesn't seem like a decrease in recklessness. What actually reminds me something for the part of the previous conversation, which is, you know, people say you never know when you're in a bubble until it's over. Yeah. And that's entirely incorrect. I mean, I've been through a bunch we all know. Like we all sell. Yeah. We just didn't know what was going to end. I mean, like you mean, exam people were talking about the bubble in 2005. No, if you fought it in 2005, you were out of a job pretty quickly. Like it went on for a long time. I could tell you the reason I want to bring it up is again, the perilous today is in, you know, so in 2007, I'd been on trade and bonds for whatever 13, 14 years. So not the smartest guy, not the most cool, Dave guy, but been around enough to trade enough stuff to understand kind of how stuff works. And all this stuff they're coming through with like CDO squared, it's below the, in like, synthetic this and that like, I didn't really understand it. I didn't have to trade it, but like, I didn't really understand it. I don't really want to get into it because I didn't need to. But it's just, it's thinking if, if I'm already in the whatever percent of financial experts, just by nature of where I sit every day and it doesn't smell right to me. Yeah, something's not right. And you trade Nigerian death. Right. Right. Right. Right. So I mean, I'm taking credit to rivers on Bulgarian stuff. So I like, yeah, yes, but you're saying you're doing it as a a Magaria, but you're like, this is to. Yeah. I just like, how many acronyms also I'm just substantially reversed any acronym. And then when you take the acronym and square, you know, you're in trouble. But, but then this, this latest go around the last couple months with all this circular financing and hype with all the AI companies. And every day, you know, somebody's buying chips from somebody who's going to lend the money to buy the chips to invest in the scale or who's going to do this like for every day, four companies or you're like, you know, I suppose I could figure that out if I sat down and really tried to, but it gives me a headache just even thinking about it. And clearly it smacks of some kind of it smacks of desperation or something. That's just my gut. It's just having, you know, the sniff haven't been around a lot of times. Like, dude, if it doesn't smell right, it doesn't, it doesn't put it in your mouth. Right. Right. So you remember thinking like, what about the tech bubble in 99 2000? Did you think, oh, I got blown out, personal training trying to short that like the fall of 99. I don't know about other people. Everybody. Yeah. Oh, I've hilarious. I learned that I was with my wife in March of 2000 at a dinner at a lunch with a guy who's chairman of a major, major broker dealer, famous, famous broker dealer. And where she's 30 at the time never invested in anything. And we're sitting next to him. So what do you say? Oh, I've been day trading stocks. He's like, explain that. What do you mean you've been day trading? She's like, oh, yeah, just buy whatever IPOs. I just, if it comes out, I buy it. Do you remember that in 2000? On the idea of friend, everything just went out. Like, she's like, yeah, I just, I just buy it. And then I sell it. It's awesome. And I saw, I saw his eyes just go like this. And then that was like, that was like the, that was like the Joe Kennedy. She shied at the moment. And it was literally like February or something. I think it was probably within probably two years. It's when your housekeepers investing in condos in Clark County, Nevada, that you were like, I think maybe this is overheated. Just a little for real. Or you get your Uber divers like trade crypto on. Completely. Yeah. Whenever people are going hard on like, Cape Coral Florida real estate, who don't know anything about real estate, not against Cape Coral, but you know what it means? Yes. And those were the hardest hits up codes. Yeah. So you think it's pretty obvious is what you're saying. I just, it's, it feels, there are sort of like the, uh, Russian just sort of like the letter that they wrote about the Hunter Biden laptop. It has all the hallmarks of Russian disinformation. And it's all hallmarks of, uh, late stage rally. Let's say, yeah, well, you're very diplomatic. I have to say though, just like with the baseline fact that you spent your life trading emerging markets debt, I think if you're uncomfortable with something, it's fair for the rest of us being comfortable with that. You're shit. Yeah. Last question. You've, uh, been through all these bubbles and bursts and debt crises and bailouts and at the, at the end of every story is the United States or US line institutions like the IMF coming in and kind of saving the day. Right. Is that, if that's, that's a thread that runs through all these? Yeah. I've been simple term sure. I only deal in simple terms, Coleman. Um, by zoom, what happens if that happens? Who fails to bail it? Who bails the bailer? Uh, nobody. Okay. So then what happens? I don't, I don't think, I hope you bought that, uh, that agricultural land in Brazil at that point. Uh, so then what happens? I don't think we, I don't think we get to that point anytime soon. Um, as you just theoretically, as we've mentioned before, you know, there is no, there's no alternative right now, right? Um, people still as bad as it get in the States, like we're still the cleanest dirty shirt in the pile for the time being, right? We still have this free and open markets where capital flows and gets treated well. There's time. There's still time to course correct. Um, I'm not willing to go to who bails out. Who fails out the bailer? I just, I'm not willing to go there. You're not willing to go there. We'll be all right. We're still, still the United States of America and we've got a lot. I mean, this administration's got a lot of mental firepower and a lot of experience. We still got time. Coleman Church, ladies and gentlemen, thank you. Thank you so much.