The Jerogan experience. Shelley Duvall. Oh, Shelley Duvall, yeah. And she had trauma from it. To this day, she talks about the trauma she had in that movie. I was reading a story that I interview with her, which she kind of vanished. Yeah. And then they were interviewing her, and she sounded insane. Yeah. I think it pushed her over the edge. I think that movie fucked people up. Cupick was a strange guy. Yeah. Do you know who we do complex mathematics in the spare time? Really? Yeah. He's like a legitimate genius. Wow. And he would put all sorts of weird hidden meaning into all of his movies. Like a thing was never just a thing. Like a, there's a big crazy conspiracy about the shining that inside of it is all sorts of information that is, it relates to the moon land. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The room, the kid doesn't call it. It was room 127. And the moon is 127,000 miles from the earth or something. No, it's like 237. Because whatever it was. The moon is, yeah. The moon is like, I think it's room 237, right? Yeah, 237. That's the documentary on it. The moon is, well, it depends on what time of the year and where, but it's between 237 and 265,000 miles away. Well, and they say that he directed the fake movie about the fake moon landing. Well, that's the, that's the big conspiracy theory. What is the thing in the, the, the circled with the Jack Nicholson picture there? Oh, there's the, the coffee. Was it say the coffee, it might be the coffee. The calimate. The calimate? What does that mean? What does the calimate? And then the other one, you go up, scroll up. You see the circles, there's rockets. Uh-huh. On the wall. Uh-huh. Sort of, that is, that is, that is, yeah. Strange. Yeah, there's, but he was into weird shit. It was, I mean, he was a legitimate genius. Yeah. Like, eyes wide shut. That's another fucking strange movie. He had a lot of strange movies, man. Yeah, he did. What did he do? Clockwork Orange? Is that him? Yeah. That was Cuba's his tag. So, the full metal jacket documentary, that whole thing they shot London. Really? Because he didn't want, he wouldn't leave his home. Really? So they made, like the second half of the movie is supposed to be in Vietnam. I'm like, some area in part of England. Really? Yeah. Wow. He wouldn't leave London fuck you. I'm staying here. But this movie is supposed to be in the middle of the jungle. Yeah. Well, it's right here. Here's the jungle. Fuck off. Damn. He did some wild ass fucking movies. Yeah, they did. 2001. The conspiracy theory about him directing the moon landing was that he was doing it at the same time he was doing 2001. So because he was faking this space movie, 2001, a space odyssey, that they used him to fake the moon landing footage. There's a fake documentary, not a real documentary, but a fake, like a mockumentary, where he's admitting and people are talking about. Yeah. They've seen that one? No, but that makes sense. A lot of people are like, dude, you didn't even know there's an actual real interview with him where he admits that he faked the moon landing. But it's not. Yeah. It's fake, but it's... Were you ever on the, uh, in the camp of the moon landing was fake? For years. Yeah. It's one of my favorite all time conspiracies because it's so strange that we never went back. I abandoned it because I don't know anything about astrophysics or space travel or any of that stuff. And the people that do think it's real. So I'm like, okay, well, most likely... They think the landing really happened. Yeah. But there's so many weird things to it. There's so many. There's so many weird things with the photographs. And there's like intersecting shadows that indicate different light sources. There's all sorts of weird... Black waving. Yeah, that's weird shit, man. There's a lot of weird shit. The fact that, uh, this is the only time in human history that something is not cheaper, easier and faster to replicate than was in 1969. She 1969, 1972, there was seven trips, six successful, where they went to the moon and back. And, uh, every space flight since then has been like near Earth orbit. Mm-hmm. Everything is like, you know, just a few miles up. It's not... They don't go like they did that. I mean, I think everything since then is like 300 miles. Every human travel, you know, like space shuttles and stuff like that. They never go that far. Yeah. They never go into deep space and come back. The only time they came back was during the moon landings in the 60s. When they were lying about everything. Yeah. But the thing is like Nixon was president back then. It was like, it's so romantic. Bombing Cambodia. Yeah. It's so romantic to think that they faked it. Also, here's another reason. If you watch the post flight press conference. And again, I'm not saying that this is what this is actually what's happening, but it seems completely like their full of shit. When they come back, it seems like they're lying and they're nervous and they ask them about the stars and again, I'm not on the camp that they faked it. There was, you know, Buzz Aldrin, Neil Armstrong and Michael Collins and Michael Collins, they asked him about stars and in the press conference, he's like, I don't recall seeing stars. Problem with that is like Michael Collins never left the lunar module. He wasn't supposed to be one of the guys that was on the surface of the moon. He was up in the craft that was circling, you know, there's an orbit around the moon. And then later when he wrote a book about it, he talked about how magnificent the stars looked. So as inconsistencies, so the hoax people point to that, they also point to the inconsistencies of the actual movement of the astronauts on the moon. Like there's videos that make it look like they were on wires. There's videos that they're all down. Yeah, they say the fact that suit is being pulled by something weird. But again, like one last time you saw someone in one six Earth's gravity. It's just, everything's just look weird. But there's a video of them where it looks like they're on trampolines with a very strange and they're bouncing around on the surface of the moon. Like literally, you can't see their feet or they're like hidden behind equipment. They're just bouncing up in the air and you're like, it's fun. It's fun to think the Kubrick faked it all. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips. Easily, seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.