The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day Those are the only ones I know I know another shit if in is this I loot Mazel top laheim Nostro of you what's the other one? It's got a new what's that skull what's cool? Skull I don't know that Swedish German something is that a Viking one? Oh? Used your microphone fell slum I don't know say slum day. Where's that one? I wish one. Oh, I don't know that one. Yeah I don't know Yeah, no Jamie's throwing extra ones in there. There we go. What's up brother? Who are you? I'm well. How are you? You look like a business man is that right? Are you a business man? I'm trying to be one? I think you're a professional clubhouse guest. No, no, no, the thing is right The only platform that I have more followers on the new because you're only there once I think yeah one and done Yeah, it's just like podcasting for people to have a podcast Well, the interesting question is do you do you think that it has any ability to Figure out a way of killing podcasting because that's what they think they're crazy No impossible because the beautiful thing about podcasting It's your capturing a conversation and it's uninterrupted that the thing that happened with your brother Yeah, to put the nail in the coffin in that in that format. Oh, you mean the struggle session? Yes The fact that someone can come in and and kick everyone off to disagrees with them Take over the room and then they did it just because they decided what was the reason why they gave her the the option to kick Everybody out and gave her administrative power or what it whatever it is. I think she'd been historically oppressed or something. Oh That's why I guess I don't know well From what I understand the conversation before she came on was very clumsy So everybody was saying there's like that it it left an opening I see for someone like her to come and go shot the fuck up get out of here But the way she treated your brother and the way she listened to this by the way you shouldn't it'll infuriate you The way you know like they they caught they said he was taught he said he's an evolutionary biologist Yeah, and they were these these kids were like oh you're in eugenics You believe in eugenics. He's like no no no no no no no and they they basically just steamrolled them called Erase and cut them off It was it was very infuriating they didn't want to have a conversation with him They wanted to be little him they wanted him to proclaim the disanti racist and you know I've seen this movie before yeah, it's not good But it's just the fact that that can happen yeah in the platform You know it was just When when you're doing something like that when someone can come in and just kick all the other people out that they don't agree with Yeah, sure like you could just join in a conversation that sort of rolling could have left He just doesn't want to we get picked up he was trying to make sense. He was trying to express So he's trying to make sense. I know it's a problem. It's real. We got a fix there but I mean the Clubhouse thing seems a like a fun social thing to do Like I enjoyed doing it with Tim Dylan because Tim was in here with me And we were yocking it up and goofing on it and then your brother jumped in on the conversation and the wall was in the Conversation that's where it gets more interesting which is that the serendipity that's possible because normally the logistics of getting us all in one place Yes, it's it's difficult. It's expensive Nobody really is up for it because it it's probably not as high quality as a point-to-point conversation But the serendipity of saying yes, okay, I saw two people I never thought would be in the same room and then 12 other people and you know At first I think that's exciting But then the danger of it is that they're gonna burn through the novelty effects you're gonna have seen all these people collide Well, maybe when there's an you know, it's almost like chess moves right like even though You know how the pieces move, but there's an insane number of possibilities that could take place true But I do think there's a weird way in which you're always in danger of setting up too many different ways in The same basic source that's the value and so you know you can say okay, I've got a website. I've got a sub stack I've got a podcast. I've got a book How many ideas do you have I mean that's that's kind of issue of one of the things that I think Makes you dominant is that you have an insane breath and most people are really not that capable of going outside of a few issues Well, I'm not capable of it either. I'm just curious I'm not scared. Yeah, not scared of having conversations that are way over my head. I just think the clubhouse thing They've got to work out that What happened like they've got to work that out so that doesn't happen that the flaw is In letting someone come in and then kicking other people out so they can't communicate anymore You could do that the moderator privilege there is something that you shouldn't give out like candy because that's what opens it up But here's the thing why would you want to give out Modular we why doesn't mean but why doesn't anybody want to be the moderator because they're not good It's horrible. There's an actual status and caste system of people who need more going on in their lives like I was called up on stage I was made a moderator and you realize that You know for people whose lives have gone online due to COVID Meaning has been scarce and so in a weird way this is what's proxying for meaning the human mind will just attach meaning to any kind of distinction Like for a lot of comics it's replaced performing So they're not going up at night, but they're going into clubhouse every night and leave jail tomorrow for example It's really really active and you know what I told her was pioneer something new Don't try to do something old figure out what this new thing is better at and be the first well She has a lot of people on that right? Yeah a lot a lot more than she has on the other platforms I think she's she's doing really well and she's doing a lot of stuff and what I hope is that You know she'll pioneer something genuinely like for example radio drama was dying when I was a kid There was the CBS radio mystery hour Something we used to listen to that when we drive up to nice to love those. Yeah, they were cool right and that's gone And I was a bunch of people acting out voices E.G. Marshall was the host of those things and it was like a throwback to awesome Well, and that stuff wouldn't it be cool to get some retro thing? Because the idea behind clubhouse is to take discord and subtract functionality from it And that's the product it's less it's got less functionality than discord and that causes you to say okay I can't text you how am I gonna work around all these constraints and it's like you know Great wine is only supposedly grown when you frustrate the vines Really? Yeah, that's what I that's what I hear How's not work how they frustrate the minds that if you give if you give the vines perfect soil and climate and all this stuff They'll produce much fruitier stuff and it won't be Perfectly optimized for fermenting into wine really? Look there's a lot of BS and wine so I don't want to say 100% but this is definitely something you'll hear have you seen the documentary sour grapes No, oh my god. Tell me you have to watch it Are you wine no? I like wine. I actually love wine. I don't know a fucking damn thing about it I just go that's good and I take pictures of it on my phone when I like it and then I buy that wine later I don't know what the fuck's going on As you know there's really nobody does almost nobody that's what the documentary is about Okay, documentary is amazing and it's about this guy who got in with all these real rich wine connoisseurs Yeah, including a friend of mine who's in the film. Oh, no. Yes Yeah, and this guy Realized that there is only a limited amount of rare wine like 1974 blah blah right So this dude decides he is going to fake this wine and so he makes these labels He and apparently this gentleman who's featured in this film who want to get arrested and he's in jail right now in Colorado And apparently they're they're detaining it there they're about to deport him because he's about to get out of jail They're gonna deport him back to Indonesia, which is where he's from but he I think it's Indonesia He had an amazing palette. He was a like he was a real legitimate wine collector And then somewhere along the line He realized that buying and selling wine was good because he was kind of quartering the market on a lot of wines He's spending a ton of money. He realized you know what I can fake these wines. I understand what these wines are So he started mixing wines together and he developed all these formulas I had a mix like cheaper wines and he would sell them as like these Super rare, you know 1970 whatever wines But where he fucked up is spoiler alert one of the Koch brothers bought like four million dollars with a wine from them and one of his friends Started he had a friend who's an investigator of wine apparently. That's a thing wine investigate guy who really understands wine was telling him You know like he bought bottles from Thomas Jefferson. Oh, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah from the 1700s. It's Chateau de Kem of Jefferson. I think is still drinkable Really well, there's this one particular kind of sot turn which comes from the semi-owned grape in the Bordeaux region or And it's made from this noble rot So you get the grapes to sort of have this disease that concentrates the sugar and I believe that Chateau de Kem is like Weirdly drinkable beyond Hundreds of years. Yeah crazy. Wow. That's wild because this guy just the Koch brother He just had this stuff and was just had it on display I mean he has this immense one yeah, yeah, fucking untold amounts money. What do you do with that money, right? He just has an insane wine collection millions of millions of dollars but he has four million dollars of fake wine and He realized it as they were going through his collection like that there was magnums from a year where they didn't make magnums and this guy starts going over the and then what happened was a gentlemen from France got involved France I should say he got involved and He is an actual wine maker and his wine was being plagiarized he was they were faking his wine and so he came in and saw the counterfeit wines and even in the auctions Like the like he was pointing out in the auction booklet like these are fake wines Like we did not have this wine in this year though the label is incorrect This is incorrect and then you know There were some misspellings on some of the labels and this guy made fucking Millions of dollars in wine and sold thousands and thousands of bottles and so Initially they thought he was doing it all himself in his apartment But then when they realized the sheer volume of the fake wine this guy sold and put out there that there had to be other people involved But he was the only one that went down for it. They think maybe his brothers in Indonesia were also involved in the scheme somehow But they they feel like there's thousands and thousands of bottles of this stuff still in circulation and still being sold There was an auction that was they were selling this guy's wine bleaves names Rudy They were selling his wines At a Christie's auction like long after he had been exposed and so these guys on these You know these wine connoisseur email list or they're you know emailing each other back and forth and hey like Rudy's wines Or being sold here is his bullshit This is fake and then they have these experts come in and test this stuff But what's crazy is one guy in the film and one is like this is one of the real bottles that Rudy sold me because Rudy was selling real wine Right before he started selling bullshit wine It's like this is one of the real bottles like try and the guy tries it He's like oh yeah, this is really good and then another guy gets a hold of goes When did you open this and he goes? a couple hours ago. He's like He tasted he goes this is bullshit. This is not real because this doesn't have the vivacity It doesn't have the flavor. This is not I've tasted this one. This is not the one because apparently and I don't understand this at all Right the palette of a wine connoisseur is this thing where they can literally like you can give them Like a flight of wines and they can tell you this is a James Bond teach your eyes from blah blah and I don't again I'm so out of my wheelhouse here. I think I like Buffalo Trace whiskey. I'm with you there. That's what I'm saying I know this tastes good. Yeah, you know, but okay, well first of all should we try to drink this in the weird wine way No Now this is American. We don't fuck around here. It's got a buffalo with testicles on the label. So I look at that right there Like that. Yes, this is older than America by the way, you know those his company Buffalo Trace they started making whiskey in 1773 It's literally three years old on America itself So the thing that I did not understand I think about wine is that if you're trying to taste your wine You can't possibly get at what's this high-end stuff because it's only your nose That can determine that these differences that nobody's got enough stuff going on in their tongue to tell great wine So you've got this thing called the retro nasal passage in the back of your mouth Congular graft jammy retro nasal passage. Yeah, where do we pull this graphic? And so this whole thing about burbling where you turn your mouth into a bong, right? Yeah, let's do it. How you do it? And they smell it well you start you're getting this fountain with air coming up and then you're opening the back of your Hopefully your retrin nasal passage you do get a little bit of a smell right and you and that's where the magic happens So the weird thing is somebody buys really expensive wine and then they try to taste it Yeah, there we go. There we go. That's for beer Well, it's for anything. I know but once you get interesting once you get addicted to Smell right yeah, maybe that's like dudes are in a smelling feet like that's what's going on You're not trapping me in that kind of recession. No, we had we had a guy a kill Tony Okay, he was really in the feet. He was fucking hilarious. We you there Jamie that night It was a kill Tony recently Antons and this this kid went up. He was really funny. He was a funny comic But he was really funny. He was talking about how he's really in a girl's feet It was like completely unapologetic And he was hilarious and he was just talking about how he likes to smell girls feet Everybody else's attraction is weird and whatever your thing is. It's like I don't know. I'm just into that Well, it was funny I mean it was definitely weird because it's unusual. Yeah, someone would be it's I don't think it's unusual That guys are in a feet I think it's a lot more usual than you think but I think what is unusual is that he was so Open about expressing the fact that he was in defeat in front of a group of strangers Yeah, in a one-minute set on kill Tony because kill do you know how kill Tony works? Not really kill Tony is The foundation it was one of the foundations in in in Los Angeles And I think it's gonna be the foundation in Austin of the open mic community. Okay, because it gives a comic one minute The Tony has Tony Hinchcliffe developed a show and him and Brian Red Band They do it together and Tony has a hat they shake the hat up and they were a bucket They reach in the bucket and they pull out a name Random and then that person doesn't know if they're gonna perform or not There's maybe 30 people that throw their names in and maybe five get to perform and Tony pulls that name out Calls the guy or girl or non-binary folk and they come running onto the stage and they do one minute of stand-up Got it and this guy did one minute stand-up about how he gets hard on because of feet and it was just hilarious But he was talking about the smell of feet and the girl got on stage and took her shoe off and he smelled her foot It was just it was preposterous. Okay, but it's it gives these comics an opportunity to like On that at that night I think was me and Adam e get that night, but it's like Donnell wrongs has been on You know like you name Dom Irares of a favorite guest like great comics around it all the time So there's a professional guest that sits there and talks to the comics the comic does a set and then we'll ask them I've done a bunch of times we'll ask them questions. Yeah, like how long you been doing comedy like what would where'd you start? You know what town just start out in and then they tell what are you doing now for money and you know They've great stories and it's it's fun because you get a chance to see the beginnings and some of those comics have gone on Like Ali Makovsky who is open up for me and fucking arenas She started out on kill Tony. Okay. Yeah, it's slow It's like you could develop a legitimate professional career from this, but it's like a really good path for These amateurs to get like one minute of stage time so they hone this one minute Hoping they're gonna get called onto the stage and usually like if you're a halfway decent comic and you've been doing it You know six months a year. You probably have a minute You probably have a minute where you could get up there and rock it for a minute and when they some of them are terrible But some of them are really funny some of them would say this way to get people opened up almost instantly with no four-point To go on yeah, yeah, you know, there's no way, you know, you have to say it's There's a different way for you Yeah, it would be for Jamie than it would be for me everybody's I've seen it be different for you on different nights Yeah, it's always different. I always you gotta it's just like it's a living thing the audience is a living thing It depends entirely upon what's happened before you went on stage It depends entirely on what time and night it is, you know, there's a lot going on I'm always a little freaked out when I see you at the store because I Don't associate Like I got to know you before I ever got to see you be funny in front of a crowd Mm-hmm And it was just like holy shit you can do that, you know, and it's a different persona Like you can clearly see that a different mind has clicked it. It's like the I know Kung Fu moment It is like that right and it's like if you saw me do Kung Fu you'd think that too I don't really know any kind of food, but you know it's uh It's a thing, you know you got to know how to do it then you've got to when you do it you got to treat that audience like You know you got to bring the good shit. You got to come with a good good jokes It's like when I saw Steve sick all playing blues guitar Like what is he good? He I don't want to say anything negative, but I've seen parts of it that have been really really pretty good. Yeah I don't know. I mean I'm I'm I'm trying to figure out what happened to the guitar and what happened to Covid Changing the world of guitar because everybody Nobody changed the world of guitar lots of people had time on their hands Oh, they're just practically so and then and and the amps have gotten wildly better in the last year I bought a a modeling amp for 250 bucks that changed my life from positive grid called the spark amp We're talking about with Jamie and it is a replica of like all the gear that real guys have that Hobvious like don't even know what it is. I can play with it and it'll model all of these setups So suddenly like I'm smarter and then you know, that's weird thing. I was telling Jamie You see this hat have been developed long and advanced. It's been over covid. Yes, but I think a 250 dollar Item that just blows your mind may be relatively new and this I think there's one coming from Oh with neural DSP so that there's like competing and Jamie was talking about the helix So there's like this collection of these things and I hadn't spent $300 on my rig for 30 years or something and I did this and suddenly A little bit more magic was like Available to me and then I put a brief clip of myself playing on Instagram And I got contacted by like some of the greatest guitars in the effing world when when toastin a bossy and Joe Robinson and Ryan Roxy of it was guitars for like Alex Alice Cooper contact you and they're like This is you jamming. We give me some of this give me some of this Jamie You jam into Glenn back is that what says That's pretty fucking good and you're doing that without a pick with you. I think I if there's another one The look yeah that one That one I didn't know you were supposed to yeah, you that was the one that did it. I think Earlier supposed to use a pig. I didn't know You Basically playing air guitar with a real guitar. That's really good dude Well, that's that's the amp and the fact that somebody set up my strat What do you mean but that you didn't know you're supposed to play with dude? I don't know what I'm doing. I don't know what I'm doing and I don't know what I'm doing. I don't know what I'm doing. I do this I hang out in a room alone. It's sort of dark and lonely, but yeah, why did you learn this? Though this is part of the thing I do a bunch of things that I did I don't do with other people, right? I just learned shit on right. But when did you learn this? How long ago? I don't even know some of it in the last year But but when did you start playing guitar you being quiet? No, I don't have had a good. I don't like it I'm gonna call you out on this. Okay very in car. I've had a guitar since I was I don't know weighing okay, yeah playing forever, but your self-taught but yeah And then you have these like plateaus where suddenly you take your head off your ass well, the tricks with self-taught You know almost all of the really great. Steve. We have on I believe a self-taught. Albert King with self-taught Yeah, it's all of these guys were like on the next level Where are they gonna learn it from you know who creates a Danny Gatton or a Roy? You can't nobody knows. I don't know who those guys are, but I'll trust you to blow your mind. Willy I Want to out Gary learn Gary Clark Jr Gary Clark Jr. Psycho. What does it say? self-taught bitch So I can't do that stuff, but the point that I'm starting to come to is I realize when Different communities behave differently. They're angry jealous communities and they're open-hearted We're glad to have you on board communities and I could not believe the quality of the people who reached out to me to give me Encouragement for whatever stupid and this thing. I don't know how to hold a pick. I don't know how to do this stuff with a pick I just can't I think as long as the sound is good. They don't care is that correct I think more than that. I think that the idea is that there's this one of us thing like Okay, I can see that he's spent time in the trenches trying to figure out what we do and most people don't care and he does you know, and so the idea is Yeah, I did a guitar podcast recently and I just expected this other thing Which is like what do you mean by you do the a guitar podcast Ryan? Roxy for Alice Cooper says what I want you on the podcast as a fellow good His yeah, so like Joe satryani, you know was sitting in that chair and then here I am saying like Wow well, but in part when people are like fans of I Mean you do comedy you do acting you do jujitsu you do so many different things that You know that there's some things that you don't do at the same level as other things Yeah, for people see that you're like taking an interest like if I found out that you were you know a Road racing but you know bicycle or something like that people would be like wow Joe Joe's one of us They're happy to have you on board. I feel it you said. Yeah. Yeah especially like weird esoteric things You know weird like mandolin for example whenever I do something on mandolin You know I have all these people Oh, I'm one of those people too. I haven't mandolin. You know it's probably pretty rare right? I'm gonna play in mandolin. I don't know it it was it was competitive with the guitar in the late 1800s I think and then the guitar sort of just blew it out of the water But there's a new thing called octave mandolin which is down an entire octave So it doesn't have that kind of really bright Tinney sound it's I'm gonna pursue the octave mandolin and see whether Is there any benefit in the kid learning how to play the recorder? It seems like they're just fucking with those kids when they give them a recorder Well, look there's some cool stuff from like tell them on if you're really into it I bet like no one plays professional recorder, right? Can you get chicks with a recorder? I don't know. No, you can you you would get those chicks anyway. Well, you know the scene with blue sheet and the guitar. Yes I can't You have to be very careful what you think. I know we all do love that scene. It's so real. It's so real. Sorry Yeah, it's so real. I've been in a party where a guy bust out a guitar and starts singing You know like oh my god. Who are you? What have you done? Well, what are the skills that you would want to acquire at this set? I think music would be really interesting to learn either play the piano or play the guitar I just don't have the time. Yeah, I don't have the time. I don't have the time to do the things that I already do You know how about hyper accelerating one of those things like getting somebody who understands your brain because you're a great learner I'm good at listening. Yeah. I look You'll be good at his mindset a lot. Yeah. Well, I think it's helpful I do a lot of things from scratch. You know like I Think that's how I got good at jujitsu is listening I didn't get good at jujitsu because I figured it out myself I get good because my friend Eddie Eddie Bravo was a great coach and and mine's original instructor Jean-Jacques My child. I was a great coach. I just listen to them. What made Eddie a great jujitsu intellectual Eddie thinks way outside the box way way way outside the box and he's just real creative You know because he's a he's a musician like that's that's what he does outside of You know, yeah, he's on comedy too He actually he was always really funny and I tried to get him to do comedy like way back in the day And he did a few open mics, but it was just too harrowing for him But then when he started doing a lot of seminars and got really comfortable teaching because he Became a jujitsu instructor and started teaching for a living Then he got much more comfortable in front of large groups of people and then he started doing stand-up again Within the last five or six with five years or so something like that and then he's very funny He's just a funny guy like me and him hang out. We fucking laugh so hard He's like other than Joey Diaz. I probably laugh harder with Eddie Bravo than anybody that I know but he's just He thinks different than people and sometimes it's a problem He starts like entertaining some ideas that are completely preposterous And he goes deep with them because he's figured out a way with jujitsu to take ideas that a lot of people didn't think were good And figured out a way to tap people out with those ideas Like he took some ideas and he said no you just kind of like like for instance It's a perfect example like there's certain kicks that If you just showed someone it they would say well, that's not practical You're not gonna be able to do that the problem is you just have it reached a proficiency Like maybe like a Stephen Wonderboard Thompson or something like that where it will become practical Like a specific kick is like a spinning wheel kick. It's a wild cool looking kick looks great in a Bruce Lee, right? Wonderboy Thompson. He's a famous mixed martial arts fighter He pulls that off in fights Because he's a 57-0 kick boxer and one of the best strikers It's ever competed in mixed martial arts. So his proficiency in striking is so elite that he can do things that if you just taught Some people would say That's impractical that'll never work in a fight But it will work in a fight if you reach the highest level of proficiency and Eddie had that same mindset with jujitsu techniques And he figured out a way to make some techniques that a lot of people thought were impractical not just possible but really Very repeatable yes not just repeatable but high percentage Like especially if you If someone is in a situation where they don't understand what's happening So they don't understand what's in danger or where the counters are or where you know where you're trapped He's just real creative You know, but again, I like you get some tripped up like he starts believing some wacky ship But then he gets out of it. He'll let things go after a while But you know he it's because he entertains ideas and he'll because he doesn't trust mainstream thought well so mainstream thought whether it's in jujitsu or mainstream thought whether it's in economics or whatever We all struggling with this a little bit like there's no part of the mainstream that looks at all credible to me anymore Well, it's Jujitsu or mainstream thought whether it's in economics or whatever. Are we all struggling with this a little bit? Like there's no part of the mainstream that looks at all credible to me anymore. Well, it's real wacky now, right? And here's a here's a wacky one where the New York Times is they they're debunking this idea that the Wuhan lab may have been the source of COVID when they're like when all these different people are talking about it. They've been on this forever. We have been on it forever. What it's extraordinary is the the New York Times is still saying debunk claims with no evidence whatsoever. You know, Sogger and Jettie from the rising in the hill had this whole piece about it. It was a I love what they're doing. They're the best. They're the best. He's got two channels. Have you been on either? Well, I've only had him on here and crystal together. But what I like about what you guys did right at the beginning of that where they explained what happens. I didn't mean to catch up. What happens in the cycle when your team wins and your team loses and how they've both broken out of that and they've thrown that away. Yeah, that was there were 10 minutes that I needed to hear that you I thought you broke new three of you guys broke really new ground. There what we need. There's a reasonable person on the left and a reasonable person on the right and they're both committed to honesty above all, right? They might have different philosophical coming together. I think crystal is coming towards Sogger because she's seeing the right on the left. Yes. What my hope is is that she's going to be a credible progressive who's rejecting all this nonsense progressivism. Yeah, I think I think you're right. She's very smart and so is he and the two of them together wonderful. What were you going to say before I catch up? What I was going to say is they were talking about how the New York Times is talking about this deep. I forget who they were quoting who was entertaining this idea. That was the CDC guy that he was entertaining this idea this this debunked idea of this emanating from a lab, but it's not debunked. Not only is it not debunked. It's more possible than ever, but the problem is the idea was originally associated with Donald Trump. So these motherfuckers at the New York Times still have it in their head that they can't admit. I don't know that that's what's going on. What do you think it is? Well, that what they do, it's a weird move. We should tell people what exactly what we're saying. Okay, the former head of the CDC is saying that it's more probable than not. He's not saying it's absolute. He's saying it's more probable than not than it escaped from a lab. Right. And he details it and he actually predates it. He goes pre, he goes like deep into September and October, he believes it might have emanated around that time, start spreading. The reason why is, and it all makes total sense. This is a very unusual laboratory. The laboratory had been cited in 2018 for safety protocol violations. The laboratory works on the exact same kinds of coronaviruses that cause this world. Why pandemic? On bats. They work on bat. Yep. Coronaviruses. And this is one of two level four labs that are in this area. So this whole thing is so, it's so much more likely that it emanated from the lab. But the problem is the narrative was Donald Trump is racist. Donald Trump calls it the China virus. Donald Trump says it came from a lab. It can't have come from a lab because Donald Trump's always wrong. That's one possibility. I'm worried about something beyond that. What do you worried about? The way that they make this move is that they synonymize the lab leak hypothesis with a synthetic virus engineered from scratch. So in other words, the idea of like maybe somebody growing horseshoe back coronavirus in human lung tissue to accelerate natural selection. Cause like we don't know how to engineer it. But if you let natural selection engineer it, you can accelerate that. Right. So instead of saying we don't know what to make of accelerated natural selection in a lab leaking, they try to make this move, which is like, you know, there's no sign that this was engineered in a lab. You know, like, okay, we changed what the hypothesis is in order to say what you're saying to protect your future credibility. And the thing that I'm really freaking out about you've been talking about it, Brett's been talking about. I've been talking about all sorts of people have been talking about this one for a year. I increasingly think that none of these organizations think that they owe us any kind of truth that when they get caught, it's just like, yeah, of course we had to say that. You know what? Yeah. You know, like this time magazine article about of course we fortified the election. You what? Oh yeah, we fortified it. Oh, I, yeah, Trump was right about a conspiracy. Like in the who they're quoting that who were they quoting that said they they fortified the election. There was apparently some entire group under one guy with hundreds of activists who told their people don't riot in the streets have a dance party instead. I would highly recommend it's time magazine. I read the I read the the blurb about the fortifying. And I was like, hmm, that's a disturbing quote. But what does it mean? What do they try? What they're the claim of the article is we went right up to the door, heavily with the election. But all we cared about was free and fair. And we had a huge conspiracy. So Donald Trump wasn't wrong. There was a huge conspiracy. But we are so committed to democracy that even though we hate Donald Trump with the passion that you know won't let go of 24 seven, we still would never do anything against the election. The problem is with a guy like Trump, you can almost justify some with that's what I said. I said, if you claim that you're you have to fight all enemies foreign and domestic and you claim that he's a Russian asset, you're pretty much saying that you have to do something drastic. Yeah. And so the number of things that people claim is what the problem is because they're not all compatible. And what I'm trying to get it more broadly is over and over, I see the same move, which is denied and I deny we get caught. Yeah, limited hangout. Yeah, we did that shit. That's what the kind of stuff we do because we have to do it. But I don't think they're saying they got caught. I think they're saying that what we did was make sure the election was fair. It was I think the concept of a limited hangout where you know that something is too big to hold back. So you push a part of it into the public, not all of it that the limited. And you let the public think, okay, well, now you know the truth and it stops there. And then they stop asking questions because they've got a new toy to play with. Have you been paying attention to the border crisis shit? Where it's not bad when Democrats do it. It's not bad when Democrats do it and it's even worse than when Trump was doing it, but it's still not bad. It's bad. I don't know how to be a logical Democrat anymore. Yeah, I don't know how to do it either. I don't like politically homeless. I'm politically homeless now. And these people have done it because it's a low IQ movement or it's a high, it's a low integrity movement or it's a low IQ movement. It can't be high IQ high integrity. You and I had a conversation on this very podcast and I said that I would vote for Trump before I would vote for Biden. I remember. And people got mad at me. I didn't wind up voting for either one. I voted for Joe Jorgensen because I'm like, this is almost like a protest vote. But I did the same. But my point was exactly what we're experiencing right now. The guy does press conferences and they're like something out of a fucking macabre movie. I feel like I'm terrified. It's like grandpa is at the wheel. And he's not on his medication. This is nuts, man. It's nuts here. And then now they're calling it, they're not calling it the Biden administration anymore. They're calling it the Biden Harris administration, which to me is like letting you know that there's only a matter of time before it's pressing. this kid in Florida. I'm at some, you know, didn't say caretaker president. But, you know, I'm just sort of here to warm the seat. You're the future. You're just thinking like, okay, you're the oldest president in the American history by a long shot. Why do we need a transition? Oh, transition. I'm a transition thing. Bernie's older than him, right? Jimmy Carter still in the play in the game. Jimmy Carter is still in the game because you could do a second term. Yeah. He's only a thousand years old. He just got over to me. Just, I'm hoping that I'm joking. I hope so. But Bernie is lucid. It's my point. I believe Bernie is at least Biden's age. My correct or is he older? Older. He's older. But very lucid. Yeah. When he talks, he talks clearly and, you know, and apparently he said he's going to run again, which is kind of crazy. So he's going to, what is he going to do? Like, how is that going to work? Is he going to go independent? Why can't we have anyone younger than us? Well, I could vote for Tulsi. Yes, I could vote for Tulsi. You know who I think has a shot is the Governor of Florida. Okay. I think he has a shot. I really do. Maybe this is going to depress me too much. Maybe it will. I mean, I don't know what you have to do to run the country correctly. What you can't do is what Trump did is is say, fuck you to the people that don't agree with you. He's, he didn't unite people. He was like, I'm doing it and I'm kicking ass and you're coming with me. And I was like, yeah, all the Trumpsters will like, yeah, but everybody else is like, ah, this motherfucker. He, he riled them up. He made them angry. He made them furious. I understand, but we can't have any solution that could work. So we have to select from this menu of the unworkable people. Well, I don't know if that's necessarily true. It's just what we have at the moment. It's like you go to a restaurant and you're like, well, all they ever have is hamburger. Well, that's just what's on the menu currently. Like, you know, another manager could take over this restaurant and they could expand the menu. I was in Cambridge, Massachusetts from almost 20 years and there was cafe Algiers and had soup of the day. And we always used to ask because every single day for 20 years was lentil soup. Every day, every day was soup of the day was lentil soup. Well, Cambridge is a mess. Really? Yeah. Can you have a crazy place? Yeah. You're from Massachusetts? Yeah. He's two catch rising stars. Oh, right. That was like the weirdest place to perform. It's like that was the beginning of the PC movement. It was like the PC movement in the 80s was like the first morning shots of wokeness. What we're experiencing now. Actually, if you go back to Clint Eastwood in one of the dirty Harry movies, he's, it's a really interesting scene where he's told that he's has to approve new candidates for the force for detective and there's a female candidate. And he's not happy. But the reason he's not happy is super subtle. He asked how fast can you run the hundred? Like his thing is not about mail versus female. It's like, don't don't touch the requirements. Yeah. And well, that's how people feel about the military. They're they're they're lowering standards of military physical tests to enable more women to get involved. And the shout of shape people. I want more septag... We know ageism in the special forces. Yeah. Jesus Christ. Well, Tim Kennedy had a post about this recently because there was someone who is hired by the Pentagon for some sort of diversity role. Right. And they just let him go because they found out that he had some posts that were very questionable on social media about Hitler and Trump and then so they got rid of them. They moved into a new but the point was that there there's no Tim Kennedy's point was there's no room for the concept of diversity with trained killers. He was like, our job is killing people. But there's no room for woke politics or political correctness. Like we're there to get shit done. What are you doing? Jamie got something for us? Oh, it's like we're our job is to get shit done and kill bad people. Right. Like there's no room for diversity. You know, we don't need to send a fucking South Pacific trans man into do the job because it would make everybody look good in the newspaper. Like you get the best killer for the job and the other ones who complete the task. Well, but so the idea is no relaxation of standards. That's really hard. That's what buds it's right when they when they choose seals. It's a ruthless elimination of anybody that's going to quit and that you need that. You can't lighten that up at all because then you won't have seals. Right. You'll have some fake thing that you've created some just you know, it's like fight training or marathon running or you can't say you know, like you don't have to run the full 26 miles because you know, you're this or that you know, you got a fucking this is the standard. This is what it is. The person who wins wins. Like that's how it goes. It's like you got to get under three hours or whatever the fuck they can do it now. Isn't there a guy who could do it in two hours? Isn't there a dude? Isn't that the new the new, uh, the marathon? Yeah. Yeah. The new they made away from to break it and like with some funky shoes, right? They did a lot of work to get it happen, but it did have any's a beast on top of that. Correct. Yes. You can't lighten standards, man. Yeah. You can't discourage competition because the people that you would like to see succeed aren't succeeding. There's a place for everybody and all sorts of life is a giant spectrum of activities and disciplines and, and, and you know, and things that people are enjoying. You can't you can't decide that you don't have enough of these people in this so you're going to change what it is. It's not over like people were basketball. We're going to slow it down. Right. And what are you going to do? You know, you can't. You can't. You can't do that. You can't. You know, it's like it is what it is. Yeah. Okay. I'm with you. I'm with you. And, uh, promise, if you say that, you're a racist or sexist or a homie. You agree that we're all of those things. Pay the fine and get on with it. But we're not. I, well, you're none of those things. Right. Which is just you matter. Right. Yeah. I think that the thing that I don't want to do is I don't want to pay the tax every day. Of course, Joe, I'm not saying this. Right. I'm not saying it. What's the people that are woke? What it is is a forced compliance to an ideology and they're, they'll bully you into compliance before they will hear your terms. They will bully you into compliance. And that's what happened with your brother and clubhouse. Yeah. They bullied him into a specific conversation before they allowed him to speak. Yeah. Islam, for example, has a lot of overhead in the name of all of the compassion at the merciful and Mohammed, peace be upon, but they just write PBUH. So they only use a four characters. So they don't do the whole thing. But it's important to be able to, but what I'm trying to say is we should be able to say something like PBUH about the whole thing that we have to say every time we want to have an opinion, because it's just too expensive. The overhead is killing us. I see what you're saying. Yeah. I like all usual caveats. I all want to say is all usual caveats. And then I want to abbreviate that. So I go, I'll do a copy. And then I can get on with what I'm sorry. My hope is that the outrage Olympics will be exhausting for people. Yeah. And they'll eventually come out on the other end and realize that what's important is just be nice. Just be nice and be a good person and stop bullshitting people. How long is this taking? I mean, the late 60s were over very quickly weaponized. I know. Right. Like accusations are weaponized. And anytime something happens, you can politicize that event and use it to. But it's so effing boring. I can't stand how boring it is. But it's not just boring. It's dangerous. It's dangerous. Right. Well, this is the thing. Right. It's these twin people talk about this in terms of like combat, dangerous and boring. And it's much more dangerous than more bored you get, because mostly nothing's right. And that's the thing that I wrote an entire article about this with K-Fabe, which is that you in order to get wrestling to be exciting, you had to move away from actual wrestling. And that's the origin of professional wrestling. Right. Is that matches with last too long. And there mostly nothing would happen. And then somebody be crippled for life. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Wasn't a good business model. Yeah. It's just we're at a weird time where people are pushing narratives. And, uh, and then other people are joining in because that narrative fits along with their ideology, even though they know there's some horseshit. Right. To what that narrative is. Like a good example is, um, do you wear that 65 year old woman that got beaten up in New York City? It's a sad story. Because this guy, it's all caught on security camera. There's this guy. He's kicking. He kicks the 65 year old woman down and kicks her when she's down, stomped her and just it's terrific. And there's these three guys, at least two guys that are watching and they do nothing. They're inside the building and they're watching. Like this carjacking video where the guy is just filming and doing nothing. Yeah. But anyway, this guy is kicking this woman while these two guys watch. And then de Blasio goes on TV and he blames it on Trump. He blames it on the White House and the current administration because it was an Asian woman. But what it, what it was, was a guy who was released from prison who had stabbed his mother to death. So the guy was, he was criminally insane. And because of these liberal ideas about rehabilitation. Oh, I can't. And murder this guy had only done. I think he'd only done like 10, 10 or 12 years in jail for stabbing his mom to death. And so they let him go. And what does he do? He finds some woman and kicks the shit out of her. Was now here's where it gets weird. Did he kick the shit out of her because she was Asian because he was aware of the propaganda against Asian people that he that de Blasio believes was influenced by Donald Trump's portrayal of the virus as being the Chinese virus. I don't know. I can't. I don't know. But every time we can point his, the point is, the reason why that guy did that is because he's criminally insane. It's not because of Donald Trump. The reason why that guy did that is because he shouldn't have been on the street. Yeah. But why is he's a bad person. But they're forcing us to talk about it over and over that the more we have to debunk this stuff. It's just a fire hose of debunkable stuff. And everything takes a half an hour to explain what somebody screwed up and form. But I think it's good to talk about it because then people realize like, okay, what is why would he say that? Well, because he's a bad mayor. He's bad. He's bad at his job. You saw the video that he put out about how we have to bring back New York City with culture. Did you see that? You want to, you want to see the craziest fucking thing you've ever seen in your life? All right. Jamie, find that it's on my Twitter page. It is, it seems like a sketch from SNL back when SNL was funny. It is how as an L still funny sometimes. I shouldn't have said that. It goes for periods where it is. Yeah. Well, it's hard to do 90 minutes of live shit every week. But the point is it seems like a sketch, it seems like a parody. Here's what it seems like. It seems like a scene in a Cohen Brothers movie where a mayor is out of his fucking mind, go, go full screen and give me some volume because this is fucking completely crazy. Watch this. You're not going to believe us. So people just listening. We know recovery that brings back the life of the whole heart and the energy of this city and the ever saying could be a part of it. And we're going to do that. We're going to really bring back the heart and soul near of city. We need our arts and culture back and we need people to see it and feel it to participate in it to know that that essence of New York City has not been defeated by the coronavirus. But we'll come back strong in 2021. Month after month in 2021 as you see the city come back to life, cultural lead the way. Open culture is another thing for the world. If you saw the video of this, you would know how fucking preposterous this is. And then this guy is talking about they're doing. I mean, they got the list, the most Hispanic gentleman they could find to speak about this hashtag open culture. And so listen to this music. It's fucking terrible. And what are these people doing? What is this dance? So they're spending money on this. So this is the city's fallen apart. Restaurants are disappearing left and right. Small businesses are disappearing left and right. 90% of all the moving trucks are going out of New York City. And this is this is his solution to this because these people don't have any respect for business. They somehow or another think this money falls out of trees and that you just need to re redistribute this money because the rich people, they have too much of it. So we distribute this money. And the way we're going to redistribute it, we're going to open up culture and we're going to bring back dance. Like, what the fuck is that? Like, what is that? Imagine that you are the mayor of one of the biggest cities on planet earth. And that's your solution. Like, this is a big video that you put together and you have these people dancing and doing all this. It's so uncorignated. The music is so bad. It seems like a sketch. This is what you're dealing with. And this is the same guy that was saying that Donald Trump was responsible for this criminally insane person who kicked the shit out of this poor old lady. I listened to this stuff, Joe. And I just despair. I know what we're capable of. I know how amazing we are as human beings. And I've walked this stuff. Like, imagine you had pelibeless, right? You ever seen pelibeless? What's pelibeless? Can I say this? Yeah. Jamie, pull that up. Pull up pelibeless, Jamie. It seems like an old Greek guy that I'm not aware of. Yeah. What are the great dance philosophers about? pelibeless is pelibeless. Jamie, you're not aware of it either. Good. I don't feel any long. I know what you're saying. I mean, it's terrible. Even if you're going to make a wrong point, you're in New York City. How much great dances there? You know, you know, you know, you see stuff on the subway using the poles and everything that's available. Yeah. The blow my, yeah, guaranteed. They could have had break dancers out there. They could have had hip hop guys out there doing like stance elements guys. And it would have been amazing. What do you got? You got something crazy? Why is smiling? I'm not sure what I'm looking up. Pelibeless dance. Okay. That's all right. Pelibeless dance. Is this pelibeless? There he goes. We are pelibeless. Oh, wow. Yeah. Okay. These are talented dancers. Yeah. This is difficult. Yeah. It's really, it's unbelievably gorgeous, beautiful, difficult. Okay. If you saw that as an example, that can blow your mind very quickly. And sure. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. No, I'm not against dance. I got your point. But that was, that thing was nonsense. But here's what I think. It's almost better when it's irrefutable when the nonsense like the Blazio's video or him saying that this guy who got out of jail recently for stabbing his mother death, that the reason why I kicked the show of this Asian lady was because of Donald Trump. This guy might not have been known. Donald Trump was a thing. Did you see my graph from like Google engrams, which was a diversity and inclusion usage versus most qualified and they cross in 2017. Most qualified is going down and diversity inclusion is going through the roof. You know, like, we can talk about this. But I want to know every cool thing that you know. And like this, it's just dumb. It is, and it's corroding my soul. But it's happening. I mean, it's, it's like, it's like playing tennis with people who can't play tennis. Right. And you used to be really good at tennis. And now like, when you fight people, do you want to fight people who suck? No, you shouldn't want to get injured. You will worse than that. You're going to get a false sense of your abilities. Yeah. And you're also going to degrade. Like all sorts of bad things. James gets something else going on. I was looking in this up. This is what I was seeing that he blames the state parole system. Oh, well, he's right about that. But what I saw him was saying that it was Donald Trump. My incorrect year, I tried to find even him blaming Trump for it and wasn't seeing that. Well, but he was blaming what happened in DC. That's what he was saying. And someone, someone had a video exposing that that it was not. Well, could have just, if that's true, well, he's correct here. He blames the state parole system. Well, then I take it back, because he's absolutely right with that. There's no way that guy should have been let out. Maybe he had one statement on it. And now today he's released the different one, because he wasn't standing in front of these flags like this was a different scene. I believe and you saw that carjacking in DC. I did. I'll take this back then, because he's definitely correct. There's no way that guy should have been on parole. That guy murdered his fucking mother, you know, and then he attacked that lady in midtown. So maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I maybe got duped, because I watched a whole video where they were explaining what was I forget it. I don't remember who was hosting the video, but they were talking about how wrong his perspective is on that. Hey, but I guess you see the guy that got his car car. I just, I just, I just despair to the fact that the girl, you know, what jamming? Correct, I guess this is for an older thing though. This is from 2016 where he's blaming Trump and hate speech for rise and hate crime. So no, that was a different one. Okay. Well, I don't think he necessarily said Trump. He was just talking about. Well, I don't know. I'm not sure. But the point is, yeah, he's right. He's right. It is the parole system that did that. But this, this carjacking, this is these are my perspective on the car jacking is different because they're a 13 year old and a 15 year old kid. They're children. Can I freshen you? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you're talking about, you know, a really unfortunate situation where you have these young kids that stole this Uber driver's car and he tried to stop that from happening and one up dying. It's horrific. If you've never seen the video, please don't watch it. It's horrible. Well, the hardest part for me is where the grosses my phone is in the car. Yeah. And, and the guy is dead. Nobody cares about the guy thrown from the car. Like the, the, the, the, the troops of the National Guard doesn't seem to care. The girls don't seem to care. I don't think the National Guard at that moment necessarily knew what happened. Well, it was very confusing. But, you know, she practically trips over the guy trying to get to a phone in the car. No, it's awful. It's, it's certainly awful. But I think soul is corroding from all this stuff. I'm watching this and I'm internalizing it. And I know I'm supposed to sort of take a step back. I am so worried about the degradation of who we are because we can't figure out how to say no moss. I think this is different. See, the, the, the, the, I'm not in any way exonerating those young girls who stole that car and killed that guy. But I think the National Guard people that pulled up on the scene, I don't think they knew what happened. I don't think they had it. There's no way they could have known these girls stole that car. This guy's dead. The car has flipped over. The girls are in shock. Right. The girls saying, where's my phone? Like, I don't blame the guard, the guard guys probably are horrified once they realize that this, these girls had stole this guy's car. And I don't, if you're a 13 year old kid and you steal a car and all the sudden the guy's dead, you're probably, you're probably your whole life is public. Yeah. But what I worry about is no idea what the fuck just happened. I'm worried about something. I'm calling video game mode, which is the more I stare at my screen and then I have to context switch between my screen and real life, my screen and real life. Yeah. More real life feels like my screen. The more I can't tell the difference. And it's not that I'm dumb. It's that's my pro, my evolutionary programming doesn't know anything about this screen. I know what you're saying. And what my concern is is that we don't feel our own life and our own interest anymore. Like, we don't realize what we're doing. We imagine that we are characters in the video game. There's always a restart. There's always some exploit that you can use to start again. And I am increasingly feeling like reality is slipping away from us because the phone, it's a little bit like what happened with porn. We thought that porn was going to habituate us to like non standard sexual practices and tweaks that but I don't think what we really understood is that it was going to rewire us so that it was very difficult to get aroused about anything because it changes your hedonic thresholds. I think the same thing is true for real for real life versus the phone. The phone is in some sense so much more intense for most people. That environment starts to blot out the feeling of being fully alive. So you think that the reason why they were so desensitized. I can't say that because it's shock. Crazy situation is the first few seconds. Fog can be the explanation. However, I increasingly see people like the Capitol Hill thing on January 6th. Very clearly that woman was dealing with a loaded pistol. You see the guy who's holding the gun, take the finger and bring it inside the trigger guard. And then he goes back out because he's like pointing it at her. He understands what he's doing. It's like, please don't advance. And she has an idea that somehow she's protected because she's part of this romantic. He understands what he's doing. It's like, please don't advance. And she has an idea that somehow she's protected because she's part of this romantic story in her own mind. And I really believe that the Viking and all of the Trump, you know, and all of the stuff people don't feel fully alive. They don't realize that we are actually attacking the Capitol building of the United States of America. That they didn't realize what they were doing while they were doing it. I think that's true. We're in a sort of live action role playing. And I believe that, you know, sometimes people probably going to combat that way. Maybe. I think those people genuinely thought that they were patriots. And I also think a lot of them are genuinely not bright. There's a lot of those guys that I saw being interviewed where they were talking about why they were doing it. I watched people snap out. A lot of people was like, the moment that I realized I was too far in and then such and such. It was like a kid. He could caught up in the crowd. You could get caught up in the internet. But also I watched people, particularly that guy with the Buffalo hat on the interviewed. That's a dumb guy. He's a dumb guy who is good at stringing words together with, you know, QAnon themes. But the guy smiling with the podium with the lecture. Yeah. Yeah. There was a lot of that going on. These are men mostly. There's a few women. But men who are unacceptable that think they're exceptional because they're tied into a thing that they believe is like a movement to free. I think they just believe democracy is being served in some string. Well, no. There were two narratives. There was a narrative called Stop the Steel and there was a narrative called Certified the Election. And they avoided themselves as long as they possibly could. And I was watching them. I did a tweet storm on January 4th because I could see January 6th was going to be the ark point. Very often, you know, when you say Twitter isn't real life. It really isn't up until it arcs. Then you get a spark across it and then whole issue comes like real life. Yeah, exactly. It did real life. Right? And so there are these twin narrative problems where you've got these two incompatible worldviews and these stories. And they avoid each other like two guys circling each other. I don't know. Yeah. Both of them know that once we actually engage, it's pretty unpredictable what's about to happen. That's what I think you could see coming for January 6th. It had to happen that way in a weird way because the narratives that avoided each other from the maximal length of time because nobody wanted to have this out. And then it was impossible to stop the two from ark. And the plates got too close together. That's what I really believe. I see what you're saying. So what you're saying is that you think that there's two worlds that aren't communicating with each other and both of them believe wholeheartedly in what they're doing without listening to whatever might be reasonable that's coming from the other side and then they collide. And there's no way of squaring the circle. Like at some point there will be a Donald Trump presidency or a Joe Biden presidency. And once you realize that your story is collapsed, it's like a doomsday cult. You say it's going to end on such and such a day. And then it doesn't. And then what happens to the cult because everybody had the same concept. I think that if you look at like if you listen to the audio from the Jim Jones, uh, Jonestown massacre, it's very clear that they got caught up in a story that they couldn't get out of. That's what happens with all cults, right? Yeah, exactly. And the story becomes the software that you're running. Like there's this one woman named Hyacinth who hit under her bed and survived. You know, survived. Jonestown. Oh, you know, her sister perished. And somehow she ran a program that was different than the program that ever because you have the recordings. People know that they're going to their death. They know the software is telling them that this is the right thing. It's a revolutionary suicide. And I saw this with people, you know, I was trying to tell people because I didn't believe the election was necessarily free and fair, but I also didn't believe that it was stolen in the way that Donald Trump was saying it was stolen. I feel the exact same way. So, you know, I was watching people who couldn't go, they couldn't keep their footing. And this is, you know, the really tough. They're also struggling to find like when they went around with their team. Yeah, exactly right. It was going to say the same thing. People who feel comfortable being alone are in a different situation than people who say, well, I have to pick a team constantly. Right. Right. And, you know, the greatest thing that has ever happened to me is the ability to stand alone for some periods of time. I do need a family. I need to be a part of something. But there are times when there is no team that it represents reality. We all need people. We all do. I need to admit it, but you're right. Yeah, we all need loved ones and friends and people don't operate well. That's why when you're in prison, the worst thing they could do to you in prison is to leave you alone. Yeah. You're in a fucking cement building filled with rapists and murderers. The worst shit they can do is leave you alone. You know, it's a really interesting point. Strange. We are very social animals. But the one, it's like the ones that can go the longest in solitude and just think by themselves. There's a great benefit to that. I was forced into it because when I was a kid, we moved around a lot. We moved when I was seven to San Francisco, when I was 11, moved to Florida, when I was 13, we moved to Boston. I was forced to form my own opinions about things because I didn't have a steady group of friends where we all agreed on a certain narrative. That's a real problem with people in this country. Agreeing on a certain narrative where you know socially that you have a contract you have to uphold. You're socially intertwined with this narrative. You can't think outside the body. You say, hey guys, I don't think there's anything wrong with that. Let's look at this logically. They'll go, what the fuck is wrong with you? And then you got a real problem because the people want compliance. This is what's going on with wokeness. A lot of what wokeness is is these socially low status people who are gaining power by enforcing this narrative and attacking people who don't enforce the narrative. They're bullying people who don't enforce the narrative. You know, the phrase hurt people hurt people. Yeah. All the time. Well, people have been bullied. They tend to bully people. And a lot of fucking dorks when they've been pushed around in high school and college and socially they've been very awkward. My God, they get on that goddamn computer and they attack and they love to attack. Well, Tim Ferris tried to do Big Itir. Another people tried cry bullies. What's a Big Itir? Big Itir is somebody who crawls. That's what he crawls. It's pretty good, right? It's great phrase. Tim is good. Yeah. But cry bullies, another one, and hurt people, hurt people. All the best things get at this concept. And I do think that this issue about how, what does it take to be alone for a long time? And then the part of the problem is those of us who are very good at being alone for a long time can overstay. You can overstay being alone. Then you're next, you know, you're Ted Kuzinski. Well, mathematician. Yes. I'm speaking to you, which I asked you for this date, April 1st. This is a favorite to me. Yeah, why? I want you to have this. What? Is this nonsense? You give me a stack of papers. You know, I don't like reading. You're not going to be able to read it. Oh, this is your unity theory. This is the first copy that got to version 1.0. I want you to have it. And one. You're here. You lost me. There's all these equations in here. Jamie, take this and make something out of it. What is this? I believe, and this is the hardest part. This is the hardest part. How do you have time to do this while you're still in Clubhouse? I'm not really in Clubhouse. It's a bot. I bet that little quality stuff. This is something that I've been uncomfortable about sharing. I've been in what I call the ice cave for about 37 years. And I shared a little bit of it in 2013. And I shared a little bit of it last year, April 1st. And I am coming to grips with a story. And in part, you don't know this, but you've been playing a large role in my thinking about this. And well, that's a problem. No. No. I reviewed this weird episode of you at the store when you took a break for seven years. And I looked at the courage that you had to do, that you had to have, to do something unfunny in a funny context. I think it was an incredibly difficult situation. And I think I've been running from a similar situation my whole life. I don't want to face certain unpleasant facts that are out of keeping with the joy that I feel, with the love, with the creativity that I feel. And I don't want to let certain kinds of negativity take over my life. And then I have this other thing, which is I legitimately believe that if we are not very careful, theoretical physics is coming to an end. And I believe it is our only hope for getting outside the solar system. When you have Elon on it and he talks about Mars or bust and all this kind of stuff, I cannot understand how mankind has gotten to the point where we are not spending our efforts trying to figure out how to spread out so that we don't self-extinguish on one, two, or three rocks. It just doesn't make us any sense to me. And the best hope we have is to go beyond Einstein. And we're losing the belief that we're capable of it. We're so worried about the professional norms and humiliation and what's going to happen if we say something and what our colleagues are going to say and all of this stuff that we're self-sensoring and we're silencing ourselves. Because we'd rather be in good standing on the Titanic than risk saying, holy shit, we're in a nice bird field. Let's think about how we're going to survive this. And I've been being a pussy about this. Well, what is it? Explain what it is. What is this thing that you handed me? What is this? It is. OK, this is the hardest thing for me to say because I have to not hedge it. I think it's the theory of everything. And what do you mean by that? There is a moment where you have to say this, I believe, about a radical departure. And you don't want to say it because you want to hedge it. It is. Jamie, if you could bring that up and you go a little bit, maybe two pages in. This is available online, so someone can peruse it. In fact, OK, right there on the left, go down that table. You see where it says X4. Yes. X4 is four parameters. It could be salty, sweet, sour, bitter. It could be low, treble, medium, base, and volume. And the question that I took from Einstein was, can we generate the world? Everything from something as innocuous as four parameters? And if you think about a fertilized egg, somebody can hand you a picture of an embryo and an in vitro fertilization. Well, that's your child to be. Get the fuck out. Well, that fertilized egg somehow self-assembles into something that you cannot even imagine. And that's a mystery. The question is, in some sense, can four parameters bootstrap itself? And Jamie, if you go to the first picture of the two hands, the Escher sketch? Yeah. Yeah. That is this weird paradox. Can a piece of paper effectively will, two hands, into drawing each other into existence? That's what I believe makes the theory of everything so difficult. I don't think it's the. Wait a minute. Yeah. Piece of paper didn't will two hands into drawing themselves into existence. The point is, so that an idea. MC Escher had an idea of what Douglas Houghs that are called a strange loop. And it's a depiction of something that can't happen. But in some sense, at least was conceived of as being able to happen. OK. And so that's what I tried to give you, which is I am scared to do this thing. I have been avoiding this for. Let me ask you this. Yeah. What's been the criticism of this? Well, because people have criticized it, right? In one year, I've seen one actual critique. Only one? Only one. Is that because you haven't looked for other ones? Nope. I think two guys, I think it's two guys. One of them is anonymous. And I refuse to deal with an anonymous coward who critiques me. Came up with three basic criticisms. And they'll have more because there'll be errors in this. But two of the criticisms are inferential. They imagine that I'm doing something that I'm not doing. One of the criticisms is valid, but it's something that I would have brought up anyway. The most astounding thing about their so-called paper is that it shows that what I put out a year ago in a lecture on YouTube is understandable. In other words, they got from the lecture what the basic setup of this theory is. I want you to boil this down so that someone who doesn't understand physics at all will understand this in a way that they could maybe even explain to someone else. Go to jamespul.com. Pull that up jamesp.com. Try pull that up jamesp.com. OK. Collection of videos in support of geometric unity. A pic troll. Who put that up? Go to the bottom of this. There is a team of people. Brook Dallas, Brandon Stone, Bo Coom, mysterious German who does amazing graphics. Tim, the worthless swagman from Australia, Art Vark, and Nick who have been, let's just go up to the top. So for example, dramatizing Einstein's, the greatest insight of the 20th century arguably, click on the one on the left and blow it up. Einstein took a curvature tensor, which has three components called vile, traceless reachy and reachy scalar. Snap the vile off and readjusted the vile scalar to get it to live in a space not called curvature but metrics. That is saying that curvature influences how we measure length. OK. Now, this is an Einsteinian metric for two dimensions. You can have it. This, he gave me something that looks like hedge clippers. Well, it's two rulers. They're hair ties on the two rulers and a protractor. OK. OK. So there are three dimensions of ruler, two dimensions of ruler and one dimension of protractor. OK. Now, if you'll, the idea is, heat Einstein took curvature and fed it back into the space of rulers and protractors to say how the rulers and protractors would warp. OK. So that we can actually define gravity. Now, that is a visual depiction of the Einstein field equations, which if I wrote them down, would mean nothing to you. OK. And the key point is that Einstein figured out you had to get rid of a component called the vile curvature and readjust the reachy scalar to put it into the space of rulers and protractors, which I bought from Amazon strangely enough. And people, you see, I don't think in symbols. I think in pictures. Now, the insight of geometric unity, if you'll go zoom out, is that if you do the smaller neck, like we had a huge bottle to get it into metrics, there's another space. People are listening to this, you know. OK. They're not just saying it. Very few people are saying it. Well, maybe like 30%. OK. If this is a problem, this conversation is a problem. Because people are going to have to, the people are tuning out right now, guaranteed. Well, if you go to pull that up, Jamie, look, there's no way in which I can talk about tensor analysis, curvature tensors, the theory of everything. I understand that I want you to boil this down. You're not boiling it down at all. Why did you do this? And what are you trying to accomplish with this? Well, first of all, what I'm trying to do is to say we don't have to talk about this. This is just something I wanted to do on your show as a thank you. Because you've been huge for me. And the courage to take the slings and arrows that are going to come at me as I put this online, which is what I'm going to do today. Today. Yeah. So this hasn't been online before. Correct. I'm going to do it. So the people that are going to do it in front of us live. Oh my goodness. It's going down. All right. So this says launch, Geeam. Boom. People can now. And it's going to debut tomorrow because we don't release today. But it's April Fool's. And they can download this as of tomorrow when they see this. OK. And they can peruse it. And there are going to be all sorts of problems and errors. But it's a complete story of who we are, what this place is. It's my guess. The universe. Like everything. Everything. Everything. What made you want to do this? What made me want to stay the problem? Yeah. Tell me, Joe. When you ask why is a kid, what happens if you keep asking? You either end up in theoretical physics or an insane sound. All right. I just keep asking questions. No, no. You stop somewhere. You stop somewhere. If you don't end up in theoretical physics, it means you stopped at some point asking why. And so I just didn't stop. And the issue of, like, we are here and we're looking at all these crazy things you have arrayed in front of us. These things are understandable. But they're locked in a system of symbols. So if I put a page of the stuff in front of you, mego, as they say, my eyes lays over. So for example, the light in this room is tied to something called a U1 principle bundle. But you're not going to understand what a U1 principle bundle is. However, I got your present. What is that? It's water bottle. That is a U1 principle bundle. It's a water wiggle. But remember the time I showed you the hop vibration and you're like, what the fuck is that? That was a U1 bundle over the two-dimensional sphere, which was the earth. This is a U1 bundle over the one-dimensional sphere, alias the circle. And as you do that fidget toy, you're spinning that circle over and over again. So this is an actual model of a gauge theoretic concept that somehow nobody in the history has ever mentioned to me that you can buy U1 principle bundles from Amazon for under 10 bucks. And I could, if we had the opportunity- I don't know what the fuck you just said. How about that? Okay. Do you know what he said? If I show, look, I can show you on video, but then we're not on video, right? Well, you are 30% of the people are watching. Yeah, but we need more than that. But they can go to pull that up, Jamie.com. They can watch these videos. And what I'm going to do over time is to show people visually without symbols. In other words, if I say Ramani and Metric, they're not going to know what I'm talking about. If I hand them rulers and protractors in a video of it, they're like, I don't know about the symbols, but I can follow an actual concrete thing. That thing, that water wiggle, the idea that that's a U1 principle bundle, that is one of the deepest things we only figured out in the 1970s that the light in this room comes from effectively seeing the world as having a water-wail structure on top of it. Now, I'm not expecting on this show. I'm not what that means. The light comes from having seen the world, having a water-wail structure on top of it. That you can rotate these, right? If I squish a water wiggle and it goes around. Yes. That is called a G action, G is the group of symmetries. I am taking the symmetries of a donut. OK. And I'm playing with this thing, and it's going out of my hand. Right. This is the structure that gauge theories, which we've talked about before, which Lawrence Kraus has been on your problem, that nobody can define what's a gauge theory, man. It's just some mumbo-jumbo. But he had a hard time describing it. OK. If we spent an afternoon with a water wiggle, or those videos, which we can't do because of your audience, I understand that, you could understand what a gauge theory is, because you'd never see a symbol. There would never be a symbol between you and understanding why there's light in this room. The light in this room comes from a water-wiggle structure about a circle that nobody's ever seen that is at every point in space and time, which is one of the great discoveries that we've made, that nobody seems to care about. So how is it at a water-wiggle structure? Because there's a circle at every point that we can't perceive that we're everywhere. In space. In space. Above space that we can rotate. A circle, how big? We don't know. OK, but this circle somehow or another does rotate. It rotates. And there is a four-dimensional cross-section, like this is three dimensions here, and one dimension of time, because our conversation is progressing. That's four dimensions. That four dimensions forms a cross-section to that water-wiggly structure that we didn't know about, because it's invisible. OK. And that's what photons are. And how do we know about that water-wiggle structure? We know about that water-wiggle structure because we wrote down the equations called Maxwell's equations that unified all sorts of things that have to do with photons. Magnetism, electricity, x-rays, radio waves. All of that stuff got subsumed into one really one equation, called Maxwell's equation. That equation presupposes a circle out of nowhere. We didn't know that there was a circle, but we wrote down equations, and the equations told us, hey, nomnads, there's a circle that rotates just the way this water-wiggle rotates. At every point in space time that you can't see it, because that's the only way those equations make sense. Now, you'll hear people like you'll have Sean Carillon. I want to talk about the multiverse, right? Or Neil deGrasse Tyson will want to tell you how big the universe is. And somehow, people don't want to tell you there's a circle around so we can see each other. I don't know why. It's not fascinating. Well, it's very complicated in the way you're explaining to me. It's not resonating. Well, I can show it to you on a video, but I don't want to ruin the show. So the part of the problem is that I'm not sure that the video would even show it. Do you understand what he's saying? Well, little, but not really. In essence, the photons that we see are the levels from which we measure a derivative, which is rise over run above a level. The level that we see is the photon in essence. And the thing that we're differentiating is the electron. So electrons are like functions. And photons are like horizontal levels from which we measure rise over run to take the derivative. And then the idea that we have partial differential equations is how photons zing off of me and hit your eye and we see each other. That world of waves colliding, like everything in this place is waves in collision with each other, waves interacting. The story of us is the story of interacting waves and the waves of bay partial differential equations. So the fact that you have derivatives, which allow you to define the derivative in partial differential equations, differentials, or derivatives. Are determined by levels, which is on this page of videos we've made for you guys. And those things allow you to define the equations for waves which we are. So when you talk about the theory of everything, what you're actually saying is tell me about a medium, waves in the medium, and rules for how waves behave moving around in the medium. That's what a theory is. OK. That's what this is. It's a theory in which four dimensions, births some elaborate crazy set up, which has interacting waves that look like electrons, up quarks, down quarks, protons, neutrons, gamma radiation, beta radiation, alpha particles. That's the story of us. And how did all that weird shit get into our world? To form, like everything in here is made up of up quarks, down quarks, and electrons held together by force particles. It's like an incredibly economical statement about it. Look at all the diverse shit here. That's what this is about. And what I believe is, is that we'll never take the time to say, let's spend a day talking about this shit and do it at a blackboard and do it with videos. Like we spent hundreds of hours making these videos to show you what these concepts are. Now, I understand the constraints of the show, and I'm totally fine with that. But the point is, I believe that with artists, and with imagination, we can actually show you what these structures are. I can draw lines with pens and show you what a derivative is on a water wiggle. And you can say, OK, you're doing calculus on a water wiggle, and there's a water wiggle like structure in the world, which I never heard about. And that's what gives me light electromagnetism, all this stuff I know and love, that keeps electrons bound to protons and hydrogen atoms. That weird world of waves interacting with each other, according to derivative equations where the derivatives are determined from levels called gauge potentials, is visualizable with videos that we've been making. And the hope is, is that this is for experts, and they're going to have their day, and they're going to piss all over, and they're going to be angry and mean, and that's going to happen. But at the end of that process, hopefully, the ideas here in contained could change the world. It's the first time I've ever seen somebody tell a complete story about how did this place fill up with all this crazy stuff, assuming almost nothing to begin with. It's like a fertilized egg hypothesis. Show me a minimal amount I can assume and drag out the falling in love on a park bench in early May. That's how crazy the story has to be. When you have a fertilized egg and it becomes your child, the story of development, how something births itself is what this is a story about. And that literally can explain falling in love on a park bench in May. We can't get there. But we don't believe if we're materialists, we believe that there's nothing other than protons, neutrons, electrons, gluons holding these things together. Are you materialists? If I wrestle with, if I say this, I believe about this. I have to wrestle with the problem that there's not a lot of room for magic. But isn't magic subjective? Isn't the idea of magic just our own personal experience? Because everything is magic. If you've never experienced it, if it didn't exist. There was this guy, Paul Durock, who's really Einstein's only rival in the 20th century. And in 1963, he wrote this article in Scientific American, where he said something insane. And he said, Schrodinger was led into error, because he put too much weight on the particulars of agreement with experiment with his equations. And he was missing something called spin. But the essence of his idea was so beautiful that if he embraced beauty rather than the scientific method, he would have gotten farther, quicker. And almost everyone who tries this crashes on the rocks. Everybody who tries to throw away the scientific method in service of beauty, almost cracks up. And the exception is the three guys who really wrote down physical laws that govern everything else that we know about the world. But why do you have to throw out the scientific method in service of beauty that couldn't it just be a part of the equation of life itself? It's a huge issue. It exists inside the experience of human beings. Ultimately, humans can't throw out the scientific method. Scientific method is the last word. Right. But why would you in the service of beauty? I don't understand why the two are mutually exclusive. Because if I say something early, and there's the slightest problem with what I say, that is the instance of what I'm saying. I have an idea, which is, I've got it. We're going to sell skulls to Native Americans. That's an instance of an idea. It's not the general idea might be, let's go into business and sell things. OK. The idea. That's an instance of an idea. It's not the general idea might be let's go into business and sell things. The initial instance of every great idea about the world has always been wrong. Einstein always? Well, I think if you take the 20th century, start with 1900. Einstein gets it wrong initially. His first equation is wrong. Durock gives us the equation for matter. Einstein does gravity. Durock tells us that the proton and the electron, which are oppositely charged are antiparticles of each other. Heisenberg says you're an idiot. The proton is enormous. The electron is tiny. They'd have to be of the same math. Then, Durock gave us this theory of matter. We couldn't compute with it for almost 20 years because everything blew up in our face. These are the instantiations of great ideas. The instances of great ideas are almost always flawed. Yang and Mills, who came up with the generalization of the light equation, Maxwell's equations, didn't have mass in their equations so that they couldn't suppress something called beta decay, which is a kind of radioactivity. The world would be taken over by beta decay if you couldn't make certain particles massive. Every time we try one of these things, our first few instantiations are usually wrong. What Durock was giving us, and which we didn't understand, is he saying, at the beginning, don't take the training wheels off. The training wheels are like beauty. Look for internal coherence. Look for some kind of symmetry. Look for some deep idea. Don't immediately run to say, is there an error? Is there an agreement with experiment? Because those things will have to wait for the mature instantiation rather than the first instantiation. What do you mean by beauty? What do you mean by magic? These are subjective concepts that are only with human beings. Dogs don't see beauty, or if they do they don't express it. Like dogs don't see flowers and become perplexed. They don't stare at a mountain and sit down and take a deep breath and sigh. I don't first of all agree with that. Dogs stare at the sky and sigh. Dogs look at flowers. That's fucking amazing. Certainly dogs are very focused on smell. The effect or a sense of what is fascinating to a dog is not highly subjective. We're talking about beauty. I'm talking about beauty. I'm talking about beautiful smells. Is that what we're talking about? Absolutely. I don't think we can imagine what a dog smells. Because their sense of smell is so far between. Absolutely. I think it's smell cancer. Dogs. Yeah. If for example we're cutting hairs here. What I'm saying is the human beings subjective experience of beauty is very unique to us. You're going to say that. But if I go into any culture and I go, aha, aha, every culture has that interval. What's man's say? Ooh, heave, ooh. Okay. Okay. That is universal. Okay. That's not beauty though. It's art when you let your vocal. I'm talking about a different thing now. You let your vocal chord vibrate. Mm hmm. Implied in that thing. You may say I'm singing the note C. But you're not. There's an entire chord called the Overtone series. And that sounds good to every culture because it comes. It's not about you or me. It's about our throat. It's about the one dimensional nature of a vibrating column always produces that same. Well, music resonates specifically with human beings. Can we agree that music is people are always going to want to say it's totally subjective. It is. It's not totally subjective. How so? If I go... Well, it's at least partially subjective. It's partially subjective. Some people don't like jazz at all. Some people live for it. So it's subjective, right? Some people hate rap music. Some people love it. Some people hate metal. Some people love it. Some people hate country. Some people love it. It's as subjective as taste and food. No. How so? Well, first of all, your bitter response is in general protective of you. So that some people enjoy bitter foods. I was going to say that you have to usually learn which foods are safe and then you have an acquired taste. That's what very often bitter foods are a bit of a wire taste. Culture is already figured out what foods are safe. But you know the most part. But it's local. You know that that thing. Like if you were going to eat Cabralas cheese, which has maggots in fest. You know, if you come from Spain, you understand that Cabralas is safe. So you call it a delicacy because it's some stupid stuff that you happen to have local information to know that it's safe. This is Brett Weinstein 101. Sure. But even in Spain, there's people that find it detestable. But my point to you is that what we are hiding behind the universals. It is true that we all have subjective components. But it is not the case that you and I will have a conversation about a whole lot of love. And we will have an idea like that is just the best song. And you will know that you have to say, okay, well, I understand that some people don't like it. But then when you get drunk, you're going to say, how can you not like whole lot of love? Yeah, but I mean, you would say that, but you know. You say that, but you're joking. Like when I say, how can someone not like Elton John? I get it. I get that you don't like Elton John. I fucking love Elton John. But some people they hear, they don't want to hear that shit. Stop, stop, stop. Right. You don't want to hear it. They don't like Elton John. It's subjective. There is a non subjective component to music. You can focus on the fact that this is non subjective about it. I just told you, but you're not correct. If people don't like it and some people do like it, that is the essence of subjectivity. Do you remember what you said to me about Gary Clark Jr. when you introduced me to him at the store? My personal opinion problem. You were talking first. It's one of the baddest motherfuckers alive. You just said, this is the greatest guitarist. Alive. Yeah. In my opinion. That's my opinion. Yeah, but that's my opinion. And I don't necessarily think that he is necessarily the greatest guitarist. A lot. To me. When I listen, but he's objectively. If I listen to numb, he's objective. Right, amazing. Yes. But it's not objectively. But it's not objectively. Because some people don't think he's good at all. They don't like that kind of sound. It's like some people like weird sounds, man. Some people only like necessarily looking at him. You're like putting on art at him as a pianist. You cannot sit me down to watch art at him and say, that is not amazing. Okay. But if you don't enjoy it, it's subjective. I may not enjoy it. But it's subjective. You might say that that is a guy who's very good at doing a thing that I don't enjoy doing. You're listening, man. Yeah. You're splitting hairs. Okay. You either enjoy something. You don't. That is the absolute subjectivity. Okay. You either think it's good or you don't. It doesn't mean you look just because you know that some people enjoy it doesn't mean it's objective that it's great. Like, you don't enjoy it. Look, it doesn't have to be your thing. The first thing is, can I recognize something? Like the millennial whoop. You know about the millennial whoop? No. This thing. Oh, you. 535. Right. There's this thing that all these millennial songs have. Okay. Now, I don't necessarily enjoy that. Okay. But I can recognize it. So the first step is, is it objectively recognizable? Can I train myself? Well, you're talking about a sound that you know exists. Okay. But that doesn't mean you like it. Okay. So if you don't like it, it's subjective. Right. Just like food, just like movies, just like clothing. There's a lot of things that people enjoy that other people don't enjoy. I mean, it's going to be very successful. You think so. So while. You think statistically we just all had a high probability of thinking that Godfather was a great film. I know that some people don't like that film. They don't like violent pictures. They don't like tension. They don't like mafia. They don't like the portrayal of the Italian Americans. They don't like movies that are from that era. Exactly. Exactly. They're slower. I agree with that. Yeah. Okay. But it's a subjective film. Joe, I have a different belief structure. I believe that we're hiding behind subjectivity. I believe that what we've figured out is that there's a subjective component to everything. Okay. And you're absolutely right about that. But you're overcomplicating. Pause tastes. Pause tastes. Pause likes and dislikes. They're real. Right. Some people like pop music. Some people like Beethoven. That is the nature of subjectivity. What I'm trying to say is that what you're saying is true. We have different likes. Yes. And that's a really far downstream process of can we recognize what's going on? Okay. What's our association with it? If you were tortured to the most beautiful music in the world, you're probably not going to love it. Right? Sure. If you watch Clockwork Orange, you got really screwed up about it. Well, I think that's what they did to Manuel Norierga. I'm going to try to get them to leave Panama. Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. They've the same song over and over and over again. Exactly. That's probably a great song too. I'm sure the first 12,000 times you hear it. So, but that's not what I'm trying to say. What I'm trying to say is that there is a huge component about what we like. We don't like. That's objective. And there's a huge component about what we like. We don't like that's subjective. And in our time, we've all been taught the same move, which is back off claims of objectivity. Every one of us, myself, include that, off claims of objectivity. I've never, I don't agree with that at all. We've been told to back off claims of, if I say to you, Charlie Parker is objectively one of the greatest jazz musicians of all time. You will have a negative reaction. No, I won't in general. No, no, I've listened to Charlie Parker. He's brilliant to you. Yeah. Okay, and somebody else doesn't like him. Yeah, but you asked me. You said I will have an object into that. I won't. Okay, that's not true. So who are the people that now I'm really confused? Because before I thought you were telling me that these things were subjective. And what I'm trying to say is you are willing to accept these things. Now you said me personal. Okay. So you personally believe that Charlie Parker is objectively great jazz musician? I believe personally Charlie Parker is a great jazz musician. To you, I see. So you objectively believe that you subjectively think. That's the problem is we're conflating objectivity and subjectivity here. We're getting into this weird area. It's subjective whether or not I enjoy it. Right? It's subject if I agree with that. If you say, is this person really good at something that I have no interest in? Like are they a really good badminton player? Right. And I watch them and they win. I'm like, yeah, that guy's really good. I don't give a fuck about badminton. Right. If badminton just vanished. Yeah, but even the last even there I heard old basketball guys asked about Steph Curry. Isn't he amazing? Like I don't know what he's doing. He's doing a bunch of three point shots. I played in the paint. That's basketball. I don't know what he does. This is not my game. Right. But you get that from fighting. You get that from high jumping. You get it from hard to hard. Table test. It's subjective. It's subjective. I'm not sure who's making whose point now. Objectively or subject. It's subjective whether or not you like that style of badminton. So we're like some people like brawls. Some people like Floyd Mayweather because he's super technical and he's clever defensively. I totally agree with this at the level of there's a whole bunch of process that happens. And at the end you say, I like it. I don't like it. Right. And there's no way to tell because if you like something, I can make you hate it by associating with something negative. But let's look at the Webster deck definition of objectivity. Bring up a subject to it. Bring that up. Let's pull that up. The Webster definition of objectivity and the Webster definition of subjectivity. And let's look at this and see if we're talking about the same fucking things here. Because I think we're getting a little bit into the weeds here. Here we go. That's the Jamie Hama. Build to spend. What's that? I was typing it in. There's a brown dot edu dissertation about this. No, just whatever. Whatever the definition of definition of definition of the definition of objectivity. Let's see what we get. Here we go. OK. Here we go. That's why I did that. Based on or influenced by personal feelings, tastes or opinions, objective of a person or their judgment, not influenced by personal feelings or opinions in consideration of expressing and representing facts. OK. So objective. It's not influenced by personal feelings or opinions in considering and representing facts. So you can say objectively someone is a very talented guitarist because you see how complicated their movements are and how they're hitting the strings. But you could say subjectively, I don't enjoy that music. I agree with that. Right. Now, now, pull up subjective just so we were clear about that. So subjective definition. Based on or influenced by personal feelings, tastes or opinions. Yeah. So personal feelings and opinions and how you feel about something is subjective. Right. But if I say to you, is Eddie Van Halen objectively a talent, was he a talented guitarist? He's clearly a talented guitarist. I didn't say clearly. Yes. I think somebody else says in 2021, the next move in the conversation is actually, I don't think he's a talented guitarist. I've heard him. I find talent is really about playing with feeling and all of these crazy moves in the tapping and the wines and the squeals to me. That's not talent. You want to have motherfuckers never listen to running with the devil. Now you're playing on both sides of this. Yeah, but running with the devil is like that the fucking movements and the way he plays guitar. He's clearly got amazing ability with the guitar. Now, so relatively, you could say I think that music's trash. Somebody else is going to make the claim in 2021. I think you're on my side of the issue and you're still right. This is very interesting. I think we're crossing over on both sides. I think what you're now saying is expressing the tension of our moment. The tension of our moment is that as soon as somebody says that something is objective. Somebody will say actually to me, you're a definition of that isn't how I define it. And therefore I reclaim the subjectivity of it. I can turn Andre Sagovia or Eddie Van Halen or Jimmy Page or any of these people into not a good guitarist by redefining what a talented guitarist is. If I redefine the concept of talent on a guitar and I say talent on a guitar is somebody who can convince me of emotions that they're playing with. And I didn't feel anything. Maybe the promise of word talent. Exactly. You say if someone is objectively proficient about the guitar is Jimmy Hendrix proficient. He was incredibly sloppy in a weird way. He's timing actually varies. It's not incredibly rigorous. But the end result was subjectively amazing. I know people who say what is this noise? Who are the fucker those people? Not that he couldn't but what if he couldn't read music? Does that make it? Well I don't know. I don't think Joe and I would put more on that. I know what I know about that. I'm just saying like if you're throwing them into another situation and be like okay play with these guys. And then he came into the game to make them work. Academically he wouldn't be as proficient. Like in terms of like if you had to write the music down and teach it maybe. I think if you took something like Guthrie, you know who Guthrie Goven is? No. Guthrie Goven is arguably the great guitarist of our age. And one of his tricks is you tell him a guitarist and he will play in that person's style in and of what he does on his own. Really? Yeah. So effectively he can mimic anyone's style. So he has a proficiency of technique that the guy's always. If anyone is a good guitarist, Guthrie Goven can represent that person's guitar in a way that if you were blindfolded, you would say boy BB King is having a great day. Okay. That's right. So that would be a proof that Guthrie Goven is like it's a Turing test basically. The Guthrie Goven can emulate any guitarist. So if you believe anyone is objectively talented, then Guthrie Goven is objectively talented. That's a thing about guitar is that it is an instrument with six strings, but people can make radically different noises with those six strings. Tossing a boss is not six strings. Narcisso, yeah, it's not six strings. Even that. Okay. Yeah. I'm just trying to say we can also do those double guitars, some of those wacky rock and roll. Even if we, I know, those are always sort of dark, what's that called? Double neck. Usually it's a 12 string and a six string so that you get these sort of resonant. So it's 18 total. So which one's 12? And I don't think all of the strings are doubled on a 12 string. So I think it's only some or I'm not exactly sure. But those things are based on the idea that you're trying not to switch guitars in the middle of a song when you're trying to do two things or Stanley Jordan will tap on two guitars simultaneously with his fingers as if he's playing the piano. Right? Which is insane. Well, Andrew, she's playing star spangled banner with his teeth. Yeah. And nobody teaches you that. I, who used to do it. Maybe someone will teach you that after he did it. At least in that movie, August rush. No. It's Robin Williams in it. It's about little kid proficient, whatever. It doesn't matter. The style of guitar is playing. He's slapping the guitar. It's tuned in in a very strange way. It's hard to recreate. But he's doing this. Like what he's saying is like tapping on like piano. I'll show you what he's doing to kids acting. But someone was actually playing it. It's not guitar playing like you're used to seeing it. But put up. Never heard of it. Yeah. I mean, that's a different thing, right? You can like there's people like Gary Clark is a perfect example. Like Gary Clark up. I'm pretty sure I played this for you when Suzanne Santo and Gary Clark and Ben Jaffe were. We did this show in downtown LA and they played midnight rider. And Gary Clark attached his sound to that classic almond brother song midnight ride. And it was fucking amazing because you could clear if you just tuned into it. Oh, that's Gary Clark. Like there's a style of sound that Gary creates that's uniquely him. Steve Ray Vaughan is another example. There's a style of sound that Steve Ray Vaughan created that was uniquely him. This is a little clip. This kid's finding out how to play a guitar. This is a little too much. It's like movie magic. But this is what I'm talking about. He's not strumming it like you're used to seeing or hearing. He's almost playing the bongos using the reverb of the room, adding into what he's doing. Oh, that's pretty badass. This is called August Rush. It's a movie. It's an interesting movie. Watch it if you want to spin out for a while. It's just a very strange. Robin Williams is one of those guys that I see him like it's sad. Yeah. It's a very good movie. Exactly. And that people might be to know it was a kind of. A madam once. It's a weird story. I've told it unfortunately. I've told it already. So forgive me if you've heard this. But I was at the improv. I did a show at the improv. But then afterwards, there was a line of people taking pictures of people saying hi after the show. And this dude with glasses and this thick white beard of baseball hat was in line. And he was telling me how great the show was. He really enjoyed it. He's talking about specific bits. And we're talking about, oh, thank you. Thanks, man. I really appreciate it. Glad you enjoyed it. And then in the middle of talking to this guy, I go, holy shit, this is Robin Williams. Fuck you. He was just in line. I didn't even know it was him. He had this crazy white beard. I didn't know it was him. I had no idea it was him. Until in the middle of talking, I realized it was him. He waited in line by himself. There was all these people. No one noticed it was him. What a compliment to you, sir. It was wild. It was really, really weird. It was right before I did triggered. It was like I was tightening up my act. It was like getting everything together. I think it was around then. I'm pretty sure it was in the middle of about to do a special. So everything was very tight. And I remember seeing him going in the middle of the conversation going, holy shit, this is Robin Williams. I saw him when I was in high school in an LA comedy club at the improv. And there were two guys in LA. I can't remember the other guy. The thing about them was that you were just convinced that their brains were 12,000 times faster than anybody else you'd ever met. Like that they were just in a weird way smarter. And Robin Williams' free association, it was like being on a nan-tucket sleigh ride of the mind. And comedy was how it expressed itself. But it wasn't about comedy. It was about just like having thoughts interact with each other. And you had to justify them by turning every thought into a joke that's influencing every other thought. It was like almost like excusing madness that was purposeful and pointful and amazing to watch. And unfortunately he repurposed some other people's material. Was that right? Yeah, he was known for that. And I think that was part of the manic nature of this style was that sometimes he would come across a subject that he was just, you know, because he was free-balling. And he would just use material that he knew of. Well, my guess is that the speeds he was at he probably couldn't slow down to ask where did that thought come from? Is that the... Maybe. Or maybe the ends justified the means. And then what he really was doing is just trying to put on the best performance that he could. And he had this idea that he knew wasn't necessarily his. He cut checks to a lot of people. And there was a lot of issues. I know Keneson and him had a big squabble because of it. And I'm pretty sure he cut a check for Keneson and cut checks for other guys that were at the store. Like when you want to... Because he had to not because of it. Do the material on TV. So let me ask you a question about this. I guess I was reviewing that night in your life. And I was looking at the fact that it wasn't that funny when you went up and you said it had to be said. And I think about comics. That's done at the Comistro when I left. Yeah. And it was painful for me to watch in a way because it was both courageous. You know, that was a weird situation where I was called back on stage by Carl'sman. See, there wasn't like... I mean, I made a statement. I had already done my set. I had already didn't stand up. And then I went back because he called me out. That, you know, like me leaving the comic store was not even my idea. It was like they banned me. So it's like it's less... It's less... In the story, just... Didn't you... No, I don't think so, Joe. I think at some level, you threw your head into the ring. And you almost certainly knew. Like they said, why don't you take a break or take some time off or some soft... Yes. And then I said there's no fucking way I'm going to do that. I'll never come back. Yeah. That I think what you did is you obligated yourself into a role where you actually had to stand up for something. And the thing that the thing that I'm wrestling with it, because I reviewed this whole story a few times, is this question about... Like I look at your energy and you're such a positive person in my life. And I look at that energy and you were trying to take care of something like Ari. You know? It wasn't just Ari. I know. It was created to be in general. It was the concept that there was a guy who was more successful than everybody else who would just suck up everybody else's material and profit off of it. It was also that nobody else was saying. It was also that they knew it was happening. Everybody was talking about it and there was a silence. Bill Burtt told me a story where he was performing there and he said to the guy that was a manager, the guy that I had the issue with. He said, fuck, I don't want to go on stage. You know, fucking Carlos is here. He goes, oh, don't worry. He doesn't steal from guys like you. He only steals from the younger guys. And he goes, what the fuck did you just say? So you know he steals from the younger guys? He goes, that's not what I said. He goes, that's what you just fucking said. It's exactly what you just said. And it doesn't feel that way. That's the thing that, you know what, man? It was a time before accountability with the internet. The internet came along and by the time that, like when that instance happened, people recognized, oh, there's like legitimate accountability for doing things along those lines. This is from 1964. What is it? It's a FOIA request made for the Freedom of Information Act. Freedom of Information Act for the file of Barack Hussein Obama Sr. as a graduate student in the economics department at Harvard University. Okay. Obama has passed his general exams, which indicates that on academic grounds, he's entitled to stay around here and write his thesis. However, they are going to try to cook something up to ease him out. All three, that is all three Harvard people, will have to agree on this, however. They are planning on telling him that they will not give him any money and that he had better return to Kenya and prepare his thesis at home, which means he will never get his PhD. Remember when they said, take a break to you? This is my alma mater. This is the thing I've been unk-y, you know, there's this whole story about what happened in my early life and why I don't talk about it publicly. And this is why this is interacting with your story about joke theory because it's weird for a comic not to turn that into a joke. And it wasn't funny to you. In around, I don't know, 1988, 1989, Harvard University told me to remain in good standing in this program. You cannot live in Massachusetts. Why? And I said, what? How can you tell me where I can live and where I can't live? It wasn't until somebody foyered Barack Obama's father in his file. And I read the story that I realized that Harvard has a program for how it gets rid of people it wants to get rid of who are in good standing. There's a move. It makes them move so that they can't complete their thesis. Why do they want to do that with you? Probably because I was learning disabled as the day is long, probably because I took an unpopular stance that the equations are not. The people we're working with called the Donaldson theory self-dual equations were not the right equations to be working with. And that we had somehow been assuming that they were highly peculiar to dimension four and the difficulty of the equations, which was giving us all these great results. I effectively gotten on the wrong side. I proposed some equations that where I was told were insufficiently nonlinear. Never mind what that means. that in 1994, effectively the same equations took over the entire field. Whatever it was, and this is like part of the idea of reclaiming your own story, it was so crazy that a university would tell me what state I could live in. Can I stop you? So the people that are telling you this, they're operating on a pre-existing solution to deal with people that they find undesirable or desirable problem. If you solve some of them, right. So it's written somewhere. I don't know. It's like people maintain, for example, one way of getting rid of a tenured professor that's known is that you asked the person to report on their research and you load them up with teaching and you give them allows the office. And then eventually they'll just quit because you make their life hell. So people know that there are these kind of secret quiet ways to do the unduable. Can I ask you this one? What did you think about Cornell West being denied tenure from Harvard? First of all, I thought I assumed he already had it. I mean, Cornell West is this loved intellectual when I found out they denied him tenure. I was like, what the, what? How do you deny Cornell West tenure? Like, what is that? What did you think about that? I, first of all, am not knowledgeable in that area. I think of him as a very bright superstar of some sort of part academic, part social crossover, high impact human being. Yeah. I was there when Larry Summers was president of Harvard when he went out and said, I said, I impact human care. I was there when Larry Summers was president of Harvard, when he went out and said effectively too many people are using the Harvard label and we're going to be raining it in and going back to hard rigor and basics. Let me tell you what people don't understand about Harvard. Harvard is two separate structures fused together. One is about power and one is about achievement. The two of them are interlinked in a way that cannot be separated. Without the achievement, Harvard wouldn't have this kind of glowing reputation that causes us to sort of, ooh, and ah, over it historically. Without the power, it wouldn't be able to attract the money and it wouldn't be able to constantly position itself. So through achievement, it gets enough cashay to wield power through the power it gets the resources to buy achievement. And this sort of thing is not understood. And I've been in both sides of this thing. One of the things that happened was that the Boskin Commission in 1996 tried to figure out how to cut social security and raise taxes without getting caught because that's the third rail of politics. And what they said is if we change the CPI, the consumer price index, the way we measure inflation. This tax brackets are indexed and because entitlement payments for social security and Medicare are indexed. If we claim that social security, sorry, if we claim that inflation is overstated by 1.1 percentage points, we will gain a trillion dollars in savings. And the public won't be able to object to it because we're going to be just adjusting a dial. We're going to say that this dial was broken and we got some technocrats to fix it. So they figured out we want to get a trillion dollars over 10 years. They backed out, that would require 1.1% overstatement. They broke into two teams. One team came up with 0.5. One team came up with 0.6. 0.5 plus 0.6 equals 1.1. Totally fictitious. They got a proposal for a trillion dollars that they were going to steal effectively from social security. And they described this action publicly. Robert Gordon, who is one of the five Boskin commissioners. Jamie, could you bring up something called Boskin Wild versus Mild? They brag about these things. Power wants to explain just how powerful it is. And you remember the scene in the big short where they're talking to these guys in Florida and saying, why are they confessing? And somebody says, they're not confessing. They're bragging. It's a question of what are you proud that you're able to do? So until Robert Gordon did this PowerPoint presentation, we did not understand what happened to the work that I did with my wife in economics, which is that we were trying to show how you could actually compute the consumer price index objectively using gauge theory. The same year they were trying to figure out how do we steal a trillion dollars over 10 years by doing funny games with the gauge called inflation. Do you find the wild versus the mild? Yeah, I did. It's just blowing a PDF and it's like taking it out of the field. So this thing, perfect. If you go to go about five or six slides in, we'll see how that works. OK. Keep going. I find the word is somehow. Keep going. OK, Dale said 1.1% implies 1 trillion in social security savings over 10 years. Somehow our separate efforts came up with the 1.1% bias number. In other words, they came up with the target, which is let's save trillion dollars. And then they came up with, we have to say it's overstated by 1.1. We then broke into two groups and somehow, keyword, we put them numbers together and we got the target. This is academic malpractice practice in the absolute extreme. And Harvard was doing that. It was acting in its power capacity. And the way they did it was they buried what I think is probably the best work in 25 to 50 years in mathematical economics that happened in the Harvard economics department, which is a second so-called marginal revolution where we changed the calculus underneath all of economic theory. So how does something like this happen? Is there a concerted effort did they get together and they have this idea that we're going to do five person commission? Behind closed doors, that meets at the cousin's house of somebody on the commission in Florida. And in another presentation- In the fourth of Florida. Florida man. In another presentation, they say, we solve this at the kitchen table of my cousin's house in Florida. And you're just thinking like, okay, so it's five guys, Bob Packwood and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat and Republican, got together, picked five economists who were willing to play the dirty game. The dirty game broke into two teams. They knew exactly what they had to do. They found the results to put them together, to put in front of Congress, to put in front of the national academy. And would they ever held a ton of both for them? No. There's an entire book called The Physics of Wall Street in which my wife and I are chapter 10 and the epilogue, which it talks about, they made Weinstein and Milani go away. So what I'm trying to talk to you about is like this experience for me. I've never talked about this with anyone. I've never, I mean, I've talked to tons of people privately. This is going to go out into the world. I was, you know, this question like, what is Eric Weinstein ever done? I did that. I did the marginal revolution using speech. No, no, no, no. That question is Tim Dylan joking around. Yeah, I know. He said, what did he, he never created the rotator. He was very joking. He was fucking around. That was the funny part about it. He was joking. But he's saying that because he knows you're brilliant. You understand the only reason why he can say that it's Joe. Joe, Joe. He couldn't say that. You don't need to make me feel good about myself. I know, but you brought it up again. No, I'm saying something completely different. Okay. Okay. I actually have been scared of this question. What question? That, Tim's question taken seriously. Who's he going to take his ears with? I'm taking it seriously. Okay. You're in a weird world. Okay. Here's your word world. You're in a world of serious intellectual people. You're dealing with it. You're also hanging out with Tim Dylan and me. And I love it. But it's the problem is like you're complaining these two things. Joe, Joe, I'm not that angry at Tim Dylan. It's not that angry. Do you hear that? You heard the word that? That's a problem. You're not that angry at Carlussman. See it. I'm not angry at him at all. I know. I'm not very tired. I'm sad for him. Tim Dylan. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. He's one of the most important meetings of our time. Okay. How dare you, Eric? I took, it gave me a moment to reflect. And I realized something, which is I don't want to talk about this shit publicly. I don't want to say Dale Jorgensen is the guy who buried one of the most important innovations in economic. But you just did. I just did. And that's what I just done. That's right. I realized by reviewing your history and revealing your seven years away from the store. I don't want to be associated with Dale Jorgensen. I don't care about him. I want to be associated with gauge theoretic economics. I see what you're saying. And what I realized is I don't want to be associated with the shit that happened over something called the cyber-witten equations. What I just handed you, one of the reasons I've held it back is that it very clearly gives an alternate definition, alternate motivation and derivation of the equations that revolutionized gauge theory, which is what I was thinking about. In around 1987, 1988. And I've lived afraid of my own story because it's such an ugly story. This story of a guy who was not allowed to attend his own thesis defense to any academician. You hear it, like, what do you mean you weren't allowed to? You present your thesis. No, no, no. I was not allowed in the room of my own thesis. So this is why Harvard wanted you to move out of state. Harvard and I got into a thing because of that, because of the conflict. It was also of this because of geometric unity. Because I said I want to do physics. And I have an idea about how physics goes. And to be brutally honest, I was technically underpowered. I am technically underpowered. I was conceptually amazing. I was very creative, very generative, tons and tons of great ideas, I think. I'm being honest on both fronts. Technically underpowered. I couldn't accept myself in this world of, you know, if you play classical music, everybody's technically brilliant. There's no technically weak people in classical music. I was like a guy, I was like, it was like John Lee Hooker in the orchestra of, you know, the Cleveland Symphony Orchestra on one string and a guitar playing with some weird syncopated rhythm. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Gonna shoot your head down. Yeah, exactly. Mom said, that, dad, he said, let that boy boogie-woy. It's in him and it's gotta come out. thing I'm scared of. Why I'm scared? Because it's my history because I don't want to go back into it. I don't want to go back to being the guy begging Dale Jorgensen. Oh, pretty pleased with sugar and top. Let me innovate your entire field. I don't want to go back to the Harvard department and say the words Clifford Tabs. You had Gary Tabs on your program. Clifford Tabs was the guy who told me I had to move out of state. Clifford Tabs. Is it Gary? Yeah, it was a brother. Yeah. He was the guy who held the secret seminar. And the thing is, is that I'm not against the person in the story. I don't want to have it. I don't want to be involved with him. I want him to go and be successful and have a good career. But my story, when I put forward those equations and he said they're insufficiently non-linear. And he said, self-duality doesn't have anything to do with spinners because if it did Nigel Hitchens would have told us. Okay, Nigel would have told he didn't say Hitchens. He was wrong. And then when I gave him the opportunity, he didn't say, you know what Eric Weinstein brought these equations up and I told him no. And that thing is like something I've held open the door. He's now in his mid-60s. I was like, you really couldn't just say, maybe I screwed up. You should go kick his ass. No. Why? I'm choking. I know. Well, but where's the second joke? Such a dick. Such a dick. I had to. Oh, man. I thought you were going to cry 30 seconds ago. Do you have a tissue? Somewhere. That's right. Yeah, it was over there. But that's this is the thing. I've been running what I realized through Tim, it wasn't a question of being angry at Tim really. I've been running away from my own story. Just the way I don't like you associated with, I haven't mentioned the guy who was the joke thief in this entire time. Yeah, I understand what you're saying. Right. It's like, why are you in he entangled in a story? Because he has nothing to do with your life. It's okay. It doesn't bother me that I'm entangled with him. What bothers me that I'm entangled with this stuff? I know what you're saying. Because I want to be joyous. I want to produce positive things that uplift us, to give us a hope of breaking like the Einsteinian speed limit. You know, if this is wrong, I want to know. I think it's right. I think with all my flaws and all my failings and being 25 years out of the field, I believe that this story is going to be fixed by people who are trying to shoot it down. I'm going to say, holy shit. I think there's something here. Well, now we're going to know, right? I think I'm hoping you released it today on geometricunity.org. And go to pull that up, Jamie.com. And you can watch all the videos that we didn't show you. There it is. Pull that up. I'm a little conflicted with that. Are you? I, well, we can talk afterwards. You should have thought of it first, Jamie. Jamie's got a shirt that says pull that shit up. I have a comment on the way too. What is it? We can talk about it yet. Yes, and what website would that be? Jamie Vern. Young Jamie.com. Yes, correct. The break out star. But we're at dinner yesterday. Yeah. Beat and barbecue. And I asked Jamie a question in the fucking way. And it goes, holy shit. It's Jamie. It was hilarious. Jamie, do you get recognized? The like, because you're like, be that way to he fucking panicked. When he saw Jamie, he panicked. He's like, holy shit. It's Jamie. That's good. It was kind of hilarious. I'm gonna serve a world. It was funny though. It was an interesting moment. I pretty sure that was the first table that dude ever waited on too. It seemed like it for sure. Yeah, he was, he told us he was a trainee. And pretty sure if it wasn't his first table, it was definitely his first 10. Yeah, he's a little perplexed. I'll make it. But seeing Jamie, it was, it was fucking hilarious. Do you hate being famous? Um, if I hated it, it would be pretty fucking stupid that I continued to pursue fame. I don't hate it. Are you pursuing? Well, I mean, I'm doing this thing that makes you famous. I mean, I'm not pursuing fame. I don't think it's an after effect of the thing that I should. I think there's no way to go through life, trying to do what you're doing without getting famous as a byproduct. You could get marginally famous and stay alive and feed yourself and do well. But you wouldn't have the ability to impact as many people. You wouldn't have the ability to get the guests you get. You wouldn't have the conversation. Here's the thing. It's like I would like to pretend that I'm so smart that I figured this out in advance. But I didn't. It was just all luck. It was all this job of being a podcaster mixed in with my mental illness of comedy. Well, it's a comedy too, but it's also a I'm an obsessive person. When I find things, I upset on them. And I, yeah, my, my main problem is that there's too many things I'm obsessed with. Like when people tell me they're bored, I just go with weird. That's, that's crazy. That's like someone tell me they breathe underwater. I don't know what you're saying. I don't ever say, I have so many interests. Yeah. I wish I had multiple lives to lead simultaneously. Then I would pursue each thing that I'm fascinated with with like single mind determination. Absolutely. Exactly. So I stumble. I almost, I mean, I don't really believe this, but I almost believe this, that this thing found me that it's almost like there was like totally understand what that means. Like like an attractor in like how you ever see when neurons. Yeah, trying to find each other. Yeah, it's fascinating. And they, they speed it up. So he goes, I think Friedman, I think Lex Friedman had it on his Instagram. These neurons are, they, for, they don't see, right? It's not they just send stuff out chemically. Yeah. Some way they find this thing. And I, I feel there it is, that is Lex. And there's something that I feel like about life that if you just open, if you just, if you don't bullshit yourself, yeah. And you, you're willing to take risks, those things find you or you find them. And then once you get going, once you, the easiest part is once you've already started just continuing, the hardest part is getting going with everything, the hardest part is showing up for the first class. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Then I, easiest part is showing up for 1000th one. I'm backing away from fame. How you doing that? By being on the show? It's a clubhouse. That's the clubhouse. What? Hey, Mark. You come busted. Fuckin' Jimmy. Jimmy, it was a closed app. I know, I get it. I can million people follow you, bitch. Two. What are you talking about? What? You piker. I think I have 4000. Yeah, because you showed up once it's seven. I might not even have 4000. Joe, the issue was, I tried doing something. I tried doing it and it got big. Oh, yeah. And that was an accident in a weird way. No, you're good at it. You're good at talking. Joe, like hearing you. But I love it. I love, and I love a large part of being famous. You should be on only with Tim Dylan. Just you and him together. Should we have an only fans page together? That would just see you guys only on clubhouse. Yeah. And you have to be in the same room together. You can't. We've got a bunch of rooms to show, but only in the same room room. Like, where you have to look at him. Why do I fly to Austin to try to be serious with Joe? Listen, you can be serious for a little bit. I know. I'm struggling with it. And I was wondering whether or not, because, you know, in a weird way, you, you very clearly scope your life. Like this and not that. I'm going to do this probably. And I'm going to retreat into my own. I just have instincts. Yeah. And my instincts are there's a great benefit for me personally to do this podcast. It's a talk to interesting people to have these conversations. And I've most certainly been educated beyond my wildest dreams in the 11 years that I've done it. I've learned so much about just the the broadest spectrum of ideas. You're going to claim you're not doing it for the world because the world is I'm not doing it for the world. I'm not doing it for the world. I'm not doing it for the different than for my personal edification. I'm doing it because I enjoy it. I'm doing it for the money. I'm doing it because I do think that I love the benefit. It's true. I'm doing it for all those things. I'm doing the money. The reason why I'm doing it for the money is because there's a lot of freedom and money. And there's like, I'm the trappings of money. Like, you know, you start people get crazy. Like they start buying fucking diamond and crocheted watches and shit and bigger houses and it's freedom. That freedom is the biggest insecurity. Like I would buy bodyguards and assistants and lawyers. Yeah. It's very valuable. The freedom aspect of it is very valuable. But but when you reach a certain number, then why are you still doing it? Well, I'm still doing it because I enjoy it. I do enjoy it. Like there's not a day that I do this where I go, fuck, I'm going to go to work. Not a single day. It's and you know, partially it's because I pick all the guests. Like there's no one that's a guest that's I don't want to be on. Like you have an easy time saying no. I just don't answer. I don't say no. I just don't say yes. I just don't, you know, it goes there's a filter system. So like when I send my guy people to go contact that I don't know. Yeah. And then the people that I do know I contact. Right. So it's like half of them get booked by me and my phone and half of them I get someone to contact for me. And like, hey, I read this guy's book. He's really interesting. Can you get a hold of them? Or hey, I saw this guy's documentary. This is crazy. This is the best part of the fame thing. The best part of the fame thing is getting your call answered when there's something like I desperately wanted to talk to PGA work. I don't know if you've talked to him or. No, I have not. But I know we are unbelievable writer. Yeah. I just think he's one of the greatest writers in the English language full stop. And I told my producer, can you get me PGA work? And he's like, okay, he was booked. I'm just like, you got him. I got him. Yeah. And you know, it was meaningful to me that like that particular person who's I've read so much of this I've gone over and over like, how did he make that sentence sing like that? Just tell me how that sentence happened. Probably the third or fourth draft. Maybe or maybe the I think actually what it was in part was that he imitated so many people's styles initially that he became very adept at like pulling from the great grab bag of tricks that everyone had used and then he built his own voice. And that's the benefit to reading as well as writing right like all the great writers read a lot. Are you a great reader? I do more books on tape than I do reading, but I'm reading more lately. Yeah. And when you write comedy is writing comedy a great exercise for you? Does it feel good or relative to doing comedy? Writing is very important. There's a lot of bits that I come up with that I would not have come up with if I didn't just sit alone with a computer. It's very important for me. Some of my best bits that I've ever done closing bits. Yeah. Signature bits have come from writing. And how much of that? How much do substances break into new space? Like the space was always there to be broken into, but it wouldn't be so easy to find it. I think there's there's multiple variables that are at play. And I think performing is a big one. And lately I haven't been doing that much of that because of the pandemic and trying to be responsible and not do that many shows, you know, and searching not to shows without people being COVID tested. Right. So and I'm hoping that as we come out of this and it seems like we're coming out of this, it'll be easier and I'm also buying a club in town. So once that happens, I'll be doing the same thing there with COVID testing everybody and trying to get the ball. So there's that, right. But then there's also you have to think a lot. You can't just perform because if you do like one of the things that comics fell trapped to in the early days, not the early, you know, 10, 20 years was they would do a lot of jokes about being an economic on the road hotel rooms, airplane travel, that problem with you know, exactly. That's a problem. And I think you have to experience life and you have to think and you have to experience you have to experience different mindsets. You have to experience different subject matters that you're contemplating and you're puzzling, you're puzzled about. You have to perform a lot, you have to write. I think you have to write too. I don't think you can just perform a lot. Some people can. Some people just write in their head and they go on stage and they continue to craft these ideas and some of the best comics alive. But I think they would have more choose from if they just sat in front of the computer and force themselves to write. And some guys will say I don't like it because then my material seems like I wrote it. It comes out like a script and I understand that. But I think the work around for that is what I've done and I've talked to a few other comics that do the same thing. Felicia Michaels, she said she does it this way too. I write essays. I write, I just write on a subject. Like if I'm going to write on getting drunk, yeah, the perils of getting drunk, the pros and the cons and what feels good and what feels bad. What's good about it? What's bad about it? What do I hate about it? What do I love about it? And then out of this, I might write 3,000, 4,000 words. But out of it, I might have one paragraph that comes across that becomes the idea that the essay is weirdly the throw away because the product is like, this is fascinating to me because my guess is that somebody else would publish the essay and we'd be saying, wow, like we I read this thing Joe wrote in the Atlantic. It wouldn't be terribly funny. I would change it. If I was going to do that, I would write it as an essay. But the essay is essentially for one, one person audience, that person's me. And then I smoke a joint, and I go over it. And then I go, oh, that's it. Well, so one of the things that I learned from sort of studying when you do a bit and I see it multiple times, I learn about when you find the rhetorical formulation that allows you to get closer to the truth without paying the outside price. And somehow that unleashes comedy magic. I remember you had something about getting high and and having kids. And it was a very difficult issue because obviously people do get high and they do have kids. And then we have this idea, you know, it's like being sexy leads to kids, but sex and kids have to be kept apart. All of these weird ways in which normal adult behavior and children are incompatible. Right. And so there was like a William Tell act in some sense that had to be negotiated, which is how am I going to talk about two things that are not supposed to coalesce, but obviously they coalesce in people. How do I find the skill? And that's sort of what I wonder about when you hone a bit is that you can get closer and closer to the truth because you find the formulation that actually works without blowing up in your face. It's like I can throw this grenade and wait to the point where it's maximally affected without losing a hand. Well, the beautiful thing is sometimes you lose hands. That's the beautiful thing. You try it out and you lose a hand and then you go, well, that fucking sucks. And then you come back tomorrow with the new approach. Okay. Well, then it wasn't really losing a hand because it was in a comp that then if your Michael Richards and somebody's got a phone up, then you're not losing a hand, you're losing a career. Yeah, that's a different situation. He's on coke. But what the difference is also he wasn't really a comic like that was a disaster. That was just the difference is you're like you you have an idea and you're not exactly sure how this idea is going to best be expressed to group of strangers. Well, this is what I love about the idea of the store and the experimental thing. And when I got together and had the conversation about David Burns, we had it CBGB's work for punk and you said this is the same thing as the store for comments. Yeah, we were in the back bar. The secret bar. This non-comedians are not supposed to even go into them. But that weird thing about like I keep thinking about it. Why don't we have a secret bar for math and physics? Why don't we remember it incorrectly though? I mean, I just tell you that you were the one who equated it to CBGB's because I don't really know that much about CBGB's. You said this essentially was CBGB's is. It wasn't me. I came up. Yes. But then you said that's exactly right. Exactly. And so I was trying to be well, when you were there, I mean like fucking Bill Burr was walking in. Shepau was out there. It was like crazy. That's how it is there. That's well how it was there. Now it's a fucking ghost house. Now it's boarded up. Well, but you're going to do something here, right? Do you know you're going to turn the Austin? Because you're basically hoovering up everybody I like and moving them to Austin. I've moved it up a lot of good people. Yeah, I even got Brian Holtzman to move out here. The idea is to throw up the bat signal and to let all of them know that they can be free here. Really? That this is a place where I'm as opposed to every other person who opens up a comic club. Every other person who opens up a comic club opens up a comic club to make money. Right. They say I'm going to have these comedians. You know, I'm going to make X percentage of the door and they're going to make this and I'm going to make a good living. I'm not saying that at all. My idea is to break even. If I can break even I'm happy. I just want to make it the most comfortable place for comedians. I want to support the art form. You said the store ultimately is a venue for people doing creative shit. Yes. And you said don't you know don't fetishize the fact that it's a particular kind of magic. There may be magic, but ultimately it's a facilitator of magic. The magic was mincey sure. The mincey sure let us be who we were that she would she would cackle. You know, called the island of misfit toys. Okay. The inmates are running the asylum. That was her thing. She loved it. She loved the fact that she let these crazy people just go nuts on her stage. She was in good control. She didn't. She got we she gave me a spot that night. I know the night that I got banned. She gave me a spot. I called her. I told her what was going on with the video and she goes, wow, just keep away from them. And she said to me, what time do you want to go up? I go, what time do you want me to go up? She goes, how about 10 30 and I go, okay, I love you. She loves me back. So I still my talk to her. Is that right? Yeah. Can I bring somebody up on the show because it's hugely at scale? Name is a door singer. Jamie, can you show somebody named is a door singer? I S a D O R E S I N G E R. Who's my version and sometimes this guy say my ass. What the fuck's up dude? This guy is one of the greatest human beings and the privilege of coming to this show. He is one half of the a T.S. singer index theorem. A courageous guy brilliant beyond words who change the entire face of mathematical physics. And a human being who I had a air face of mathematical physics. And a human being who I had a falling out with over the National Academy of Sciences. I hate mushrooms more than anything in this world. I hate a plate of steamed sauteed mushrooms. I hate mushrooms. I can't stand a gag. And his wife rosemary is a wonderful gourmet chef and she made a plate of it. You ever had more else? Dude, I can barely get down forcing. For a sigma. Do you know what murals look like? No, tell me. Murals are like, they're almost like meat. Okay. They're like, I've tried that with shiitake. People say these things. Shtake's good too. I hate a huge plate for this guy. Okay. Without showing any discomfort when I got to the bottom. I thought I was going to throw up at this table. Why mushrooms? I can't stand mushrooms. Fucking marshal. Fuck them. I hate them. I hate them. I hate them. What do you love? I love Parmesan cheese. I love salmon. I love noodle kugel. I love grits. Sure. I love pazole. You're cool with grits. You're not cool with mushrooms. Fuck mushrooms. Wow. Okay. But the thing is, I just lost this guy. I'm not going to see him again. And I have two years ago, I went to Massachusetts to try to see him. You know, this idea that Mitzi stood up for you and she was just in bad health and all this. Well, this guy stood up for me and saved my ass. And I never got a chance to resolve my, you know, like you say, I'm never going to see this. And I didn't see this person again. I didn't see this guy again. And I have so much love for him. But I understand what happened. You know, explaining this very well. He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Like the very top, he was ahead of the committee called Coastal pup, which is the holy of holy. Okay. And I discovered that the National Academy of Sciences had faked a shortage of scientists and engineers. They did a secret study where they looked at supply and demand and decided that the price of American scientists and engineers were going to hit six figures. And they subtracted the demand curves. And they said, let's fake a demographic supply crisis where we wouldn't have enough scientists. They got us to pass the 1990 immigration act, which came with H1B. And I told is this. And it put him in a position where the thing that he loved, which was the system, because he was the guy who made the system work, he was like Harriet Tubman. He would do things. He saved me. Right. He loved the system. And then I had to show him that the system had gotten so corrupted that we were going to give it all away to China. And we were going to allow the Chinese to populate our labs and put a proctor scope in the entire university system, which is where we do our research. So they would get the benefits of totalitarianism and the benefits of our freedom. They'd learn all the stuff we were doing with our freedom. And then they'd go implement and execute with totalitarianism. And is was so angry at me that I had found the study in 1986 done with the National Science Foundation and the National Academy to fake a fake shortage of scientists and engineers to pass the 1990 immigration act that led to H1B. But he and I got to a point where we couldn't talk to each other. What was his rationale for fake? Yeah. He didn't want to fake it. He understood what I said, but the point was that he had attached himself to the system. He was, well, he was what made the system great. The system used to be much better. Did he recognize your dilemma? Is love me. Is fucking love me. Right, but did he recognize your dilemma? Yes. Yes. We got to a point where the world divided us. I was his postdoc. I was his postdoc. And we weren't just postdoc. It wasn't just a formal relationship. I go up to his office and we talk about jazz and love and children and heartbreak and all sorts of stuff. And he believed in this that I showed you. He had so much confidence that when I came to Cambridge, shit out of luck, when Harvard was trying to fix the eight me, he stood up for me and gathered the entire criminal crime of the MIT math physics world to hear what I had to say because he believed. And then he made sure that I got an NSF postdoc and then I got a postdoc at MIT and he repaired my story. Right? And I love this guy. I love this guy so much and he was at my wedding. And I never got a chance to say goodbye to him. And the New York Times did a bituary. And the New York Times hasn't talked to me for like eight years almost, something like that. And I looked at the obituary to hear about his singer and like I'm the major quote because they were still talking to me and they do the obituary so many years in front. I've met a tiny number of people who will remember a thousand years from now. This is one of like three people I can say for sure if people are still talking a thousand years from now. They're going to remember him because he did this wonderful thing. The T.S. singer index there. It's just so foundational. You can't even imagine how beautiful this thing is. You know, it was shocking. It was shocking to remember that I had been enough part of the system that I could be respectable, that I could be a trusted to say something about this great man who just passed it like I don't know, 96. And I never got a chance to like say goodbye or repair the repair of the relationship. And you know, I was in touch with his daughter right within New York Times is had a cabinet. If you said something really brilliant, like really fucking brilliant, you'd often go to the cabinet and say, you know, it's funny. I haven't thought about that for any years. And he pulled out a piece of paper and there was your brilliant idea which he didn't even think to publish because it wasn't ready yet. And on the one hand, you were just devastated like holy shit. You had that thought. And on the other hand, you were like, I had a thought that is singer head. You know, it's like there's this level like if Carlin might maybe, you know, for some comics or, or, or Lenny Bruce or Richard Pryor or Dave Chappelle or somebody like that, there are these relationships where people are just at such an incredible level that you can't even believe that some human being has ascended. And the period of time that I spent with him taught me more about what the human mind is capable of than just about anything. He's the smartest, most brilliant man I've ever had the pleasure to know really, really well. I understand the following out. He didn't want to give up on the idea that the National Academy was good. It was locked in. Well, sometimes things can be good and flawed, right? But for him to actually take what I was saying that the National Academy was acting against the American interest by narrowly saying we need to make American scientists and engineers cheaper than we need to flood the market. We need to interfere in the wage mechanism. We need to allow China, first look at everything we do. The concept that the problem was the National Academy when he was, he was the National Academy. I still understand what was the motivation of the National Academy do that. In the Reagan administration, for the first time they appointed somebody to come in from industry rather than academics to head the National Science Foundation. I named Eric Block, okay? And he came from IBM, not sure. Eric Block took a sort of green eye shade view of the world. Like, holy shit, we're going to have to overpay for American scientists and engineers. How do we avoid having to pay six figures for new PhDs? How do we avoid letting the genius of the market solve the problem of supply and demand? Because there's no such thing as a labor shortage in a market economy long term, right? The wage mechanism will rise and you'll get as many people as you want. When Eric Block did this, he hired, he went through a guy named Peter House and they picked an economist named Miles Boyland, whose name I've never said, who in 1986 wrote a study that said, here's how expensive it's going to be to pay for scientists and engineers who are American in the future. And it was, I deduced from first principles that they had done an competent economic study and that they had faked an incompetent demographic study by subtracting a demand curve. So they hid the competence and pretended that they were incompetent to pass the Immigration Act of 1990, which brought us the H1B, which brought us huge numbers of Chinese graduate students who currently staff our labs and who were addicted to. And this gives China the benefit, the first look at the benefits of freedom and the first and the benefits of the ability to execute with an iron fist. The idea that I was telling is a door, you don't understand your organization is doing the wrong thing. You have to stand up against your own organization. What was his response? How dare you? But did you show him the data? He was on a trip to Washington, D.C. And he said, prepare a report for me on what you're saying. And I sent him the secret study that I had uncovered. Okay. And he said, how dare you? It was too cognitively dissonant. You're picking on the one thing that I don't want to talk about because. Did he say that? Yes. He said, you're picking on the one thing I don't want to talk about? You Joe. You're picking on his low, I love this guy. He made a bad call. The great is a door singer made one bad call in the job conversation with him about this. I tried. He wouldn't talk to you. So this guy who you loved and he loved you and you had long conversations with him. I'm sure he just stopped communicating with you. We couldn't get past the idea that something called co-stop up the committee on, I don't forget what it's an acronym, public policy. Had gone in a direction that was long term deleterious to the United States. He was a patriot. He had stood up for Star Wars under Reagan at great cost to himself. He was a guy who loved his country. He loved science, the National Academy. He had courage like you wouldn't believe. So essentially he had a blind spot. A blind spot didn't allow him to even understand that it was changing. Everything was changing. And the thing that he loved, which was the system, which had been, you know, the thing that put us on the moon, right? The thing that one World War II, right, was stabbing America in the back. The National Academy of Sciences, something called the government university industry research roundtable and something called the policy research and analysis division of NSF. The two main science groups, National Academy and National Science Foundation teamed up against American science for the benefit of employers to make sure that they would never have to pay market prices and fuck these people. They gave away our advantage, our geopolitical strategic advantage and they spun an entire story about we need the best and the brightest, but it was all about money. And this guy, Miles Boylan, who's an economist, who's, I believe, sort of semi-retired from NSF, is the name I've held back. You know, like I'm saying, names that I don't normally say in public. We, I lost somebody I cared so much about over this issue, right? Because I told is the National Academy of Sciences has gone bad. They've had me there four times to tell them that I've caught them. There's no record, like at some point they had a reporter from Science Magazine and I spoke and there's no record that I said anything. I got a standing ovation at a conference for talking about the fact that I had caught them in this, in this conspiracy against American scientists. And I learned about what happens when like you're going, you say, can you please report this? It's like suddenly your voice vanishes. And I said, you know, is they've had me there four times. They've asked me four times to tell them how I've caught them. And it was too much for him. He couldn't come to grips and like I don't want to be talking to him. I want to be talking about the ATS singer index there and we're racing or torsion or any of the beautiful things, the BPST instant time. All the wonder that is singer brought into the world. I want to talk about him saving my career if I wanted one. This was the thing that didn't go that way. It was me saying, you know the thing that you loved, it's gone bad. It's gone bad because of economics. Because of economics. Because this thing I talked about embedded growth obligations. When the growth ran out, people became sociopath. Okay. It's like you don't like the, you know, I looked what you did with the store where the guy who was the booker was the bad actor. Right. And then you said, we all have to think about the store. Nothing ever made sense about the store. That was what was great about the store. It's true. Okay. You want to know what I love? I love this country and I love our science establishment. I love our universities and there's nowhere to stand because they've been acting bad for so long. They've been so corrupt in terms of shepherding the research enterprise. And I caught them and they knew that I caught them and they invited me back to tell them over and over again how I caught them. What was their response to you explaining how you caught them? They hired a guy, well, they invited a guy named Sherwin Rosen who said, scientists are like cattle. You breed them. You birth them. You feed them. You slaughter them. You repeat the cycle. You really said that? Yeah. Economists from University of Chicago. And I was supposed to respond to this because scientists are not economically minded. So you can take it. And I said thinking about data. That's right. All vulnerable because we all believe in the best and the brightest and we're heads down in our work way, way second. I got up and I said Sherwin, very interesting that you think scientists are like cattle. Let me tell you a different story about economists and then I went through what I unearthed. And I brought a room that was in an academic conference to a standing ovation. That never happens for an academic conference because people wanted to hear the truth. And Sherwin Rosen went off to the airport and said that was the most impudent young man I've ever talked. And then I got invited to the coast of Pup Committee. And the coast of Pup Committee said, you know, Eric, the problem with your model is scientists are not in any way motivated by money. They only care about the truth and that's why all of your models don't work. And I said great news because I have a friend who's got a wife who's eight months pregnant being paid $14,000 a year. So I'm going to open my briefcase and we're going to use the tool called Revealed Preference and we're going to go around given that you're all doing very, very well in your lives. And we're going to open up the briefcase and we're going to allow you to put in an IOU for how much money you don't care about to help the struggling young topologist and his wife. And I looked at each member of the coast of Pup Committee and I got to one of them. He said, okay, Eric, you've made your point. And one of them said, well, who did this dastardly thing? And I said, the government university industry is your grand table and all eyes turned to this woman. I think my name is Mary Ellen Fox. She said, well, Mary Ellen's the head of that. So then Mary Ellen invited me. So then I gave this talk again and again and again and again, right? And they wanted to know how much do you know? How much do you know? And then there's no record that any of this happened. And one of the reasons I don't talk about this is not that I don't have the goods. That I don't want to ruin the beauty of who we are and what we do. I'm keeping waiting for these people to retire and stop ruining our universities and stop ruining the next generation of kids and stop charging people so much that they have to effectively go into gray area prostitution or to pay off their student loans. I keep saying, when are we going to get rid of this class of people that ran everything into the ground? I've now given up and that was one of the things that I did by reviewing what you did with joke theory as I realized that you said joke theory isn't actually funny. There are things that aren't funny. And these things that I'm talking about, about burying careers, about destroying people, about interfering with the wage mechanism, about giving away our advantage towards geopolitical rivals are not funny and they're not cute. And I've realized that this is the thing that I'm unwilling to talk about. I don't want to get into the ugliness of going up against the National Academy of Sciences and saying, what the hell is wrong with you people? But now I've decided I'm going in whole hog and I'm going to be who I am. One of the things that I'm working with when it comes to what culture is not that people think the way they think because I think a lot of young people think that way. A lot of young people have socialist, Marxist ideas because it seems like it's a good thing to think of. And then woke ideology, at least on the surface, it seems to be spreading what you would call social justice, which seems to be a positive thing. On the surface. What my concern really is, and I think with highlighted what you were expressing about these Chinese scientists, is that what my real concern is, and I think this is probably actually happening right now, is the way that people are expressing things online is not entirely organic. I think it's partially organic, but I think it's influenced by foreign entities. I think it's influenced pretty considerably. I think there's a lot of elevating and escalating a lot of the rhetoric. That's incentivizing there. Yeah. They're hacking our openness as a system. Yes, and they're accelerating the rhetoric and pushing the narrative. Because like this, the thing about this woke ideology that we were talking about before with this forced compliance is that people feel compelled to agree with everything. They feel compelled to go along with whatever the ideology is proposing. I think a bad actor can insert almost like bad code into an operating system, like a virus into an operating system, and accentuate or advance things past the point that just a few years ago would be considered preposterous. I think that this woke ideology, the way it permeates through academia and the way it doesn't allow for reasonable debate, it doesn't allow for uncomfortable ideas, and it enforces things like safe spaces and trigger warnings and all this shit that's just not supposed to be any, not supposed to have anything to do with learning and growing and exploring ideas that we are empowering, we're essentially our economic enemies and our political enemies. We're empowering other countries. I think these things are all connected. And I think the economic motivation that allowed those people to essentially cut the Achilles piece heel of science by making it so that these scientists could only earn a certain amount of money and disincentivizing people who are economically. I want to make scientists reasonably middle class or better. I want men and women who are raising families. I want them not to worry about money so they could pursue science. Yes, I want gay couples to be able to raise kids, but I want them in the same state. I know people who are two states away who think that they have jobs close to each other. What do you mean? Somebody will have a job in Arizona and somebody will have a job in Wyoming. They think they have jobs. What do you mean by that? Jobs are so scarce that married couples will live in different states. Oh, scientists. Scientists. Right? Women will be, I interview investigators for the American Society of Cell Biology and principal investigators who are at the top of the biopile, say, we're supposed to not have children because we have to show that we're serious. Oh, Jesus. Right? And that one claim was we make people wait to get tenure into their late 30s and early 40s because some percentage of females discover that motherhood is as interesting as science. Like, I honor so much crazy stuff. People talking about the joys of slave labor. What? You would talk to somebody and say, look, you know, you can say what you want about best and the brightest, but really what I enjoy is having a slave labor force. Americans don't actually listen to directions. Who the fuck's with that? A particular PI. I don't understand what that means. What do they mean by that? Somebody is trying to say the system is broken and trying to tell me in an anonymous interview. I worked for the American Society of Cell Biology through the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Sloan Foundation. And I interviewed, I think it was like 25 leading, called principal investigators in biology. And these people told me the most hair raising things about the nature of biological research. Okay. And I thought, why are you telling me what does that have to do with slave labor? That the PI's, the heads of labs need an army of people to do exactly what they say in order to be competitive to win grants and get prizes and publish papers. And they described it as slave labor. They're basically talked about undergraduates. Nope. What are they talking about? Graduates students. Graduates students aren't students. They're a labor force. They're minimally students. Postdocs and graduate students are a labor force. So the idea is that they provide a service, but ultimately it will lead to them being PhDs and yes, but very often what they're really doing, the foreign ones are very often trying to immigrate. And so the idea is that the way into the country is that I'm going to contribute n years of labor at a very high level at a very low price, pretending that I'm not a worker, that I'm a graduate student, into the system. China, for example, will get the ability to look at what we're doing because their people are in our labs. The PI gets low cost labor to carry out the research. And the system is based on the idea that client labor is in an abundant supply. So I forget like a quarter of PhDs went to China, something like that. And we talk about them as students. So the whole thing is like people want to unionize. How can you have a union of students? They're students. Well, really they're a cryptic labor force. The work that's getting done is being done by the students who are really not students. You're a student probably for the first year or two of graduate school. Then you're a worker. So the whole thing is completely corrupt. It's cryptic. There's like a system called fringe rates. There's a system called overhead. It's funny money through and through. And this whole thing is organized so that senior principal investigators, PIs, can run their careers with these labor forces. And then they take pictures and they say, look at our lab and how wonderfully international it is. But what they're really selling is immigration. Whoa. Right. Yeah, yeah, this is why the National Academy and I just fucking have no kidding. But the point is is that we just gave away our technical advantage because we couldn't get the money to pay for our own labor because we actually have the best and brightest people right here in the States. So these people learn as graduate students on these projects and then take that information and go back overseas. Or they stay here and they have a very strong tie because very often our professors in order to remain competitive have to take on this kind of science knows no boundaries. Well, if science knows no boundaries, why are our tax dollars supporting it? So this is how you get to a situation like where the World Health Organization refuses to say the name Taiwan. Exactly. Because they're so economically and our people are not I have this quote, which is very difficult for people, but it says the idealism of every age is the cover story of its greatest thefts. And one of the greatest threat thefts is science is international. Science is international. A result that's true about a virus is true in one place and true in another, you know, right? Same thing about a theorem. But we maintain a national science program in part to give us advantage. Economic advantage, military advantage, we've got all the smartest people in the world. And what we've done, you see, I want China to say shit, we're cut off from the benefits of freedom. We're going to have to free up our own people. If we want top tier science, we can't do this totalitarian stuff anymore. The same way they've sort of opened up their economy, do a version of capital. A version. I want a... I want to say, look, I don't want to fear you. I want you to be more open to your people with their middle fingers up telling you to go fuck yourselves. And in order to get that freedom, remember Tiananmen Square and the Statue of Liberty and all that kind of stuff? In order to get that, we can't give them the benefits of both systems. What we've done is we've given them the benefits of freedom by taking all the stuff that they can see that we're doing. And then they have all the benefits of command and control. So they execute like crazy and they listen through their people here. And then they build programs where people go back and forth. And so what we're doing is we have a group of people who are so idealistic. I can't see these boundaries. I can't believe you're bringing up the specter of nationalism. Okay, well, this is the idealism, is the cover story of a theft. Is that we have the greatest educational system. We train the best people. We have high schools in New York that have won Nobel prizes in science that all of China. Okay? And we are destroying ourselves lying that Americans can't do science. I see your complaint, but what can be done about it? Well, one thing is that if I have a friend who has a ridiculously large podcast, I can go on about once a year and I can say crazy shit. And then maybe, maybe somebody will write about this. Somebody will talk about that. I know. That's Joe. That's a pie in the sky right there. I don't know what to do about it, but what I've been trying to do is I'm going to say. You made a very good point. It's really interesting because I didn't know it worked that way. And the way you describe graduate students is essentially like almost like indentured servants. Well, this is the thing about this is why isn't I lost our friendship. This is that I tried to say, let's think about what's really going on and he looked at it and he's just like, I can't go there. In fact, he said to me at some point, it's like, I'm not saying you're wrong. I'm just saying, I can't. Because he's too embedded in the system. Because he, look, this is a guy who made the system run. Like if you're proud of our universities, if you're proud of our government, if you're proud of journalism in a previous era, this was the kind of a guy who would break the sons of bitches who would do bad things. He cleared stuff out of people's way. He knew who was not in, who was nice and he made sure that his people survived. There's another thing though. It's like rebellion is a young man's endeavor. A certain point in time a man gets settled into his life and his position and who he is and you know, it's hard to believe. I'm not, I'm not bitching about him. I know, you're not. I know you're not. I know you're not. But it, you know, I think you're, uh, well you said it's very important. There's a lot of shit you said that I don't understand at all. I know you're not, but it you know I think you're uh well you said it very important There's a lot of shit you said that I don't understand at all. I just let you talk I don't know why you got hair ties on your fucking Thing here Because though yeah because those are one degree of freedom as you push them up and down that's Remember three degrees of freedom. I opened up a can of worms. You should check out Pull that up Jamie calm. You just stay off clubhouse. How about that? I have been largely staying So do I have a regular gig here Monday Wednesday and Friday when you're coming back anytime brother You got to get out of LA though before it implodes their falling apart They just they killed their gang unit today. You know that. Oh, no. Yeah, I'm waiting to get the I'm waiting to get the Lex-Fridment Invitation he's already moved here. I moved here today. No, I know because you invited him You haven't told me you haven't told me to move here. You want to move here? No, you should move here Should I? It's pretty everybody should move here. It's awesome, but then nobody should move here because there's too many people are exactly Tribe Exhorety. Oh so hard dude sometimes it takes five extra minutes to get we have to go. It's crazy Oh my god, it's terrible Joe traffic here is so cute They like the traffic is crazy like you need to go to Orange County at three o'clock in the afternoon Just take that fucking Suicide drive so who if you got your name right now you got Suzanne to move here You got Lex to move here. Did you do Elon? No, I don't think so. No, Elon was fed up No, no, Elon and I didn't even talk about it. We both kind of came to the same conclusion organically I got I think Holtzman probably moved here because of me Tim Dillon Tim Dillon moved here because of me for sure He thought about soon me because when he moved here at the ice storm hit Tom Seghura definitely moved here because of me There's more the common. There's waves What's this the club opens then then the full wave then I'm gonna do scholarships. I'm gonna do whatever the fuck I kind of get people here. I Have a plan. It's a weird plan, you know, it's uh, but it's uh, it's uh, it's Rob's in my head Like a weird sound that only a dog in here You know, I have an idea. What's the plan? The plan is to turn this into the hub stand-up comedy There's a lot of logic behind it One of the big pieces of logic is that there's no reason for us to be in Hollywood The only reason for us to be in Hollywood is we were always chasing sitcoms before But now if a comic gets a sitcom it costs you money It's it's it's it's a loser It's a loser in comparison to a podcast and you've got a bunch of suits around you telling you what to do. Hey, hey easy on the suits brother I have a couple of those But it's like I've done it So it's well, you know, I can be at this moment in my life this stage of my life I can be a a reasonable spokesperson in that I really am just doing this for the art form And then I really do love the art form still And I think that we for somehow because of economics we've been embedded in Hollywood in terms of like acting like actors and You know and television shows, but we are as far from actors as a creative Endeavor can be like comics or as real as you can get there's no there's no acting You know, I think it's a writer is my producer. You just can comedy those are the great signs of intelligence well It's it's an underappreciated art form and it's because it's because you guys are all broken It's all it's a little bit of that, but it's also because it seems normal. It seems like you're just talking It's like if I see Gary Clark playing guitar. I go, oh, I definitely can't do that But if I see someone talking I go, well, I can talk He's just talking. He makes a good point, but I can make some good points It's the the instrument is the instrument that everyone uses all day long every day So it gives off the illusion yeah that the art form of communication of comedy right it gives off the Solution that it's not that big of a deal Right, but to people that do it the guys like the Tim Dell's y'all's popis. He's another guy. I got to move here He comes here next week There's There's more coming though, but these the guys who are really doing it they understand and they understand that I am really in it for the Reform, genuinely is gonna be mecca. I want it to be okay. I think it can be and I think it can be for the good of the art form Because I think if I can provide a base like a real home base where they know There's every home bay every comedy club that we've ever had even though they've been great They've been run with an economic motivation right and this is not gonna be run with that It's gonna be really good for it not to do. Yeah, I just want to break even that'd be my goal But if it doesn't break even I'm okay with that too. I just want it to be right I want to set it up right and once I set it up right I want everybody to grow and and it's like a gym if you have a bunch of killers in the gym You get better you get better by music scene here It answers it. Yeah, sure for sure. It's for sure. People are in that they've got that muscle. Yeah pretty strong What it's it's tight here. It's real good. It's a real good scene and you know Gary also helped me move here too because when Gary Gary He lives here. Yeah, he lives here. Yeah. He was there. He was here before me though He was living in LA and you know We were he and I were talking and he moved back and I go, why didn't you move back? He's like, man. I just was not fucking feeling Hollywood man He's like, it's just not me. I'm from Texas because like I'm a simple dude I like brisket and Cadillac and guitars and I mean that comes forth in his music, you know like the purity of his music and He that made that made sense to me and that was before the pandemic. That was before it You know and well Texas blues by the way is its own Sub thing of the blues. I mean whether it's I don't know that place stops word Shepella now we're playing yeah Steve Ray Vaughn used to go there and work for food They used to feed him that's how he would go up there and play and they would feed him in the early days of his career I didn't know you were a big SR Vega. I'm a huge SR Vega Yeah, I used to work out to his music are you an Albert King guy? I've heard his music. Yeah I think I think I think of Stevie Ray Vaughn is like really some major insight on top of a few select voices and I mean huge amounts of new stuff, but really The amount drawn from Albert King was pretty pretty amazing Hmm, well, you know blues all comes from a bunch of different sources, but they all feed off of each other right you go all the way back to Robert Johnson and this like That's one of my favorite stories of all time said he was so good everybody thought he sold a soul And if you go listen to it now you go no, he's just good. You know, but oh, I don't know that those record is like two records only right Yeah, I believe so and Brilliant, but the number of saw the number of standards that he came up with Even minor ones like hell hands on my trail and yeah, sweet home Chicago. He was Coolingly especially for the time ago. What year we talking about Robert Johnson's 20s 30s Yeah, so he was clearly On another level, but there's always a LeBron James, you know, there's some there's always some person just like well, but Okay, I think that BB King and Albert King it's sort of hard for us to understand. I'm afraid he came Freddie King is Super important, but I don't think I think that the issue of bending notes That BB and Albert did in their particular boxes next to each other on the guitar neck In which like one of them associate with with Albert which has cut meaner and more minor and the BB box weirdly Is all about this major minor alteration through bending like you don't hit a note by playing the note you hit a note underneath and you move Oh, okay, and so it's this vocal articulation in particular kinds of vibrato and The weird thing about like super technical players like the most like a John Petrucci or something As you say like well, who do you revere and they'll say BB King and you're like how he played super slow and well Yeah, but with five or six notes, so just break your heart Infinitely you won't care you'll just stay there. You know, and it's sort of this idea of really deep musicianship that I took me a lot longer to appreciate Albert because Albert was was gritty It was much more idiosyncratic. He played flying the upside down backwards The gauge of the strength everything was like really weird and he knew that he was doing everything quote wrong but I think Stevie Ray Vaughn really just said okay, this this guy has said so much and I'm gonna prove it and I'm gonna prove it by building my legacy on top Of what this guy contributed. I'm gonna show you how brilliant this guy was it changed my mind. I think that's one of the interesting things about Any genre. Yeah, is that people piggyback on the work of others. It's clearly the case of comedy. You know, it's Who would you say are your greatest influences well everybody comes from Lenny Bruce? Everybody all of us Lenny Bruce kicked open the door and we're the Robert Johnson He's he's the guy who started it all off but It's hard because comedy is not it's it's it's it's it's hard to listen to Lenny Bruce today Like you listen to prior today Pride I think prior took what Lenny Bruce is doing it made it a lot funnier You know prior figured out a way To just be more vulnerable and more You know more self deprecating and personal and just if it figured out a way to just be more honest Not that Lenny Bruce wasn't honest, but it just wasn't as exposed as prior was prior still to this day's hilarious He's one of the few guys that it resonates today like you go and listen to old prior It's still really funny. You know whereas Lenny Bruce is like you You got to kind of put yourself in the the times of Lenny Bruce You got to put yourself in the 50s and 60s and try to imagine what it was like to be in this incredibly suppressed I think that I think so much of what I believe was important about the 50s is that Jazz and comedy and a few of these things like maybe beat poetry were so Dependent on the oppression of the normies. Mm-hmm. Right that there were these just islands. Yeah magic And they were so oppressed that things that are standard to us today We're just revolutionary to that. Well, that's the thing is is that I listen for What these guys were doing and I think about there were these? Math and physics seminars in the Soviet Union that we did not understand We're entirely dependent upon the fact that everything in the Soviet Union sucked right and so that you could go to these places And this here's an island of transcendence in a sea of shit Right and so in a weird way. I think the the US had this and I don't know if I mentioned this to you before at some point They held San Francisco home movie night at the Castro theater and I went and they asked everyone to send their old home movies of San Francisco And people were filing out of candlestick park or something in 1962 And I noticed that half the people looked like modern human beings and half of them had that glazed look that you'd have with a formal hat On your head and like a suit jacket that you associate with with photographs from like an earlier time And so it was like you were looking at cardboard cutouts and modern human beings simultaneous there So a melding of the time. Yeah, that there was some transitional thing like if you ever watch Albert Einstein Everybody's in a suit and tie and he's in a sweatshirt. Yeah, and you're thinking like Wait, you were in a sweatshirt when everyone else was doing something else. Yeah There is sort of almost no trace of this in George Thurgood was the guy who said when I saw the Beatles on Ed Sullivan He said was the first time I saw young people having fun in public on TV Like just not perform in them. They were just having a blast And I didn't realize the extent to which this was the oppression that animated the Lenny Bruce milieu and that you know if you were gonna see Lenny Tristano or You know, Dizzy Gillespie or Bud Powell You know like if you just think about the beginning of how old you know this thing about I've seen the best minds of my generation blah blah blah People are seeking something authentic and real and the hippies aren't yet You know, we just lost Lawrence firling Getty the great last beat poet of the city lights bookstores in San Francisco I don't know how he lasted this long over 100. I think I think we forget about the beats as As important to that time well, I think people are being suppressed in a different way now I agree to being suppressed by people that purport to be intellectually Open-minded and progressive and it's not necessarily true And there's a suppression on the other side of that and unfortunately a lot of people are embracing like far right-wing Ideology to combat that because they feel pushed into a corner And there's this there's a different kind of pressure But it's all it's always pressure to get people to conform Pressure to get people to comply. It's always pressure to get people to accept an ideology or a way of life that they don't like But the comedian takes the opposite. Yes, like think the pressure to think for yourself That's what we do and that's the job But why is it the calm you know the thing that you said to me that really still resonates is you said for a while We couldn't figure out how to tell jokes I really remember this they were saying we go to college campuses and it wouldn't work And then we gradually We realized how you had to tell the joke and then it became the golden age of comedy This is the conversation you and I had I think what's going on right now is a good thing for comedy because comedy has become radioactive and certain Words are forbidden But that just makes it so that you have to figure out a more clever way to describe things in a way that resonates with people better in a way where While also being funny You're figuring out how to wait to let these people know you're a good person You're a good person, but you're talking shit. So what confuses me is I would imagine that our comedy right now and our music right now would be As good as they've been for a long time and I think our comedy is pretty amazing And I think our music is not hitting the same heights. I don't know that I don't know that if you just look at musical complexity There's been all these recent studies about What is the music needs and repression? I? Think repression in the ultimately look at all the like what happened in the 60s. It was responsible It came out of the repression of the 50s. I think that's real I think we need an opponent we need an antagonist and a protagonist Well, this is the people we need it again and any angle where people don't understand about my reaction to WAP is Do you have a reaction to WAP? Oh, yeah, for sure just say with us pussy Can you say that say that? Say it for me. That's pussy. What there you go. You say you say you went off Mike My reaction is the same as my reaction to little Nas X Given Satan a lap dance. Well, okay, you go girl. That's my reaction My reaction my reaction is you're screwing up the repression angle How if you want to say something like wet ass pussy? You want to do it in a way that You're you're frustrating at making it difficult so you have to work for it Just say it, but you can say it. It's just like it's it's a wave man. It's coming in. It's going out It's splashing against the rocks you kids. It's chaos. It's chaos. I hate it. Mr. Wine. Stop my lawn All right, I gotta wrap this up. I love you. Thank you. You have an open invitation. You know this you're the best next time no hair ties I don't know what the fuck's going on with that but check out check out Eric on Clubhouse. He's there 24 seven Stop it And you get a great podcast to tell everybody Where they can get that they're figured everywhere the portal the portal. It's everywhere the portal You got it on is it on YouTube? It's on YouTube. I should be I'll do it. I'm gonna go back to it What yeah video when you took okay talkies no, but I mean I know you mostly do audio, right? I had been avoiding the studio. I didn't like the idea of doing over I don't like Skype Interviews, right? I don't use so I tried to wait it out in part I'm gonna go back to doing real interviews and just vaccinate people all right Tell them to wear three masks because of fuck's getting studio body common all right. I love you buddy. Thank you. Bye everybody