The Joe Rogan experience. The whole thing about like tracking you on your phone that it's normal now. It just normalize getting tracked everywhere. Allow location? Okay. You don't want to wear a shirt. But you know what the good thing is I'm not doing nothing but... Yeah, that's the good thing. I'm not stabbing somebody. I got an alibi. This is like the slippery slope. You know, that's what people were worried about when all that Edward Snowden shit came out that the government can just track you. But now everybody just gives it up to apps. Now, and then listen to everything you say, well, how many of you are fucking... Isn't it been proven? Has it been proven that your phone is actually listening to you? Yes. Right? Can we say that are we crazy? That's tough. I would have to say yeah. I would probably. I definitely think they could turn your microphone on and they can make your phone listen to you. I think that's a fact. I heard a fucked up story and I'll drop it on your hand. I'm a acquaintance that's going to go to jail because of what they said. I don't know, Alexa. Oh no. So do not believe nothing. I wouldn't put a fucking Alexa in my hands. If you paid me when I walk into people's house and I see an Alexa, I make a mental note to shut the fuck up. Only speak when you know those people. Alexa played Led Zeppelin. I don't speak now. Alexa, I fucking hate you. I don't say nothing to Alexa. You never talk to fucking Alexa but they're going to go to jail because something happened in the house like a fight. And they actually call the cops to your Alexa and oh my God. Oh, so you just want to avoid all this shit. If you have an Alexa in your house, take it out right now. You can play the music by yourself. You dumb fucks. Oh my God. Now you got people listening. You got to assume that no matter what you do, they're listening to you. I don't give a fuck about laws or anything. We can't listen after 30 seconds if you're not talking about a criminal enterprise. Listen, if you got a cell phone, they could tap into you. And they know where you are. It's funny when I go to the digits, you have to log in there. They have like a computer. They make a reservation. That's why I like about how you can make like go to Zen app and just fucking go. I want to go to Wednesday class and no lock of space in here. I think they started because of COVID, but now they don't give a fuck. But when you go to you have to tap in and I'm so excited to tap in and I was going 20 years ago, I wouldn't tap into that motherfucker because I want nobody to know where I was. Right. Now I'm an old man. I don't give a fuck if you know where I am. Yeah, I came here. Yeah, I worry about all that stuff. It's like who has access to your data? Who can track you? Did you see this come out a couple of weeks ago? NYPD had a secret fund for surveillance tools. The documents reveal the police bought facial recognition software, vans equipped with X-ray machines and stingray, cell site simulators with no public oversight. There's a story within the last couple of weeks. I'm trying to remember what exactly what happened, but they tracked whoever it wasn't caught them using license plate camera things and followed them around the city and like found their location. It was when Michael K Williams died. That's how they tracked where he bought. They have on video him buying the fentanyl. Yeah, Jesus Christ. So is that good because you can catch crimes? They didn't stop. They didn't stop the crime from happening. But they've caught who did it. And I don't know what to do. I don't think that helps anything really. Doesn't right? It gives a lot of power to people that are working as police officers. If you could just like zoom in on people like that, listen to their cell phone conversations. They're just people. That's part of the problem, right? But on the other hand, you want them to be able to catch people when someone's done something fucked up. So where do you draw the line? We have a constitution that they wrote. And they're still fucking illegal. If they catch someone planting a car bomb somewhere, this is a good for instance. And you can show on a video, somehow or another, the people that planted the car bomb. And that car bomb blows up and a bunch of people die. Shouldn't you be able to find out who planted that fucking car bomb? That's the slippery part. That's the slippery part. I don't tell me they're not doing that already. They go right to a satellite and see what images they shot on that block. They're already doing that. You have to assume. They're already doing that. Yeah. I think, and what are the satellite capabilities like now? It must be incredible. It must be amazing. Right? That's how Google Earth started. Yeah. It's how crazy it is. How crazy is this? How crazy is this that burglars are even case and joints out anymore. They just go on Google Earth. They see what cars you park outside. Really? They case you join now from fucking. Does Google Earth update regularly? Does it? Really? I mean, it's not like to do two day, like every day, but like, something. Yeah. And there's probably ways to do that. Like how many times a month? At least maybe once a month in certain areas. And they have something that is kind of live because they have quite. You know, burglars doing it. Car thieves doing it. I feel like we're in an episode of Black Mirror, but we just don't know it yet. No. You know? It feels like an episode of Black Mirror. Because these guys were getting an order for a Black Mercedes. They go on the computer. They'd find one. They'd go to look. I mean, it was all tracked on a fucking computer and ever even went by the house before. This was all done right there. I watched an episode of Black Mirror the other day. I haven't seen that show in a while. They ever watched that on Netflix? No. It's all about like dystopian future shit. And the one was about the social credit system. Did you see that one? Oh my god, that was nuts. It was all about what could go wrong with us. You know, if we get too wrapped up and grading each other on numbers, that one. Remember that was a nutty one. It was a real weird one. But it's like, I kind of feel like that's a real possibility for people. That could be a thing we really do one day. Have a score. Everyone get a number. People would be obsessed by their score. Their social score. Like seeing that in that show, I was like, Yikes. You could kind of convince people to go along with that. Yeah, that one. The thing that freaked me out about it was it was a fun show, fun episode. But you could kind of get people to go along with something like that. I don't think it would be that hard. I think people would give in to some sort of a score system like that. That's a dangerous thing, Joey Diaz. That's a dangerous thing. Because then you're putting so much thought into like a number. People get obsessed with numbers. They get real weird when it comes to numbers. If you give people a number like your five stars, Joey, you're like, oh, I'm five stars. You have a mic seven stars. You're like, we get obsessed. I want to be seven stars. What do I have to do? What do I have to do to get the same rating that my God. And we would want that. You meet somebody after like a year or two we would get used to it. You'd meet somebody, you know, like I can't I know what this guy is a four. You know, I mean, it's just like he brings my credit down when I'm around. I'm bringing a three to my house. Exactly. The fuck is wrong with you? That's what this happens. No, seven's a lot. Fucking bring a two to my house. Oh, telling you that's a, that could be worrisome.