Joe Roman find the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day You know what you are on my phone what are you the wanderer? That's a new phone number The new number because that's what you are. Oh, I was telling you last night that I thought it was in Mexico City But we had a report that you heard in a waste of concert in Mexico City. He said nose and Rio It's not Paulo Okay, so it was Brazil so we know a new where you were you were gone for how many months six seven Seven months. Yeah, how many times you done that now? I guess three although when I went to Ecuador I was very much in touch with everybody. Mm-hmm. So it was like that was a halfway That was halfway, but you were there you were kind of checked out I was in touch. Yeah, I was talking numbers. I was still like doing like podcasts and stuff and Were you on a remotely doing remotely? Yeah, I would do one with a big J and Soder We did a 21 jump street breakdown podcast So more doing pandemic we're like, let's find a show and just let's get together Watch how do you want to jump Firstly, throw sex in the city and then found out gay fucking Ian already had a sex in the city podcast So like yeah, did he really do that guy blows dudes? Obviously he loves sex in the city. Oh, I guess so so we're like we don't want to step on his toes like let's pick another He seems like he's straight sometimes. He does it's weird Like is he only gay? No, no, he fucks he fucks better than we ever did for women women Yeah, okay, he gets it so and then but then he went to guys He's a new breed. He's a new breed of just like when did he go to guys? This is a new thing I think he battled with it for a while Oh, okay, so he was fucking girls, but hating him gotta wish Yeah, yeah, I guess anyway, what's a glory holes and he was saying he was a gay I'm like bro Lord one of the biggest signs of a gay So you just take your whole You're dick in the hole or you suck the dick that comes out of the hole like was he the glory giver or the glory taker You asked me questions. I don't know. I always assumed in my head. It was he was sucking dudes off But but I'm actually not sure yeah, interesting, right? It's interesting Yeah, because if the dick comes through the hole if you like everyone is suck a dick But I don't want to look around the eyes. I just want to know what it's like see if I'm good at it Yeah, I want to be parents in front of anybody. They're gonna recognize me later It's just want to work on technique Yeah, I just want to find out if I'm right I need more research not enough data points. Yeah, because so you need to ask him which side of the glory hole he was on I think it was so overwhelmed by this heterosexual dude who was telling me he was the glory holes And so then he was heterosexual. This is back in the day. We did a podcast my old podcast on the way down to like somewhere That's a skeptic tank. Yeah, and and he was telling me that but he's telling me he's not gay. I was like How do I say that wait? I was like, but he I think you are gay He was what why like the glory whole stuff it's a big sign Do you think Like but that's the crazy thing is you didn't even ask whether he sucks or gets sucked I was lost in it. You're right. I said interview. I didn't do my job that day. Obviously I'm major question. It's a one and two chance. Yeah, right. How do you not know? How do I? It's like very important to know It's because there is a percentage chance. It might be a chick blowing you There's no percentage 0% chance. The chick blowing is a vagina 0% chance. It's 100% a guy or a guy pretending to be a chick. I bet there's a ton of those dudes who have Wives, you know who live in that world like I thought I always thought it was a woman like shut up Yeah, we're set up. Yeah Plausible deniability plausible deny ability. Yeah So then he just decided to just go straight gay No, he's ever he does everything. Oh, no. He's like Miami. Yeah, yeah Yeah, so we did the 21 jump street podcast And I would do it sometimes I get on they're like are you drinking a coconut with a palm tree behind you? I got out of a coconut. I was like oh, it's just a Tuesday guys. What's going on? Really milk it because you're an Ecuador because it was an Ecuador Having a good time. What's like that gay tea drink my day? Sure sure but You just got into this it's literally a jar of hay. It really is poor hot water and there's so much hay in there It's so much it tastes you tried it. Yeah. Yeah. It tastes like just like a ass. Yeah, just hey. I don't understand It's like a ritual. It's all the goutchos in Argentina and then spread it to Chile and southern And so it's just a bunch of Leaves that are in a herbatory. You're a bombate. Yeah, but that drink is like different. I've had that stuff I think it's different really. Yeah, I think it's as about as much as like what Willie Nelson's like drink is actually weed Oh Willie Nelson's drink is weed. Really? Oh, yeah. I take it back then. Oh, yeah I don't know what the legality of that is and I don't want to throw anybody under the bus but Ron White brought a bunch of it Mothership and it's Very legit. Yeah It's it's all dose dependent. I think one glass is like five milligrams or one shot is like five milligrams But if you drink a glass of that shit. Yeah, yeah, you're gonna go for it. You're gonna go into that weird dimension You know that weird dimension where you like I think this is earth, but it doesn't seem like earth anymore It's like a fact simile of earth. Try to look at people like you see what I'm seeing. Yeah, I remember one time I was doing fear factor and we were in San Francisco and Back this is the unregulated edibles days, you know because this is before marijuana was legal Get a prescription your joke. Can I do your joke which one the X? Oh? Yeah, I'll do it This early days and by the way, which is like there's banana bread Going around now. It's killing people. It's great not killing people but like destroying people It goes they came in these doses one X two X or three X the problem is X didn't equal any number. Yeah So it's just some guy mixing up his bathtub full of fucking whatever like weed-of-views cookie dough I'm deciding what's X to him. That's not a mathematical equation X had no number value So it's one times this what's this right? Yeah, well, there's I had the joke to about the gummy bear The guy literally said that to me. I go how much should I take goes just a leg? Those are my yes, I go just the leg I Go why the fuck are you selling whole bears? Only you know like because it's only that big like no one's gonna eat just the leg. It's a crazy Dose and a half a cookie is the right cut. That's yeah. Oh cookie is a dose so back in these days we were doing fear factor and we were doing it It was we were doing it off of an aircraft carrier in the Bay area And so we had to take the you know that one train I forget what it is is it the bar that goes under the water that goes under the bay between Oakland and San Francisco the bar. Yeah Bart whatever it is. No, I called the bar just to fuck with them. Um, so I took this edible and it was an unregulated edible So I have no idea and it was way too strong and I was I was like why do my ears feel weird and they're like because you're under the ocean and I was like no It was like the longest 20 minutes of my life waiting to pop out on the other side Like how long is this fucking subway been under the ocean? Like how long has this existed? Like what are the odds this thing is still good? Is anybody out there diving checking on the tube making sure there's no holes in it? You know this fucking started doing all the research in your head and it was like I felt like I was talking to people But what I was seeing was a two-dimensional Like you know like those Standards like when you go to the movie and it's like, you know a person standing there like thumbs up But it's like just a two-dimensional cardboard cutout. That's what everybody looked like to me It was like a two-dimensional cardboard cutout, but occasionally I'd see their soul peeking around It was so heavy. I don't know what the number was. Don't you miss many X's that kind of high? I don't get that kind of higher drunk anymore. Well that kind of high is really fun. It's so fun You know, you're over when you look back when it's happening. It's terrifying. Oh That was at the best remember guy. Did you just do with he made pills? He made THC pills because he was like one of those all day guys He was just high constantly all the time And so yeah the dab guys, but this is pre-dabs. Yeah, and so this guy made pills THC pills I go how many should you take and the and he goes just probably star off with one But I take two so I took two because I'm an asshole and I wound up having this conversation with this guy And he was weirding me out. It was out of jujitsu tournament. I was like why is this guy so weird? Turns out the dude eventually got arrested for rape and Not just a rest of her rape, but he was on the run and he was on the run and couldn't stop doing jujitsu and the way they caught him Was he went to like Seattle or somewhere like because this was in California Final classes and he was just wrong, but he was killing everybody never was like who is this fucking guy? Like why is this guy so good and then eventually they realized it was him they go my god this guy's wanted for rape Wow, he was a crazy person and when I was like super high in these pills I could see all the crazy in his eyes Like it's like he didn't say anything crazy Dude, you can't you can see you can see people you can you can you can see their soul It's it's it's interesting. It is you really can't see it. It's not one of those where I'm like now It's just the drug fuck with me. You can tell and so this was like a happier Year or so later. He gets arrested and winds up fleeing I think he maybe was out on bail or he was wanted and fleeing and went to the Pacific Northwest But I remember when I heard the story I was like oh that makes sense Because he had the weirdest energy just like this dark energy like creepy dark energy Sometimes if you're on like psychedelic and then someone's not On with you, you know, but they're around you. You're like hey you got to go. You're freaking me up like I don't know your energy is not of this. It's I don't know if you're looking at me, but like you got to take off Yeah, he is he like motivations He's you see everything's so clearly no It's weird But it's not reliable. It's not like like I'm about to go into a Meeting with this defendant. I need to know if he's actually interested. I'm gonna take five grams of mushrooms Me and big Jay would even a blues fest in Ottawa once or really it's like a city festival But then you wander into the what used to be the safest city in Canada. So you're all fucked up. It's great and As you're leaving you just see who's on what drug? Like you just can tell like mushrooms acid we drunk Molly Molly. Yeah, you just see it all you just see through everybody. They're just in there talking Yeah, I don't I wonder what's gonna happen now that this Thing happened. I thought first of all I thought You know, I'm not on the news. So I'm hearing stuff little by little about everything Yeah, I thought it was just I've again, which is like great. Those people need that And then and then I mean Ed Clay has been telling me about that for So long well Ed Clay I talked about him on the podcast He's one of the ways that I found out me too. Yeah, yeah, yeah I mean tell you it's a you should get on it helps addiction. I'm like I'm loving what I'm doing right now I need to fuck up my high but like I'm like this makes sense and Then a fine great you got that and then I find out it's also I mean the best hippie flip you got that MDMA and boomers and shrooms and so Simon. Yeah, well, it's because MDMA and so Simon maps was already doing MDMA studies with veterans so for people that you know watch a bunch of people get blown up and lost their friends and come back MDMA was one of the best therapies for helping them overcome PTSD so maps had already pushed that through and John's Hopkins had already done These studies with civil Simon so they already pushed these things and they were already on the way to getting approval through the FDA But the problem was nobody wants to stick their neck out and sign off on it So probably with polity if you're running we talked about this you're running for an office and the opponent can say He wants drugs legalized then you're fucked. So it's like it really binds your hands right Well, that's funny because that's kind of what Dan Patrick did in Texas about marijuana But to his credit Dan Patrick met with Rick Perry and Brian Hubbard The guys that passed this Texas. I began initiative And they convinced him of what this stuff actually is and so they've donated So he's allocated rather a hundred million dollars in Texas for the I began initiative Which is amazing But that's a sign of an intelligent man like this Dan Patrick I had this stance on weed there's like weeds baths ruining everything and then they come to him He's like I am staunchly opposed this and they sit they sit down with him He explains Brian Hubbard explains and he's very eloquent explained what I became does It's not recreational at all and he hears it and he hears how much it'll help particularly veterans It come back. They're addicted to opiates and they're all fucked up and even CTE even like brain injuries from getting blown up It's neuro regenerative somehow. It's a crazy plant and so he To his credit he signed off and they allocated a hundred million dollars for the Texas I began initiative Which is amazing Wow, but it's like all these people have these ideas in their head But it's all because of Nixon all of it goes back Your raw position this is evil. This is you'll get stuck that way kind of stuff Or it's like I think some people do. Yeah, this is what's important So studies. Yes. This is what's important about these studies like I think this is important about weed too You know, I'm very adamant that it's not for everybody I think there's a lot of things Some of it's so strong and some people are already on the way to skits. Oh, they're already on the way There's schizophrenia in their family. There's like they just that's not a good thing for them What's making it come back luckily is like Mexican weed is like the 12 12 percent Yeah THC where it's like The old days kind of bury myself Pluto Is there anything is there? I want to be in the clouds right above the city. That's it. What's the shot in a beer of weed? That's it right. Yeah, right. I don't want to fucking dab I see these dabbers. Oh, I asked for mitzinda dispensery once they're like what are you what? Yeah, they're all so hardcore I remember the early days it was like zen dispens one of the early ones and I was like just getting into it a tarry hooked me up I'm with that guy with like weed and it was like okay, so now I'm into it and I went to zen and I was like listen I like to smoke cigarettes while I write I'm off-sigorous now, but it's a habit So I need something but if I smoke a joint I'm done writing right and that's what is it Oh, you want Mexican weed we can do that for you. Oh just something calm. It's just like Yeah, mild. Yeah. It's like going to a powerlifting gym and saying do you guys have yoga classes? So wrong They did that in Ecuador there was a city I was in when I did ayahuasca and it was a guy from the tourism board And he said what's gonna sit there's three cities that are like on the border to the Amazon and You know you go in from any one of them and they go what's gonna separate our city from all these other Amazonian cities And they go let's be the ayahuasca city and everyone else on the tourism board said no We are not getting a bunch of fucking hippie backpackers in here to be drug addicts in our town Like that's not what we're looking for at all here Yeah, you just filled it up or not there's a lever on it too. I don't know And he goes okay fair, but he goes can I take you on a ayahuasca trip to each member Each member was like you know, they're a half indigenous they're like sure right and then one by one They all go. Oh, this isn't an addictive thing. Right. So I had the wrong idea in my head of what this was you come once You don't come back for a year. Yeah, everybody had that thing from the Nixon administration It's the controlled substance of act of 1970 and that thing That's it's really nuts, but for 56 years. We've been living underneath that. It just becomes a given Uh-huh, yeah, you don't think to reevaluate any knowledge is in there already I know it's like so many people just a little micro dose of shrooms and a change your fucking life It would it would help so many people there's so many people that are stressed out for no fucking reason really does give you such a reset 100% Molly too, or I know it's why I talked to you the MDM a mask people will always like please start calling it MDM a You call it Molly it becomes a party drug. I'm like what I do with it parties So that's what it is for me the problem with what they're saying by saying that is like no because it is a party drug It is yeah, it's also just like what are we gonna call Whiskey we're gonna call it you know alcohol by volume or you're gonna have a technical term for what whiskey is fuck Oh, it's risky you know what I mean like that's why people like it like you call it that if you want yeah, you do whatever you want I'm gonna call it Molly. Oh Oh I don't know about you guys, but with spring here. I am ready to go outside There's so much to do now that things are warming up like getting your garden ready for the growing season Cleaning off your camping gear or even taking a quick jaunt around the neighborhood anything to get outside But that also means you're probably extra busy this time of year That's where AG1 comes in a healthy daily drink that helps support you all day long one scoop of AG1 Supports immune health energy digestion and more plus AG1 can replace all those multivitamins and probiotics Crowding up your cabinet see for yourself how making AG1 a part of your routine can help you stay on top of everything going on this season Visit drink AG1.com Last Joe Rogan and for a limited time get a bottle of omega 3 vitamin D3 K2 and an AG1 flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit With your first subscription. That's a hundred eleven dollar value at drink AG1.com slash Joe Rogan All your rules. That's a good ringtone It's because they've spent so much money and so much time and so much effort trying to get this stuff passed through It would be so huge if you just go get some mushrooms. Oh It'd be so huge and Why can't you if you can go to Costco and just buy a jug of whiskey and drink yourself to death? It also so like in Scott an Edinburgh They have a season for it and you can go through the the meadows or any of these fields and just like pick mushrooms right now, but if it's On your shoe, it's fine and if it comes off your shoe, then it's illegal. That's hilarious But it's just like growing there. You know where Duncan used to live in Asheville They started giving the cows like a certain type of feed that had anti-fungal properties to it What so that they wouldn't grow so who knows what it did to the cows gut? No, you know for nothing through in the cows Just because so many kids were picking mushrooms off of the cow shit They were gonna put a stopped list in Thailand. It's the elephant shit And they're guys who ran the elephant like abusive centers whatever so you could ride them and they can play harmonica Natural in the wild. Oh, no guys. Oh, it's love painting you a picture. We we wrote them one way Did I write back my second time and they were all everywhere the hostel was doing that and then I was like no I already did it and they go humane or non humane. I'm like, oh definitely the humane one like did you ride them? That's in she made him like oh, yeah, you know You made them well the elephants wanted you to ride them. They don't mind like because you weigh nothing and you Feed them first and you make you give them an offering right? So you first of all you wash them and you feed them so you feed them like you give them sugar cane and You have to develop a relationship with the elephant before you ride it like these people were all they were all free-range Elephants they're all rescue elephants so the elephants would come in out of the jungle. Are they wearing cages? Oh, really? Oh, yeah, it was wild and they would yeah Well, you don't it's how early a sad you just kind of climb onto them and there's like a thing that you hold on to and They're totally cool with it and then the end you go to this like pond and you wash them and so it's like They could kill you anytime they want to you know, so it's like it's a relationship And it's not they're not prisoners and they're not abused at all the people that are running this the place that I went to But even then I did a video with it and I said, you know, I you could ride them I go I wrote them. I don't recommend it. I don't think you should do it I would never do it again. I would never ride them again because it just feels one of them I'd rather just feed them and pet them and say you're nice, but also go to the jungle Yeah, but also like you wrote them. I did so like if you you hadn't wrote them You'd be like never ridden an elephant. I would have done it at all if my family didn't want to do it They wanted to do it so I said, okay, let's go and they enjoyed it It was a good experience, you know, the kids are they're little and we're taking other Thailand and yeah It's wild wonder sometimes if these kids have started to tell me about it Like if they'll know later in life How cool their experience was like it'll be till like that 35 or 40 they're like oh Yeah, I had a great child. I didn't understand are the coolest things I did Yeah, I think my kids are pretty aware of it um, but Anyway, they had these these hippies would go over the encampment and pick out mushrooms from elephant paddies And then eventually the people the herders were like, why do these fucking dreadlock people keep coming in at night And just like sniffing around our shit And then they realize what it was and they go, oh, no, no, we'll sell this So yeah, is it illegal in Thailand like was the legality of Now I don't know because I think they just legal as weed in Thailand did they really yeah, but it back back then when it was illegal There were bars. It sold your joints and those are the bars that paid the cops and so for all and sets of purposes You're fine, but I would not fuck around what drugs in another country Lamb Yeah, superland I mean talk to Brittany Greiner how'd that work out Oh Not good do you think when she was in jail the the guards were fuck with her and show her videos of her missing like Shoot Jail for a long fucking time in jail for a while these shoes in jail for like wasn't it like six months or something like that I knew someone who worked to the Agency she was at Sports management agency Every day they started with 15 minutes of like hey before we get into anyone else's business. How are we getting around 10 months? Almost a fucking year in jail in Russia. That's crazy for nine years in a penal colony That was a fun because they just told America like hey guys keep quiet. We can get her out She's a nothing asset just have one be quiet and though the liberal Angry, you know housewives like no, I want to say something and they all just kept talking about she's like Russia's like oh is this an important one? Oh really? Okay, bro. Is that what happened? Yeah, I think so. I think it was Biden was like just shut up We'll get her out to shut up So that they could get the merchant of death released. We are the worst at hand Americans are so bad at handling things. They don't know how to handle they just rush in full-board going I know how to fix it with no knowledge of it But it's also once a story gets out in any form Influencers cannot help talk about it. It's their currency. There's no way they're not going to talk about it Same as a little late night guys. They knew after Trump won that like talking about him helps them before we said we're trying to take him down But now we've seen the research. We know it's helping them. I'm still gonna do it because it's my money. Yeah Can't help it. They can't help it. Yeah Mean that's like CNN's most of their ratings. We're talking shit about Trump Like every time he did something outrageous They would they would talk shit about them and they would have them on and it just made it more and more popular Because I don't think they understood how much America is just Americans despise them You know they thought we're CNN we are the news we're CNN and then because the fact that Trump was opposed to them And they just kept showing him they're like oh, he must be good because you guys suck Right if you hear the theory that terrorism in the US or symbiotic What's the theory? How's it work? Terrorism can't exist without the US dominating their countries. Oh Yeah, that makes sense and the US They can't keep funneling money to weapons without terrorists Well US and Israel. I mean that's the same for sure, but it's like and and Netanyahu who famously said They were funding we need them. We need them. We we we we when we fund Hamas we can control the height of the flame for 9-11 like It popped off a little high But there was like it's we need something to be like hey, we're all against that And then those countries like look they're all against us So they just like they need each other to keep growing well It makes sense and also you need an enemy in order to get higher military contracts and higher budgets I mean if you don't have terrorism. How can you justify a trillion dollar military? So you need to like say hey, they're a real threat like that's a 30% group Yeah, they're not coming for us, but like we got to take them down look at the training they're doing Every scene chains bit monkey bars Do it in the training Yeah, I love that I'm out there a job of jacks It's a happy able to do it again to the big as loser. Yeah, and there's stuck over there like shut up Yeah, they're not going over there It's and then I always wondered why we left behind all the shit like cynically But now you know we leave that stuff behind so that they could use it The older I get the less I think there's accidents. There's an aptitude for sure, but there's also like We've done the research. We know Yeah, at some point, you know, there's bad moves you make here or there But we we left behind tanks and blackhawk helicopters like what we couldn't get those out We had to leave right now. What you're there for 20 years also We got to get out right away. You don't want to put a grenade in each one first before you go like what do you mean? And also those are still good Yeah, we didn't get out like Vietnam. I'm in a field and drop a fucking bomb on it Yeah, you don't have to leave it there for the enemy It's it's for the Taliban so they can keep the people into their thumb if you were treated last second I could see it, but it wasn't that and then you're like Yeah, they didn't have to leave when they they way they left was insane when you see those those ships that are the Planes that are flying away and people are hanging on to the wheels of the plane and falling off because they don't want to be left behind Because I know so many people that work with the Americans you said you'd protect us over and over again And then you're like yeah, we've done this over and over again. We'll just say exactly This is that we it was a equipment we gave to the Afghan state So it wasn't you know it wasn't us equipment any longer And it's already given over to them. Yeah, we gave it to the Afghan state But not the Taliban national defense security forces right and then it there was not that many of them And so the moment that we left the Taliban just took everything there's also like again What is the Taliban we have this word on it? It's like an evil word. Are they just like the government in a lot of these places? Like the cartels in in Colombia They like build schools they do back shit, but they also are the government They make sure the businesses run okay and so you have this idea of cartel. It sounds like that But it's like it's more than that. I wonder how much the Taliban is all actually into terrorism and how much is like Just running day-to-day stuff. Well, that's a good point because in America. I mean what are the pharmaceutical drug companies? I mean how many people have we talked about this the other day? It's like 70,000 people died of opioid overdoses in America in 2024 70 70,000 70,000 so like in a lot of that is probably cartel fentanyl, but a lot of it is like flat-out old-school Oxycodone so it's like what are they? What are they and how much of a donate? Every year, but they thought you saw the most effective thing of that Sackler with Ferris Bueller The documentary series whatever painkiller is they started every episode with a real Person talking about how their son is dead. Yeah, or you know something like that. Yeah, and then they can you like oh my god This makes it so real. Yeah painkiller. That's what's called. Yeah, so good. That's Peter Berg's Yeah, we talked about that the other day. It's an amazing series amazing series Matthew Brodwick plays such a good fucking creep. He did such a good job God that fucking that shows so disturbing because it's based on true story and he's show a guy falling into the despair from being fine to just like Oh, do we all know somebody who got hooked? I falling into the despair from being fine to just like, oh, do we all know somebody who got hooked? I mean, it's so potent. It's so powerful. And they told doctors they told people, they told everybody that wasn't even addictive. They knew it was addictive. They knew it operated in the same path. I mean, that's in the painkiller series. Yeah. That it operates on the same pathway as heroin. Like you're saying that this is not addictive. This is a lie. Yeah, but they did there was go, if that movie is completely accurate, it's like, okay, so this is for heavily cancerous, like bedridden people that have a pain threshold of eight to 10, that it'll be good for them. Why don't we just extend the pain threshold to three to 10? And that allows a lot more people in it. If you're at a nine, it doesn't matter if I get addicted. My life is off right now. If you're to three, like walk it off. Exactly. I talked about when I got my nose fixed and then doctors tried to give me two different opiates. When I was like, it was nothing. I mean, it didn't even hurt. It was just mildly uncomfortable. And that was also because it was stuffed up with gauze. Like those, it wasn't even gauze. Like these foam things with a tube that they stuff in your nose to keep your nostrils open while it's healing. But you know, he gave me two different opiates. And I was like, is it gonna get worse than this? Cause I don't find it. Yeah, they don't tell you, but be careful. I would not take it unless you're absolutely needed. No, they don't tell you any of that. They want you to do it or financially incentive. I got a whizup to that. And the dentist was like, I was like, hey, I don't wanna like... Why'd you get a whizup to that? Did it hurt? I don't remember. It was so long ago. Yeah. It was like, eight, 15, 18 years ago. What's the logic on that? Are you supposed to get whizleting teeth taken out? If I had both out. Cause I've had people say, I've heard people say you shouldn't. Like there's no reason to take them out. I don't know why do you that they get impacted or something. I don't know. Often they grow and they're growing in wrong and they cause problems with other teeth. It had to be that. But he gave me this thing of Vicodin. I was like, I don't want... And he goes, your friends with comedians, right? And I was like, here it goes, your friends will want it. Whatever you don't need. What thought? Whatever you don't need. I'm sure you could fight. He was joking around, but he was right. I have tons of attic friends. They were all like, nooks. Yeah. Advise me to take aspirin, not use up one of those precious vlogs. I took that stuff in once when I had my first ACL reconstruction. and it made me so stupid. Like it in? I think it was Vicodin. It was either Vicodin or Percocet. I can't remember. But I think it was Vicodin. But I wound up selling it at the pool hall. Yeah. Sell it. Get some money. The only time I would advise taking Vicodin is if you have two beers and really want a good night. Really? Oh yeah. Those go so well with liquor. Is Vicodin an opiate? Is it the same thing as Oxycodone? What is Vicodin? It's a downer. I don't know what Oxycodone is. You're a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. I'm a downer. Well, I said, Jeff. A lot of people die from that shit, too. A downer. Yeah. I was reading this sad story once about this lady who she had COVID and choosing so much pain from COVID that she kept taking time on. She died of a fucking liver failure. What is the time? The C to Menuff and killed her liver. Sometimes you see people dying. What a loser we did die. Oh, yeah. You can't ever tell anybody. There was no victimhood. Aspirin overdose. Oh, it's crazy. How much aspirin do you have to take for you die? That seems nuts. I feel like all these middle school girls would try it before they had access to stuff. Really? There's more sweet, sweet, sweet and sweet. I took a whole bottle last week. Oh, yeah. I know a girl did exactly that thing. Exactly that. Yeah, me, too. Yeah, she took aspirin. But it's like that's not going to do it. Yeah, she took aspirin. But you're called for attention is there. She was also crazy annoying. Yeah, but like, let me tell you how she did it. Big tits and she fucked everybody. She was nuts. And I'll accept it. This girl was a fucking freak. She fucked everybody. She was an animal. Catholic school girl. I just, across something weird. What? I just typed in Tylenol deaths. And this thing came up, the Chicago Tylenol murders. Oh, it seems like it's an unspoken case. Yeah, there was tampered Tylenol that people bought. That was potassium cyanide. Seven people died. Yeah, they broke that. That's when they started doing the seal on top. Yeah, right. Yeah, I remember this. I remember this. This is when I was in high school. Do they know why? Uh, investigation suspects. I wonder what the conspiracy. Yeah, what's the tin foil hat? Someone recently was arrested. No suspect has been charged as of 2026. Whoa! So a bunch of people died and they just got away with it. Yeah. Wow. It was convicted of extortion sending a letter to Tylenol manufacturer claiming responsibility and demanding a million dollars. If I remember right, they said they said we found out that the problem with one plant that had whatever. And we've got it. And someone else was like, well, okay, I bought this bottle before that happened. So this should be safe. And then it wasn't. And then it was like Tylenol. Whatever was like covering up how bad it got. Instead of going, we call everything. That's the only thing. Estimate at 31 million bottles were in circulation with a retail value of over $100 million. Equivalent to $334 million in 2025. The company also advertised in the national media for individuals not to consume any of its products that contained a seed of medicine after it was determined that only these capsules had been tampered with. Wow. The other ones in California that strict nine at them. Wow. So that's probably one of those things too. There's copycats. Right. One person hears about someone buying poison Tylenol. I want to do that. Yeah. I want to poison people in Ohio. Yeah. I want to poison. Yeah. How can hacks get your own shit? Fucking hacks. Yeah. It's just to be original. Be awful. Evil, but be original. There's so many of those like the Tylenol. We're like, wait, will you guys evenly covering this up and result in more deaths that I found out down there was like Coca-Cola, Doles? Or like, oh, these are like evil corporations. As soon as they realize that they're, you know, the pento story. Uh-uh. The, the, the mistake. So Ford found out, let's, let's, oh yeah. Research this to make sure that it's just true. They were blown up on the podcast. They were blowing up and they realized it's cheaper to just pay people off that died from their car being blown up than it is to recall all these Ford pentos. Because the pento had like the gas tank rather was in the back. Yeah. There's something about the design where if you got rear end that it would blow up. And it was just changed. It's all the value on it. Yeah. Somebody did. I want to say, I want to, you know, you say Ford, but really it's a person. It's, it's not the Ford of today. What's up, guy? What would that be? A new car production crash test. Yeah. Investigators and lawsuits showed that pre-production crash tests had already revealed this phone. Wow. But the car still went to market largely unchanged. Yeah. Who told us about this? I'll check. I kind of remember that. It's one of our deaths, explain that to us. And it was just like, oh, God. Wow. So dark. It's such a fucking dark, evil thing to do to say, well, people are going to die, but we'll just pay them off the number. Yeah. What is the number? First of all, the car sucked. It's not just making it the first place. It's a terrible ugly shoe. It's a terrible ugly shoe. Fuckin. Kind of what's cool now, but. No, it doesn't. It's got that sun deck of garbage car. So Coca-Cola would have people just like if you were like a leftist leader running for whatever, they were worried that if that person got in power, they would unionize their population. And that would cost them more money in the plants. And they would just have people straight killed straight up, get them out of the way. Oh, they had people whacked. Dole used to be the American fruit company. How about a Coke and a smile? They had people whacked. James, I mean, look it up. But like, we start looking at it. It's probably an executive somewhere, probably an executive. They could do a big house of card style. Who had some guy who was a fixer for him. Right. And he's like, look, these motherfuckers are causing problems. And this guy was concerned with his job as whatever CEO executive. But it's happened over a long period. It's not. They were given money to I think, FARC or something in Columbia after they were already labeled like a terrorist organization. They're still giving them money. For decades, Coca-Cola's faced several severe allegations regarding the murder and intimidation of union leaders at bottling plants in Colombian guanamala. The hyperparametric death squads to suppress labor activism. That's like, oh, what? They want an honest day's pay. Get rid of him. Do you remember when Ross Perot was one of the first president you were choosing? I barely remember it. Sort of. I was just starting to be aware of how fucked up politics were. And because he was on television explaining about the World Trade Organization, about when they were going to start opening up plants in Mexico and moving jobs to Mexico. He's like, what you're going to hear is a giant sucking sound where all the money and jobs are going to go down to Mexico. And what we allowed during that time was essentially what the labor unions were doing in this country was making sure that people had a great wage because the corporations were getting paid well. So the CEOs wanted all the money, like they always do. The corporation wanted all the money. But you really can't make a Mustang unless you have the people that are on the assembly line unless you have the people that are doing all the hard labor and all the work. And they should get compensated correctly. So the auto union workers organized it and they went on strike and they did what they had to do. And they were making a great living. They're making a great living. And these people had a nice house in the out of car and a garage and it felt good that they were getting paid really well. And so a lot of people thought, well, they're getting paid too well. And this is fucking up our projects. And so what and I'm simplifying this if you're taking about $10 million. And historical sort of like the top guys who make a million less. They did is just open up a plant in Mexico and pay people fucking slave labor. And they go over there and they pay them slave wages. And these people are making cars for like fucking how much a dollar a day or something like that instead of getting healthcare and retirement. And you know, and so that's a great free market says go to Mexico. The moral market says no, no, no, no, no, no. Let's just pay people what they deserve here. But it's not just that, but they destroyed Detroit. That's right. That's Roger in me. That documentary, Michael Moore's greatest documentary is all his first one is his best one. Because it's really documenting and horrific attack on Detroit and Flint, Michigan. And all those places up there where there's all these auto plants and they all just went away, man. And those jobs went away and now Detroit is Detroit's kind of bouncing back. It's kind of back to Annie was talking about at Brown where he was like just before COVID it was like starting to be like some cool new restaurants and like really coming back. And COVID kind of nailed it down again. And now it's I think back back going back up again. We have some cool stuff in there. I mean, there's there's a bunch of companies that are like proudly like made in Detroit. Underrated pizza. Yeah. Detroit pizza. Oh, really? Square. Yeah, crispy like on every bite. Oh, okay. Because it's not thick crust square. It's like that thin crust square. It's really good. It's funny that we want to in a circle. I want it in a circle. Why? I don't know. It's weird. You get committed to it. It's like we don't get committed to that with a sandwich. If I go to a Jewish deli and I get a square sandwich, I don't say no, I want to look like a submarine. I want to look like a submarine. It doesn't look right. Right. You know, like no one cares. No, it cares. The shape. No, it's a really good salmon. But some people do like if you give him a cheeseburger, but it's on bread. They're like, what is this bullshit square bullshit? I want to run bun motherfucker. I'm rye bread. Yeah. Where is this? Rye bread is for a restaurant. Okay. Give me rye bread with a fucking cheeseburger. You communist. Is my name Ruben? Then why you give me something. It looks like a fucking ruben. Yeah. What is this? I'll give you buying Italian sandwich. It has to come on a big old fucking hogey roll. A chubata. You know, one of those big fucking seeded. Yeah. Yeah. That's what you want. All bread. It's weird that we want our pizza to only be certified. And then it's weird too, is you're not eating it in the round version. Right. You're eating it in this weird triangle. Right. You're eating it in this wedge. Just a wedge of round. You know what I've seen? The deeply deserves me. Oh no. When people take a circular pizza and then they chop it up into a bunch of squares. I'm like, what have you done? No, that's the highest style. Is that what it is? Yeah. That's what it's worth. Or pub style. Oh, so you put it up here. That makes kindness sense. But not for. You bring one pizza into the bar and now it's fucking 10 people can get it by as opposed to. I guess the other way is the other way is the pizza. The other way is places like that thin. Like real thin. But that's not fun. We also have the edge-topping. This is the thing. It says that many pizzas has Dave Portnoy sold. If you really stop and think about it, Dave Portnoy is probably responsible for more pizza sales in this country than any other living human being. Yeah, probably. Yeah. Because I watch his pizza reviews. I want to go get a pizza. He gives it to you, honest. Yeah. Oh, he's very good at it. Yeah. I mean, he really loves pizza too. Like, you could tell. He's not making any money off of that. No, he's really not. No. It's just like some beautiful flavor of love he likes it. It's fun for him. And it's become a thing. And he gets an argument with pizza places sometimes. Like, they yell at him. He yells at them. He can't film in here. He fucking shit at him. It's like really kind of crazy. That's so great. But I've gone to places because he recommended him. If I find out that I'm in a town and I know that there's pizza there, I'm like, what is Portnoy think? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You want to look all right? That's always done that with anything else. What are the celebrities done that with any other kind of food where they go places and review it? There's a guy in New York, not a celebrity, but he was his goal was to search out every single slice in New York. He took him years and then named the best ones. Boy, how would you know? How are you going to compare a slice to a slice you had a year ago? Right. I guess you got to, yeah, you're really going to know. How are you going to know? You can instantly go, no. But yeah, anything that's good, you got to go back and forth. Plus it's a super subjective. Obviously. Yeah. You got to go cheese. Yeah. You got to pick out cheese to cheese. Right. Cheese pizza, which is a classic. It's so good. I mean, other pieces are great, but man, a really good plain cheese pizza is fucking phenomenal. Yeah. Especially if it's done well. Fresh out here's the secret to a few New York on a rated tip. That's all righty this. He's going to New York. That guy. So he's going to want to get some tips. It's like no matter what you were going to get, just say, do you have anything fresh coming out? And they say it's going to be like 10 more minutes. It's okay. I'll wait. I'll go to Krispy Kreme and they got the serve the hot donuts with a coming out hot. Oh, lights on with that lights on. If I'm thinking about having it, when I leave the living LA, yeah, there was a Krispy Kreme down street, like it was on the way home. And if I drive by, if that fucking hot, the hot light was on, I'm like, I'm pulling it. Yeah. I'm getting a hot one. So much better than warmed up. It's so much better. Like when they come right out in the glazed ones that are coming right out hot, they just dissolve in your mouth. Oh, right there. Oh, and good for you. Oh, yeah, it's better than better than vitamins. Look at that. It cheers diabetes. You have all dough. And you're like, let's put it with sugar in it. Like let's put sugar on top. Let's fully overwhelm your system. I remember I would eat them and then I'd go back to my house and I'd go, what's wrong with you? What's wrong with you? What the fuck is wrong with you? We've all been that fucking idiot. Fox were wrong with you. It feels so bad. Cause I would eat like a half a dozen to it. I'd eat like six donuts. I'd get a, I always buy like a box and I'd eat half the box. I buy like a box of a dozen and I buy like chocolate cream filled and all the different ones and I eat like six of them in my car right away home. Then I'd get home and I'm like, Oh, just poison. And adult is learning nothing about his body. 39 years old. Sitting in the couch. Oh, well, when you have that after 23 years old, you're like, well, you're hurting. I just don't feel like this past. I have to just like for an hour. You're like, what a fucking loser. You want a fucking loser? Yeah. You ate yourself into feeling bad. I do that all the time. Drinking I get except on you. I eat when if I go to New York, every time I go to New York, I eat myself into a coma. I eat myself way too. Yeah. Just way too fat. I get hurt. And like where my stomach stretched out so much hurts because I've got so much food in there. I really can't fit anymore food. And I look pregnant. My stomach sticks out. You got burp belly. Oh, it's so awful. And it's all swollen and bloated because it's all the pasta and bread. It's all the water and the wines making it expand. It's been straight. Your body's like bring everything into this stomach right now. Yeah. You have no like if I had a pasta spelling bee, I bumped my foot. I keep dips by like 40 points. Yeah, it's terrible. I'm a glutton too. I have a real problem with volume. I just when I start eating, I'm like a dog. I just keep eating. I just can't stop. Like I'm good at not eating. Like I could not eat for like 12, 16 hours. But when I sit down for a meal, I just, or when I'm ordering, I think it comes from being poor when I was a kid too. So it's like there's something about like wanting everything. I want it all. I want steak. I want that with that. They're all. And they're struggling. They're like that. And then after like you never learn, you fucking idiot. Yeah. And you're like, I've had about enough. And then you're like, one more bite. And then you're like, and now if we're talking, I'm going to eat like two more full plates worth as we're talking. I remember we were in Atlanta once. This has happened more than once, but this one lady in Atlanta was like almost arguing with me. It went to, yeah, we went to a diner in Atlanta after our show. And this I ordered two things. I ordered like meatloaf and I ordered a steak. And she's like, oh honey, that's too much food. I go, no, it's not. I go, I'm going to eat it all. And she's like, that is too much food. I go, you don't know. You don't know me. You don't know me. I can consume. I will consume all of this. This is not a, I need this. It was a time for you to eat, you eat. Especially also after shows, dude. Oh, God, you do fucking long ass shows. I brought you in Goldie once I hot dog. I was just like, I was doing the early days of yours early, but like mid level days and then high level days. I remember having more access to anyone could really get any more. Oh, you were behind me. And then time when the camera was on you and Duncan, see you guys made out. We were bored. They timed it. So we noticed that we noticed the camera was sitting right behind you. So they could see the monitor. So they were sitting behind me so they knew what the camera was. So we're on that camera. That guy's camera. They waited and then it's got it right here. And in the middle, so there's a camera side you guys. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. This is the early early days. This is my like 2002 or something like that. That was way back. And they did like first. So first we're giving it on. So Duncan's being accused of being in a little naughty. A lot of that. So he goes, oh, there's a camera. I mean, I got to do this thing. What? It's just to soak the flames. So let's do this. We'll just do triangles. At some point, we made a big triangle with both our hands. And then I think he said it. I don't know. It doesn't matter. One of us said it the other reacted. Oh, hey, next time we got a kiss. And it was like, fuck. Yes. Preachers. Not gamut. Yeah, you're right. We do. It was like this is going to be awful. But you have to. I didn't know about it until after it was over. People like your friends were kissing on camera. And I just literally couldn't bring it out. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. I go show it to me. Show it to me. I like made the guys in the truck. Show me the video of it. Oh, my God. This is so funny. There was also like a wrestling moment or it was. There was a lot of wrestling in that fight. If I remember right, it's a long time ago. But there was a blog from like an MMA blog to two board bearded dudes making a trigger. There you have a UFC fight. Dude, you can have like a camera on you. And we're like, let's go. We got this. Especially like you have six hours, six hours of fights. So there's all this time to think. And they're not all exciting. No. Some of them are fucking boring. And when they're boring, you got to come up with different ways to entertain yourself. Yeah. What you going to do? Yeah. It was so fun. You can see the one that was on it. So like when those fighters are in front of us, this is got to, I'm a picture. I get wants to work. It wants to work. Oh, it's just one words. Those are fun times. That was back when the UFC was like, no, boom, it was watching anyway. You could just do whatever. The way is was the best. We had a way in in Florida. And it was just like, only the camps kind of came in. And the tap out guys, rest in peace. They would come in there. We'll just one rest in peace. Yeah. We'll live well. But it was just like you'd be in there. And I remember once you were like, hey, you already maybe I'll call you up to wait. Wait. And you can't, you just could. And you're like, you want to go to all right? It was like, there was no real rules that it was pretty wild. Don't know what was going on. Ari, you should fear. And you would just walk out. Yeah, you could do anything back then. And that was also a real way. And that was when the guys actually would get on the scale. Now it's a ceremonial way. Oh, really? Yeah, because now they weigh in in advance because they want to give them more time to recover. All right. The whole thing's gross. They shouldn't be weighing in in it. They shouldn't be cutting weight. That's a casual fan. It's the most obvious one. Making way in at the event. It's crazy. I mean, we've had long discussions. I had a discussion recently with Hunter Campbell. We were trying to figure out a way to blow up all the weight classes and make people fight it with their actual way does. But you would have to like show up in camp. Like, you know, and just- Get to the right. Exactly. Wait. Go away from the pound or two below for safety. But it would have to be random. Like they couldn't know you were coming. Oh, like the whole way through. It has to be at that way. Just show up. What do you weigh? Get on scale. 185. Bro, you're supposed to be fighting at 155. How the fuck are you? 185. It's done because you're not actually- You're- It's like having field goals decide like an NFL game. It's like this is not- This is like a minor part of the sport. Right. So that's like you're finding a 185 or a pound of- probably against a 160 pound. So you're not actually- Well, they're doing the best of your class. In elite levels, they're all doing it. So it's everybody's cheating. It's sanction cheating. It's not cheating because it's legal. But it's rewarding guys who know how to cut better than guys who don't. And as a casual fan, that's not where we're into. It's also very- Not like a logical. Not like a logical. So some people can cut weight very easily. And some people, it's a fucking cool behind. And it's way more of a grind for women. Women hold on to that water weight a lot harder than men do. So when a woman has to lose like a woman has to cut like 20 pounds, it's- Yeah, man, they cut weight. But apparently it's way more brutal for them. Interesting. Yeah. It's fucking terrible. They should have never been in there in the first place. And they should figure out a way to get it. When they did high school wrestling, people find it like 112. That's just your weight or do- You weigh in the day. The weight or the day. But it's still cutting weight. I used to wrestle at 128 and then I- 28. Yeah. I mean, I- Oh, okay. And then 134. And then I- because I couldn't really make 128 anymore. And then when I started fighting in TagWendo, I fought- my first fights were at 140. That was when I was like 15, 16. And then by- my last fight at 140, I was 17. And I was not 140. And I was starving myself and I was cutting a bunch of water weight. And then I would fight dehydrated. Like fighters like- But I did it one year. I only did it one year and then I went up to 155. Which was much better. That was easy because I didn't have to cut anyway. And I was way better than- But that thing where they do in wrestling, you're not getting hit in the head in wrestling. Right? So it will deplete you. And so you have to make a decision like- How much am I gonna be depleted and wanna be the size bully and have a big of frame and utilize it but have depleted performance. Like how much- how good a shape would I have to be in where that depletion only takes out a certain percentage of my ability. And so it's like this calculated thing. Like Kurt Angle for instance. Kurt Angle when he was Olympic gold medalist, he didn't cut anyway. And he was a phenomenal wrestler. Kurt Angle was a fucking monster. And he was beating guys way bigger than him. But he had so much energy because he didn't cut weight. And so he was wrestling against guys that did cut weight and- Yeah, they have bad. He was dominating him. Yeah, because he was full strength. But they were bigger than him. They were bigger than him. Yeah. But he had incredible skill, also strongest fuck anyway, and had no depletion of his resources. Like his body was working at full capacity. That's a quick put seminars in the prime. He was just right anybody. Hey, it's just- He was just right anybody. He's a tiny little man. He's like anybody. He got attacked on stage at stitches. And the guy- Got a rush. Attacked him and they fucking some brawl broke out. And the bouncer's got it and they take the guy away. And then Greg gets on the microphone. Didn't even end the show. Gets on the microphone. He goes, anybody else wants over this? And the- Stop! Stop! Stop laughing! It was great. He finished his set. Wow. He finished his great composure. Kept it together. Finished his set. A fucking fun dude. Wow. Hehehe. Yeah. But they really should ban weight cutting. But the only way they're really ever going to be able to do that is to make more weight classes. There's not enough weight classes. And then you'll have that what I don't understand. I think boxing has- But boxing have 18 weight classes. But you have like some like who cares weight classes? Yeah. Sort of. And if you really want to get- Yeah. No, you got to move up or down to one of the majors. Well you know what's weird? Like 160 is a huge weight class. 147. Well, it's a huge weight class. Big giant fights. Crews are weight? Which is like between light heavyweight and heavyweight. No one gives a fuck about. Wow. Wow. It's weird. It's just weird. Nobody gives a shit about the Cruiserweight Champion. Like, Usyk, before he became the heavyweight champion, was the Cruiserweight champion? And people cared about him just because he was so skillful. But he had to go up to heavyweight before people cared. But if he was a light heavyweight, he would have been here. Yeah, I'll shame on. It's weird. It's thing. Very weird. Boxing. How many weight classes is boxing at? Professional boxing. I want to say there's 18. Whereas in the UFC, there's only eight. It's a big difference. It's a big difference. You can follow champions better. Yeah. But it's also- Like when Mighty Mouse came in, it was like, you have this dominant guy coming in to really launch the weight class. But people were like, we don't know this weight class. So we're less interested in you than we should be. Well, there are people who have a thing about tiny people. Look at a small guy who's like five, three and weighs 125 pounds and like, nah, we don't 17 here. 17. Reben said the 135ers and 125ers, they should have to come into the octagon on little mini horses and slide little private couple times. It's so rude. So what's also interesting is like a fly weight women like Valentina Chef Chico. It's one of the premier weight classes in the women's division. That's heavy for a woman. It's like normal size. 125 is like a normal weight. It's like a man fighting at 160 or, you know, 170. It's normal. Weird. Yeah. It's weird. But there's not enough weight classes and they should have fixed that a long time ago. There's giant gaps like the gap between 185, which is middleweight and then 205, which is light heavyweight. That's crazy. A big one. It's a giant leap. And then everything else. Well, not even. It's even stupider. You get to heavyweight at 265. That's the cutoff for heavyweight. So you have to weigh 265 or under. That's my favorite weigh ins because they're still wearing their jeans. I like they don't really feel like I'm inside a range. Yeah. They don't give a fuck. So ceremonial weigh ins is what we have now. So when someone weighs in now, they've already weighed in in the morning in an official scale in front of, you know, doctors and state reps. They give them a chance to come back. Yeah. And suddenly they just suck a bunch of water down and electrolytes and they slowly rehydrate over the four or five hours. Yeah. They have to do it. The science is so crazy behind it. The heavyweight division is older than the United States. Wow. Officially, 1738. Wow. Weight as much as you want. Wow. There we go. So heavyweight was weighed 160 plus. So divisions. 60 plus? Yeah. People are tiny. What? Oh, yeah. You know, Rocky Marshall, you know, it was like one of the great heavyweight of all time. Yeah. He weighed 185 pounds. So Rocky, Marcy, I know the heavyweight chamber of the world, one of the greatest of all time weighed 15 pounds less than me. Wow. Yeah. And then it's so different. If you ever look back at a fence. So Rocky Marcy on to the Heavyweight Champion of the World, one of the greatest of all time, weighed 15 pounds less than me. Wow. Yeah. And then, not- It's so different. If you ever look back at a fang guy from like Chris Farley types, whatever, you're like, you're not even- you're just a little big. Yeah. It's like- You're like, you're a little fang. You're like, you're a little fang. You have some own body. Look at these guys back then, where they wore diapers and shit. Like, what's that- what you wearing? What's that thing around your waist? What is that? It's a wipe of blood. And they all fought bare knuckle back then too. Quick fights. Well, they just broke their hands a lot. They had- they threw a lot of punches to the body back then because they didn't want to break their hands on people's heads. That was the biggest defense back then, the bride then, a heat thing. They had to make a punch you on the head and brace. It blew your head. And they all boxed like this too, where they would throw their knuckles out like that. Wow. Because if you just blast someone, you could blast someone like that if you have gloves on and hand wraps. Stockton Slap would have gone a long way back then. Oh, yeah. They would have been legendary. Slapped them. Yeah. It's funny how things change and then how they go back to it. Because now bare knuckle boxing is making a huge impact. See chess boxing? Oh, yeah. I've seen that. Yeah. It's ridiculous. Be fun. Be the shit I would jump in and play the play five minutes. If you're a good boxer, like you have a massive advantage, like I just got a concussion. He doesn't even know what the knife does. He's like, uh, like you can't move that. Like, uh, fuck. What kind of fucking psychopath who wants to combine those things? Yeah. You, it have to be people that aren't there good at boxing and aren't that good at chess. Because there's so many flat lines you and send you to the hospital. You're not playing chess afterwards. Yeah. So it has to be people that kind of suck at boxing. Kind of suck at boxing. Because if you really like decent and tight. Tyson somebody, you fucking kale and they have to get carried out in a stretcher. Well, then you buy fault one by default, one the chest as well because they can't even play. Yeah, just dusty boards. Yeah, take him to the hospital. How, how are they gonna play chess? I don't even understand the rules there. You have to have a minimum of 1800 in chess to be a competitor. What is that? What's 1800? I would imagine pretty good. Is that a score? What does that mean? The scores and chess? Like a golfing handicap. Yeah, it's something like that. Wow. So what is like Magnus Carlson? The guy that was on the podcast. What does he have? What's his rating? I just typed it. Please poker to this. He doesn't. He'd be in the top five to 10. Super smart. Yeah, super smart guy. He's one of those dudes you talked to him. Like there's some guys you talked to him like, oh, there's a lot working on behind those eyes. So like if you were high around that guy, he'd probably get weirded out. He read myself. He read my soul. He's a 2840. Wow, way better. What is the highest rank chess player alive? Good question, Joe. That thing. That'd be him. Oh, really? Yeah, he picked up that 2882, the highest in history. That's crazy. That is crazy. What about that? That's get so Jew turned arrow, whatever his name is. Which guy? What's that? The fucking boy? The boy once gets a skits. So Jew turned arrow. Yeah. Was there some Bobby Fishers? I'm going to show you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Translated. Oh, yeah. He became like very anti-semitic, right? I don't know. Very close. 2785. So Magnus is better than him. Yeah. I mean, if Magnus is the best ever, yeah, Max ever. Okay. He's a fucking super genius. So what happened with Bobby Fisher? This actually has him rated maybe one point below Magnus is peak 2881 one year performance. It says bottom Fisher. Yeah. It's based off of like who you're playing when you're playing them and how like, you know, good day at the time. And I'll be like golf. It's like who's in the tournament. Yeah. Yeah, but that happens like pool has ratings. They have a Fargo. And they also do it per game. Like I was there's this guy. He just died recently. Chang Young Lin and he's this dude from from Taiwan. And he played at a thousand. A thousand was his for one game. He couldn't get it. Not for one game. Excuse me for like one match. What would he have to give to you or to me? Oh, a bit pointless. Just to join us. Just as soon as you he never missed that he's played it. Make a ball on your win. There's another guy. This guy who's also from Taiwan, um, coping. Chang and he played an entire match where he never missed a ball. He won 11 to nothing against another world. Clap. Who's he getting? Who lost a coin flip to start? He lost their lag. The lag. And I think that's it. The guy didn't touch the cue. He broke and left a long shot on the one ball. And the guy missed that. And he never made a a ball. Not and didn't make one ball. The entire every. It was the winner goes first. Winner goes first. Yeah. The as a couple of tables, winner breaks. Yeah. So every time he broke and he was making the one ball inside like every game. And every time he didn't have a shot, he would just play a lock up safety. And the guy would kick and then leave a shot. And then he would run out again. He would just he got just got in the zone. So he played at a 1000 Fargo for the entire match. That's crazy. That means you never missed a ball on four inch pockets. Oh, really tiny little pockets. There's people that are like, amazing how big pool is to across the world and billiards to an in Asia. Asia. You find people with just an overhang. Just so it doesn't get wet. And they're all out there playing. And just like flip flops. And well, we're losing a lot of the top time when he's in Chinese players to a game that they play in China now, where it's like a snooker table. It doesn't look like a pool table. Like the pockets aren't cut the same way. They're rounded, but they're playing nine ball. And they're playing with like purses like top, top purses like $600,000 for a tournament, $700,000. So they're all going over there and playing in that because you can make millions in a year instead of a couple hundred grand, which is like what the best players make in America. So I went when we're going to fucking rush it to play basketball until now until now. What just don't bring lead? I mean, just don't bring weed. The thing is like, but also I think they were all doing a basketball a lot. A parent. I'm not a basketball player clearly, but you couldn't keep score. Me and muggy bogue. Yeah. That's a good round. Yeah. Yeah. But weed apparently is phenomenal for basketball players. Like they all talk about it. I've talked to basketball players, but we'd they say I can play way better one of mine. Well, they had the feel it collective bargaining, not a late one, but like the 20 years ago when they're like, we can test for drugs, but they fought back to go not weed. So if you get caught with weed, sure, you can suspend us, but you can't test for it because why we're all doing it. Yeah, they're all doing it and it helps the game. Like it helps their, their field, it helps pool for sure. It's a poker for I imagine you read people's tells. Yeah. According to world snooker tour figures, more than 24.5 million unique viewers watched the third session of the final alone in China. And during the whole 2025 tournament, headed a cumulative audience of 180 million national broadcast. That's like a NFL playoff 24 million watch the finals of this. What's it's like a billion for two. All right. Yeah, but like a playoff game. Yeah, but that's snooker. Oh, like the that's not English call it snooker. So snooker is very different. And it's on a 12-foot table. It's a huge table. And the balls are very small. And they don't have numbers on them. It's just like, red and red, black, pink. It's mostly red. There's red that's in the stack. And then you have black, pink, brown. And I think there's another, I've never played the game. I've fucked around with it when I was in Scotland. They had a table and I was like, shooting balls on it. It's interesting. Columbia. They all play this thing. And it's three cushion billiards. Yeah. And it's the take their cue and move us a thing over like a score over on the key play and move one over. Yeah. And they're all playing it. And there's kind of casual bars, but it's like 20 tables. And they're everywhere. And this is where there's no holes in the table. Right. Yeah. That's called three cushion billiards. That's it. They're in Washington. It's a fun game. I don't know how to play it really well. Well, it's really under, it is definitely strategy. But it's really understanding angles. It's understanding how to kick and how to like, but when I say kick, what I mean is like, go off a rail and hit another rail and then collide with the ball. So three cushion billiards is you have three balls in the table. That's it. And so you have the, the whole table, it's like a big ass pool table, but there's no pockets. And you have three balls. And so what you have to do is hit one ball and then go three rails at least three cushions and then hit the second ball. Yeah. But also put yourself in a position where then you can make another shot afterwards. Right. Or play safety. It's a complicated game. And it's different because it's a lot of it's spin and the harder you hit it, the shorter the angle is. And if you hit it with English, it spins out wider or shorter depending upon what you're trying to do with it. And it's a, but if you get good at it, it really will help your pool game because you'll really have a much more deep understanding of how the ball moves around the table with different speed and side spin and all that kind of shit. I've only fucked around with it though. And then not in a long time. We had a table at executive billiards and white planes. We just have a one three cushion table. They would fuck around. Just play for for for laughs. I couldn't do it. I just, I want to see the balls go away. Nice. I want to see when I hear that fire ball in. I want to see it going down that hole. I want to clear it out. I don't want balls linger and just staring at me like do it again. Do it again. Do it again. I'm still here. Do it again. It's funny that that became a bar sport. It's really just darts in that became the sports at bars. Sure. And the table takes up a lot more space. The dart board. Yeah. dart board. Sure. But the pool table. You need like some space. Yeah. And that space is totally not usable other than that. It's that's where it is. Unless a girl's dancing on it. I went to it. I went to it. This is like pool hole slash like samba place in in somewhere in Brazil. What pool and samba? Yeah. It's like daily. It's a pool hall. But then at night, it turns into samba and like the highest level guys coming their capital and their music capital. Um, it's so fun. But these guys don't stop playing pool. And so everyone's dancing. It's so packed and crowded. Excuse me. And you're like, the etiquette is you just know when you're a bar like, all right. All right. All right. But you get you want to be like, bro, not just it's packed. You can't play pool here. Yeah. You can't play pool there. But they were doing it. Well, there's a place in the Bronx that is this Dominican pool room where they gamble big money, big money. And they stream some of the matches on YouTube. And it's fucking bananas because people are just talking constantly. They're yelling at each other in Spanish. You know, Dominican people are having fun. They're having fun. There's all these Spanish speaking and they're yelling and they're all very flamboyant and having a good time. And they get people to go over there and play like pros and they get so rattled because the end of the night used to that. Right. Wow. The end of this turf. Right. Not only that, but the guys can play and they're accustomed to that culture. So they're accustomed to all the yelling and all the craziness and guys standing in front of of the whole while you're shooting at it, which is a no-no and regular. Oh, that's like high school. Well, yeah, do it. Do it. Do it. They don't do it that bad. Yeah. But it's not that bad. But there's plenty of guys moving around the table. They're all talking. Everyone's yelling. The tables next to you are yelled. They don't care if they're betting $30,000 on a different set. Wow. The Dominican time is so much fun. They're allowed to use the N-word. Black's are like, you know what? They kind of roll. Give it to them. Just a minute. Dark it up. Let it go. But it's really interesting because I've watched guys who are like top pros go over there and fucking lose to guys that they're not supposed to lose to. And the reason why they're losing is because they're just rattled by the environment. Wow. And so what a lot of these guys will do, they'll put air pods on. So they'll put air pods in with the noise canceling. So to try to take away some of the the fucking sound and just focus. But you're really going to be playing at like 60% of your capacity because you're just too much chaos going around. If you play in a real legit pool tournament, everything's dead quiet while the guys down on the ball. And then they clap when someone makes the ball with any moves to the next shot. They stop clapping. Yeah. Two or spec. Yeah. But not at least fucking pool. These guys are playing for big money. They're playing for tens of thousands of dollars. They're just getting sharks and rattles. They're blood. I watched guys like I watched this guy, Oscar Dominguez play this dude. Oscar's a top pro. He was on the Moscone top cup. He was on the Moscone team for the US. And he was over there playing this dude. I'm like, how did they get him to go there? Wow. I was talking about Jeremy Jones. I'm rep too. It's like the guys who do Burning Man, the DJ is like, I'll play for free. It's just like it's a rep thing. Well, I think it's the money. Oscar loves to gamble. And he's going to a place where someone's willing to gamble him from a lot of money. When you say they say about Jones, I'm going to listen. Well, I go to piss. We'll pass. We'll pass. We'll we'll pause. We'll be right back, ladies and gentlemen. I'm not going to stay the whole thing. We'll pass. We're back, folks. We're back. So what I was saying is my friend Jeremy Jones, who was a US Open champion, he said he went to that pool hall once and he said, I'm never going back too much. Too much. And he's also said that the neighborhood is like things can go sideways. Wow. It's it's the neighborhood where like, hey, you might go there three nights in a row and you have a good time. Fourth night, four people get shot. You know what I mean? I was always a problem. Underground pool. I mean, a poker rooms. You play with playing commerce or place like it's legit. It's fine. You go underground. Like there's not there's a guard there. Right. And you're walking out with a lot of money. I remember when you were struggling the early days of comedy when we kind of first met and you were making your money by winning pool tournament or poker tournaments. Yeah. You would go to these. Yeah. You would go to these casinos and make and you would play it like a job. You'd be like super serious. I read books on it. Yeah. The best book. I'll call it the tells and the strategy. The best. My favorite book is this guy, Mike Carroll. He's a book called Mike Carroll's Book of Poker tells. Yeah, I managed to use one of them once in a world series of that. That if this is the one where it goes, if someone looks at your chips, it's because they have a killer hand and they think those chips are theirs. And it's just like, well, you know when you lie, you look away a little bit. That's like a tell we all kind of know. So you look at the chips are you looking at it just for a second. You're like, because you're like, those are mine. You're not worried about your chips because you know your chips are staying. You got a full house. You know those are safe. But you're looking at those like how much of that can I extract? So I was throwing a bluff down against a pro at the world series. It was like whatever. And I was like, I think he must have read this book. And so I'm banking on that. So I'm holding my bluff, nothing hand. And I just kind of do a very subtle eight just do one little and he goes, yeah, right. He chucked his hand away. Yeah, he thought he had me read. But the best thing about my carol's. I double crossed. I double crossed. I double crossed. I double crossed. I could recognize. I love that. I love it. That's cool. That's a cool thing about poker that it's like a lot of its bullshit. You're bullshitting. You know, it's how you bluffing. The best thing about the poker tells is written the 70s. And there's a bunch of raced race based tells. Really? Yeah, like if I would check the nacities. All of them. If an older white man re raises you, get out that guy doesn't bluff. He's just trying to play. You know, his wife died years ago. He's just trying to stand. They're like, if you're playing, it's a Mexican find out when payday is. And if it was this Friday, they're bluffing. They're just throwing in anything. They just want to play. They're going to part with their monies. There's a whole thing on blacks. I forget exactly what they were saying on that. But it was like very interesting. What year was this written? I think in the 70s. Interesting. Back when you could be honest, yeah, he was like, I don't know. I was telling you how to win the family days. Yeah. You can't let us a lot of like honest observations about different cultures. Mike Carroll's book of poker tells. Oriental. Oriental. I had a very skillful or very luck oriented. I like it says it now Asian Americans. Like, what happened to Oriental? What happened to Oriental? Someone told me that Oriental was like a slur now. But it's actually the right word. Is it the Orient? People or goods from the Orient? You know what the opposite is? But you and I, Occidental people or goods from, I guess, not the Orient. Really? You know, Occidentals? You know, it's also interesting. It's like Asian. Asian is so much of the world. Yeah. Like Asian includes India, which is Asian. If I was president, executive order, that's no, no, that's not who we're talking about. That's not who we're talking about. Pakistan in Asia. Right. That's Italy is fuck off. You know, Israel's also Asia, by the way. But it's also like the Philippines is Asia. That's Asia. But it's give you that. Okay, but it's way over there. It's way over there. And then you got China and then you got Japan. And then you got Korea and South Korean North Korea. Okay. Let's be real China, Japan are the obvious Yes, those are the big ones. Further you get Korea. Korea is also real. Okay. Vietnam. You're still in the gold. Vietnam gets a little. Yeah. I don't know. Well, they're almost Russian. Saudi Arabia is Asia. Fuck off. We're talking about China and their subsidiaries. Look how big Asia is Cambodia. Okay. Sure. All the jungles. Wow. I don't know. I'm going to have a. So Russia is technically Asia. That's Asian Russia. Israel is the craziest one. I cut off right here because of European Russia too. Okay. So there's Asian Russia. So that would be Siberia, right? The Maldives or? But that would be like Mongolia for sure. Kazakhstan is Asia. Wow. Yeah. But Mongolia. But a lot of the Kazakhstan guys look Asian. Like your sky shop caught rock, rock, runoff. Who fights in the UFC? Among Goliain accent is crazy because it really is. It sounds like half Chinese half Russian. You know, they look Chinese speaking like the Russian accent. Hard people, bro. Hard people. Kazakhstan, India, Iran. Iran is Asia. Wow. Israel is Asia. Israel is the edge. Yeah. Basically everything that's all those people are Oriental. Orientals. I'm going to next time I go to Jerusalem. I'm going to call them all Oriental. Look how close Yemen is to Ethiopia. It feels like you could swim there. Yeah. Really, we're motivated. If you want, you just go to pool also. Look where is it? Look where Israel is. That's so interesting. See how they split it up. Israel is like that's what's not. See, every thing the border between Egypt and Palestine, that border is nuts. I mean, oh my god, it's the most fortified border you've ever seen in your life. If you think the border between Israel and Palestine is rough. Really? Yeah. The border between Egypt and Palestine is way harder to do. They do not want those people over there. You ever see it? I'm not fucking rolls of barbed wire. Wow. Wow. Look at that. Was that catch a baby being thrown over? Click on that one, please. The one that says the Arab weekly on the top. Yeah, right there. Look at that. Look at that. Wow. Are you getting through that? What a nice place to stroll for those two guys. Just relaxing after new needs of Gaza wall. Look at that. That's crazy. Sad times. Oh, the saddest. The saddest. Peace in the middle yeah. Good luck. Yeah. There are nuts. Yeah. It's even more nuts now. It's good to have it in Lebanon. Now they're bombing Lebanon too. Really? Yeah. I'm not following any of this. Israel's bombing the shit out of Southern Lebanon. Lebanon. Yeah. I was reading about this Ryan Grimm was covering this Lebanon reporter, this reporter in Lebanon that that Israel killed. They followed her with drones. They bombed a car in front of her. She ran into an abandoned building and then they bombed the shit out of the building. And this took hours. And all the while she was contacting like whoever runs Lebanon and they were contacting Israel and saying, Hey, this is this is a reporter. And so then they got text messages between like this someone from the idea of had been saying to them, we're going to kill you. And then they got the number from her phone and contacted the person from the idea of and they're saying, Hey, she works for Hezbollah. And you know, fuck you and you're naive. It's crazy. Like they're just openly killing journalists. You know, they did a good job. And when I was traveling is they got it more than up here separating Israel from Jew. They really were like, we don't have any problem with Jews. But they would like be very staunchly like Israel. Yeah. Yeah. Well, if you live in Israel, you have to do military service. Right. So everyone who lives in Israel is a part of the military in their eyes. Like everyone who lives in Israel has served in the military. It's interesting though. It's like a lot of those kids and then turn to adults are like very against what they're doing. Oh, yeah. It's like an uncovered, I think, like part of it. Oh, yeah. We don't like those. I mean, half this country are more even didn't vote for Trump didn't vote for Biden. So they're like, well, I don't like this. But they're you still like, you have to like be pro everything about this thing, even though like you can not like certain things. Right. The idea that like all Israelis have a single hive mind. Yeah. That's crazy. That's something case in any country ever. It's not the same in any crowd, especially a democracy because Israel's like literally the only democracy over there really. And they're parliament too. So there's a lot of choices. And they're trying to like prosecute Netanyahu. Wow. This is going to be as Israeli. Yeah. I mean, this was one of the things that most people aren't aware of, but that before October 7th, there was hundreds of thousands of people on the streets in Israel protesting Netanyahu. We talked about it the other day because they were trying to expand. But this is before the right. Right. So they were trying to expand what they can do in terms of like with their constitution. We talked about it. What was the exact jamming you remember? The exact thing that they were disputing over, but it was expanding the power that the government has. And so people were protesting that and then also not over seven pops off. Power. Yeah. And then, you know, it's not happened here at 9 11. It became like if you say anything bad now, you're like a trader instead of just like, well, I was already saying the hell issues with police over stepping or whatever. You're like, well, now you can't say that for about three years. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So before October 7th, Israel experienced nine months of massive sustained protest against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government, largely driven by opposition to proposed judicial reforms. These demonstrations was included hundreds of thousands of participants accused the right wing coalition of undermining democracy weakening the Supreme Court and attempting to interfere with Netanyahu's ongoing corruption. Yeah. And so that's the same as here. We're it's not about like, are you pro gay marriage or not? Or are you pro like piece of Palestine or not? That's just people taking power. And so that goes beyond the right or left and just go, no, no, that's an overstep. Yeah, it's. But any of us. It's fun because it's not going to get any better. It's not. And they've destroyed Gaza. Gaza is just a wasteland now. And mean, someone got to get posted recent video of Gaza, like what it looked like now, like right now, they set a drone or something to get video footage of what God looks like. It's crazy. It's crazy. It looks like they dropped a nuke. They just did it slowly. Instead of dropping one nuke, they did thousands of fucking conventional bombs and did the kind of destruction. It's interesting if you ask people how it's like polarizing. They've already got to polarize. And you couldn't just be like any sufferings wrong. But like, yeah, I could show you a dead baby. And a lot of people will go, well, what I got to know what their last name is first before I can tell you if I feel bad or not. Yeah, instead of just like, that's, I don't know. That's what's wrong about it. Yeah. That's just so dark. And then if you talk about like what's happening in Gaza, people say, well, October 7th, it shouldn't happen. Like, okay, you're right. It shouldn't have. But guess what? Those kids that live in Gaza, they didn't do it. They didn't do it. So like, well, they're on their team. But we did to Iran. What if Iran nukes New York City, those kids that live in the Bronx had nothing to do with what happened in Iran. So like, is that okay? Like, what are we talking about? It's fucking nuts. It's the tribal warfare is fucking bananas that it's still going on. Well, I talk to people when I knew like cousins and stuff in the military and they were just gotten out and they were like, we're all now. This is before October 7th. So a few years maybe 2018, they're like, we're talking now because we have the internet now. And we're like, this isn't sustainable. And we don't want to keep doing this. We gotta start figuring out a piece thing. And then that's all that's all gone now. It's all gone. Yeah. None of those that all gone, but now that they've started bombing Lebanon, everybody's really terrified because they're like, well, where is this going? Because they're bombing Christian villages in Lebanon. And they were, there's video of them destroying these solar panels that these Christian villages have in Lebanon, where they're just plowing over and using like tractors to take down these solar panels. Part of me goes to like, this isn't the military. Like, what do you do? Yeah, it still goes back to like Wesley Clark. If I got that right where they're like, the seven countries and Iran was on there and we just hadn't gotten there yet. Oh, yeah. But that was always like, that's not a new thing. That was just in the works for a couple decades. Just waiting for the timers, right? Yeah, they wanted to do it within five years. It took 25. It took long. Yeah, the Wesley Clark thing is funny because, you know, Dave Smith had a debate with Coleman used about that. And Coleman uses like, but Wesley Clark never said he read the memo. He said, someone told him about the memo, because any historian would not even be able to use that. Oh, I thought they said they had this. I don't know. I don't think so. I think the way Coleman was describing it. But the reality is, okay, yeah, you might be right. Maybe because he hadn't read it. Any historian would not have been able to use it in the book. But the fact that it all took place exactly how the memo stated that seems relevant. And that came up before. So you're like, hey, we're going to Iran soon. And then they're like, they did Syria. They kept trying. Syria is the best to me because when Obama was doing it, I don't care who's in charge. They're all doing the same shit to me. But they go, we got to go in there over though this dictator. And then people would just come off the whole like Middle Eastern world. Like, no, we're done. And so they couldn't justify it. And then they go, hey, this is insurgent group. And they're going to get out of hand. We got to go in and control them. And then it's like, wait, you want to go fight the guy who's fighting against Assad. And then that ended. And they go, no, we got to take down Assad. And it's like, you can really seem like you guys want to go into Syria. Look for any sort of excuse. It's all crazy. I have politics to let's move on. It's like it. It is gross. Yeah. Your perspective is probably the healthiest. Stay out of it. Stay out of it. Leave me alone. Fuck you. Live my life. But the thing is like, some of it does affect your life. Like this psychedelic drugs thing. Okay. So in that moment, where you got fucking maybe hopefully, it's true, it's legalized. You know, in an ideal world, is a very rare case of someone who can actually accomplish change. And you're very higher level than most people in terms of influence both personally and like broadly. But also the individual, like him, like most people wouldn't do it that way. Like if I was friends with Obama, there's not a fucking chance in hell. I could have gone to Obama and said, Hey, dude, you know what? Be cool. If you got I began legalized, it would keep all these people that are addicted to, he could have done that decades ago. Everyone could have done that. They've known about Iber game forever. And they've also known about the pill crisis forever. So all this stuff was common knowledge amongst plenty of people. Yeah. That means John Hopkins has been doing these studies. John Hopkins is a playlist for shrooms and MDMA. They make a playlist for you. They do that you can like this is a good MDMA or I forget which one shoes playlist. Is it like John Hopkins like sanctioned it or someone who I know someone who's student there? No, no, no, I profess her or something like that in the research they're doing in the civil side of the region was also the side of the right and not I think yeah, yeah. The kids with still a John Hopkins was also side. Yeah, they're all trying to let the way. They have a playlist that you can do. You can get it's on Spotify. People have been aware of it for so long. You know, inside the John Hopkins still a side and playlist. Wow, this is 2020. I'm always amazed when my memory turns out to not be false. Look at that guy. He looks like he's tripping. He looks like he trips. He's like, it all do his trip. Just people get a smile. That guy's not working for insurance company. Losing his tie. Yeah, Bill Richards. Look how he's tripped. Psychologist and researcher. They just put researcher in quotes. Psychologist researcher in former door. Yeah, I think it it as nonverbal, a nonverbal support system sort of like a net for a trapeze artist. It falls going well. You're not even aware the net is there. You don't even hear the music. But if you start getting anxious or if you need it, it's immediately there to provide a structure. Oh, Bill, you trip hard. When I was doing I was good. The guy was like, this shaman guy was like beating a drum very lightly. Or if you need it, it's immediately there to provide a structure. Oh, Bill, you trip hard. When I was doing ayahuasca, the guy was like, the shaman guy was like beating a drum very lightly. And when you come out of it, whatever, the slow like, boom, boom. It would kind of like pull you back into it. Mmm. Mmm. Seven hour and 40 minute playlist, boy, those guys go. Make sure that I'm a little bit. Symphony of sorrowful songs. Hey, don't do that. Don't give me sorrowful songs on trippin'. Try to have about time. Yeah, what a hero. I want to give you a great mother's death. No, Grandma. Ha, ha, ha. People always ask me about mushrooms. Like it's going to be this emotional like like spiritual thing. I'm like, yeah, that's get that gets hyped more. You're going to laugh with your friends. Yeah. That's the main thing. There's going to be, I mean, it depends on the dose, right? Like a heavy dose will bring you to a very strange place. Dude, I had a. That's my triple. Triple all time on this trip. Yeah. Of all time. Yeah, maybe maybe the first one. The Muhammad Ali of mushroom chips. Yeah, it wasn't like it was crazy hard. It was just they were fresh. And it was just like the thoughts. And it was just in places where nobody really gave a fuck. So you didn't feel like they were like a drug addict. Mmm. And just like, yeah, I just see in everything so clear. Yeah, mushrooms fucking rule. You just see everything so clear. It kills the you in your brain. What kills the bullshit part? Yeah. And so you go like, look at this behavior and it's same as analyzing someone else's behavior or your own. There's the same. That's a part of one of the problems that comes with living a stressful life is you get really wrapped up in yourself. Like you're managing yourself, you're managing your thoughts, you're managing your whatever you're trying to do. And then you think so much about you that a thing like that can take you out of that and you go, Oh, what am I wasting my thoughts on this for? Why am I wasting my energy on this? It's so pointless. It's not helping me at all. And you see people like, oh, my father for like who he really is now just like a loving caring granddad and they're like, oh, what a fucking cool guy that I always saw as like this guy I grew up with. And then just like, man, yeah, just like realizing like I'm doing this some stuff he did like going, you know, starting a new life. Mm-hmm. He did the same shit coming to America and it's like, wow, what a look at it separately from your father. Like that's a cool guy. You talked about having your father come on this podcast to talk about his experiences as a Holocaust survivor. He would. What was he now? It's about to be 90. Still with it though. He's not like a feeble. That's awesome. Yeah. What do you do it? He loves getting the word out. How old was he when he was in the camps? Young. Single digits. Um, and maybe up to I think maybe released at 12. Yeah, he would do it. He would love it because he works to the Holocaust Memorial as a docent or something. And he has a tattoo and everything. Does he have a tattoo? I don't think so. Well, he wasn't in a death camp. He was in a work camp. I believe his all sh- I believe his my grandfather, his dad was and was liberated from a death camp. But yeah, you should talk to him. He would actually love it. He loved getting the word out. I've seen him make speeches before. There's all these inner city kids in my Kansas city, you know, and then when they hear him talk, it's just this moment you realize like, oh, they're sitting in the story. This is like his life. Yeah, it's a real thing. Yeah. Like a till of the hon, you're like, that seems like a fictional character. Yeah. And this is just the borderline of that. Dude, he would, yeah, you should do it. I would do it. I'd love to have him on talk to him. It's a weird time with anything that has anything to do with people being Jewish because they conflate Jewish people with the Israeli government, the Netanyahu government and what they're doing in Gaza and what they're doing all the other places. And it's also, it's like, it's a weird time now where people are enjoying questioning the numbers of people that died in the Holocaust. It's an internet retarded. It's just kind of like. But just like, but there is some weirdness to it. And one of the weirdness to it is like there's some photos of like Auschwitz and the lies that they took after the camps were liberated and they had people go there and they took photos of them, like pretending that these people were at the camps and they weren't. They were done after the fact. Yeah. But there's also tons of videos. It was only one million. So that's okay somehow you want to justify it in your head. Yeah, that's like a weird. No, but it's 600 people. It'd be like, right. Well, it's clearly there was a lot of people who was, I don't know what the number is. But if it was six million or if it was one million or three million, it's like to catch people like, no, you guys said it was six. There are also things like it's the 30s. It's like, I don't know. And we're guessing we don't have to wear with them. You asked somebody in the Holocaust, they go, well, I was only in my one camp. I can't tell you what was going on in Bergen, Belton. But there's people that are like equally sure that it was six million. And then there's people that are equally sure that it was like 300,000 or 600,000 or whatever the fuck they think it was. And it's like this weird argument back and forth. I mean, you have to see how many Jews were in Europe before and after. Right. And it's going to be more. It's funny, you see like if you have a stat like that, like separated from this, like in a, as in Peru, we're hiking much to my computer. Much to me. Oh, we gotta talk about that. And, and, and they're like, it's a fucking pouring rain. And never right there. They're not liberal conservative. They just go, it's been raining earlier than it should be. And they don't know about the word climate change. They just don't work told November 1st is when you plant after that, you're in a risk. Now this is mid October. And I don't know what's up. Well, there's going to be climate change, whether human beings are here or not. That's the reality of the earth. Temperature and climate has never been static. Right. And the real problem with climate change is not recognizing that human beings are having an adverse effect on the planet because we certainly are in terms of pollution in particular release. But that people like Al Gore and a lot of these fucking, these greenies, they're profiting off of this concept of climate change. And then also using it to clamp down on people's rights. There's that too. Like we talked about people taking money from a good cause. And just like, so it's like for every good thing, they're like, somebody's going to misuse it. 100% for all gets conflated. But then it becomes a thing where like, you know, when I had Bernie Sanders on the podcast, he was like talking about us. And I said to him, I go, problem with climate changes, not just that the climate is changing because it always has. But the people who are having effect on it because they definitely are. But it's that there's a lot of money in the concept of climate change. and it's like recycling that was never done. The ground landfills. And then your landfills. But it's better than nothing like, no, it's equal to nothing. Well, it's not only that, but you fucking made people feel like they were doing good by throwing their fucking water bottle past the line. It's just it's just it's all kind of crazy, but we're gross. Yeah. But it was cool to see people's perspectives that were like away from political and just their observations about stuff. And like things change. And like sub Saharan Africa used to be lush greenlands. I mean, they find they find whale bones and sub Saharan Africa in the desert in the desert. They find whale skeletons in the desert way before they were cars. Okay. Way before they were plastic and power plants. So the earth's climate has never been static. But the the the the the Macha Picchu thing is I really want to go there. My friend Luke caverns. He's been on the podcast before. He's studied. It's been three times. Has he really? But as a kid, that's what I meant like. Oh, yeah. So yeah. So they're like, that's a one hour flight from Lima. And then just take the train. But like, yeah, it's it's pretty well. So you're saying that wasn't even the Aztecs. Is that what you told me? Well, that's the that's the Incas. You're talking because it wasn't they don't think it was. They think the initial monolithic structures were or megalithic structures were an earlier previously unknown civilization because the size and scope of their structures, the way they build it and Graham Hancock has gone over this as well is so much different than the stuff that's on top of it. So what happens is you have this old stuff that's enormous stones that are cut like jigsaw us, right? And almost like it's melted like the way it looks. It almost like it's sort of piece of paper through it after 200 years of like breakdowns. You're still in where the 200 years. It's thousands of years. But the thing that's really nutty about it is that design is because when they have earthquakes, that way it won't fall off. Right? It disperses the energy better as opposed to just stacking stuff on top of each other. That stuff falls. But when it's all interlocked in these weird forms, like that shit. That yeah. So check of our talks about a little bit where he goes. So ever Cusco is the gem of South America. It was the border of the Andy's where people have come in and you trade and everything. And you see this and the Christians will come in, take over and build like facades on it and cross on top to be like, look what we did. We're more dominant these people and then an earthquake could come. Facadement fall and this just remains over and over and over again. These aren't even squares. Look at how it's like a Tetris. Yeah. It's so cool. And that was on purpose. They did that because that what we would survive. But if you look at the stuff above it, that's the stuff the ink is made. So the ink is made. This stuff was like, it's all just stacked. It's not as sophisticated and also not as large because they didn't have the technology. Whatever the fuck these people had. That was a big number of huge. I mean hundreds and thousands of tons. I mean these things are fucking enormous. The really crazy one is the Lebanon ones in Lebanon. I've been there. Wait. Have you? I'm Jordan. So in Lebanon, they have these massive stone. What do they call Jamie the trilathon stones? So there's these stones that are more than a thousand tons. And they're like several meters above the ground place. And then on top of them, you have these Roman structures. Oh, right. So if you see like there, like that click that where you had your cursor. Yeah. Look at the size of that guy. Wow. And look at the size of that stone. And then you see the stuff on top of it is smaller. It's not as sophisticated. And then you had the Roman. The thing about the Romans is Romans had meticulous record keeping. And they talked about all the construction of all the different things they had. They know and even mentioned those stones. So what's that? They don't mention how they mean. No. I don't think it was them. Well, you know previous civilization. Look at that fucking thing. Oh, bro. I'm about to, you know, nasculine. Yes. OK. Oh, yeah. I saw him. Oh, did you? Yeah. The whole room. How weird is that? They're so big. You can't. I know the pictures won't do it justice because you'll see like a road. They didn't know because from the ground level, you can't see any of it. And so they just build these roads through the desert. And so you can see a car sometimes. Like so it's for perspective. And you're like, it's this dot on this giant monkey in the middle of desert for however many hundreds of years. Yeah, they don't even know how long. They're crazy. Weird. And they're all like signals to something. There's all these theories on what it is. There's a sky. You have to see them from above. You can only see them from above. That's nuts. Pilots would go over there. And then somebody's like, what's that? I go, oh, yeah, we don't know. We're just kind of go over. well, they found a bunch of them now because of AI. You know, they've like scanned the areas and found a bunch of previously undiscovered nascal lines. Wow. Yeah. And the weird thing about it is that's also the place where they find these people with elongated skulls. They find like these weird skulls that have additional capacity. So they have like 30% more capacity. And they don't have the same lines in their skulls that we have like one more babies. You know, we have these. What are the types of sagittal? I forget what the lines are called. Sagittal these lines that we have in our skull. You know, like your skulls, not just one piece, right? It's like, it's a bunch of pieces. They get time off. So they get longer as a sign of like, yeah, but some of these skulls don't have the same structure as ours. They're human skulls, but they're longer. They have more capacity of the 30% larger capacity. And they don't have those lines that we have. So it's like, what was that? Were there different kinds of humans back then? I guess it's like, were they flying around? Were they flying around and making these fucking structures? Were they responsible for sockset, who I'm on and match a peachy and all these other places? And they just died off. And all we have left is like some skulls that we can totally explain. We know how that means to explain it. Right. Because if it was 20,000 years ago or 30,000 years ago, whatever it was that these people were ruling back then, what would be left? Fucking nothing. Nothing. Very little. I mean, look at anchor watt where it's like, that's good. You didn't see it shocking. Any of it remained. Yeah. Well, anchor Watts crazy and how about that other one in India where the entire temples carved out a one stone or the one in Jordan? The. Fucking what is those play the Indiana Jones one? What's that called? That's where I went with my brother. Yeah. What is that called? See, what is it, Jimmy? Petra. Petra. It's it's not to come through this canyon and it's just in a mountain. Giant three story. Temple that it's just carved out of the mountain. It wasn't added to. Right. And where's the stone? What would you would you put the stones? What'd you do that view coming out of the middle one coming out of that cavern and seeing it after about an hour hike? That's crazy. They don't even you have to see a consumer. See how small that person is in the middle? That is so crazy. So like what? Right. Have you ever heard of Darren Kuyu? No. And Turkey? This is crazy. You want to hear this one? It's a place or a person. It's a place. So I think they found this because someone was doing like construction on a house and they found a path. Oh, so this is what it was. So a guy kept losing his chickens. They would go through a hole and they would never come out. So this guy was like, well, we're the fuck of these chickens going. So they broke down the wall to figure out where the chickens go. And they found an underground city that can hold 20,000 people with many, many levels, like many levels deep into the ground. It's fucking bananas. Wow. Yeah. Yes. Hill. I watched a documentary. No, wow. Like we see the way where you could you please go back to that one image with the houses? Yeah. Like that. Like, so this guy, it was like behind a fucking wall in the house. So these chickens would go into the hole and they would just disappear. So it's like, where's my fucking chickens? So the guy starts digging around to try to figure out where the chickens go. And they found this. And I want to say they found this in like the 20th century. Like, I think it's the 20s I just saw. 1920s. Like, 29 maybe. Wow. So no, they forgot about it. No, we knew about it. Nobody knew who made it. There was no record of it. And it's, it's so big. It's 20,000 people in there. What was it for? No one knows. No one knows. No one knows. No one knows who? No one knows nothing. There's other ones they found in China. They found this fucking insane one in China that also has no records. It's enormous. Like enormous caverns with giant columns. It's all carved out of the stone. They, they move millions of tons of rocks out of there. No record. No one knows where the stone went. I'm staying with a little of the condens, minds, whatever. And we were on a hike and there was this little like abandoned temple just the size of this room. And so the guide was like, sort of there's a tunnel in here to like the main temple. It's about a mile and a half away. And there's a tunnel where you can go through it. It takes a couple hours to walk. And he goes, you know, my brother wants to go. It's on never go back. It's so frightening. And there's fucking puma's around. And you don't know. Puma's in the tunnel. Yeah. You're like, you can't see shit. He goes, it's a bad place. But it's this long underground tunnel that was made. How a lot of walk. This is the one in China. This is one of the caves. So this is one of these caves in China. By the way, no record, no historical record of when it was created or who created it. I put it. And this is another one that they found in 1992, they found it for farmers. And long you found the caves and they drained the water from five small ponds in their village. The ponds turned out to be five large man-made caverns. Further investigation revealed 19 more caverns deer by. They've been determined to be more than 2000 years old. And their construction is not recorded in any historical documents. Look how crazy. Please show some of those images. Yeah, I was just sitting on this page. It's fucking bananas. So they're just guessing that it's 2000 years old. They don't know. Right. Right. They're just like, because there's no record. There's no record of it. But it's bananas. And they've also those carvings. They think are posts. Later people came in a post discovery. That's their way of doing. Yeah. Because you see how those lines and the walls, that's how everything looks. It's just those carbon straight lines. And it looks like the other stuff was like more modern that they think are lines. Or so that the erosion wouldn't hurt it as much. I don't know. I mean, that might have been how they did it. They might have had some sort of a device that the car of the stone now with. But the thing is it's like, this is where it's in a map. Show me where long you was in a map. I want to visit a lot of China. There's some lot of places in there that I'm like, don't know about. China's a big act back up. China's so big. Long you, caverns keep going back. Do do do do. Keep going back. Do do do do do do do do do. Oh my God. That's pretty deep in there. Good luck. Good luck. It's near Wuhan. Look. Yeah. To get trained at Wuhan. Catch a bug. Yeah. Go eat somewhere. We're good. We're good. The Prangolin. Pending a lot. I tell you got leprosy. You're normal to a little pangolin. And that's what's eat those things. Go back to the images, please. The images are nuts, man. It's like what what were these people doing? Like what who made this? I love standing in a place like that. And just like you just instantly get connected to the history of it. Could you imagine it's 1992 and you just draining upon your farmer. And then you drain the pond and you're, oh, there's a lot of cave in here. We're going to find the gold. And you go and you see this shit. And no one knows who made it. No. And China again, China has extensive historical records because China has existed for thousands and thousands of years. It's one of the few countries that's essentially been just China for 5,000 plus years. Bananas, man. Aquarium for real dragons. That was somewhere. Well, I mean, who made it and how did they make it? Like how did they do that? What? And purpose. How did they make that 2,000 plus years? And by saying 2,000 is like you're just 2,000 means. So there's a there's a Joe Diddy and are a piece on a on El Salvador from a long time ago. And she goes, they don't use numbers the way we use numbers. They say 50. It means a bunch. So like 72 virgins. Yeah. I mean, just a bot. A bunch of like bro. He went there a million times. Tons of tons of like what is a ton? That's a broad smoke. Tons of joy. Yeah. Let's not break it down. So perplexity our AI sponsor says no one knows for certain who created the long UK's archeologists agree they're man-made and probably over 2,000 years old, but there's no record of their builders or patrons. That's crazy. That is so crazy. Pottery and other finds inside date roughly to the late Quinn or Western Han period around 200 BCE, suggesting they were excavated at or before that time. But the thing is that we're in that. But that pottery could have been someone who just later pottery later. Like that. It's like if you leave behind a cell phone in Egypt and 5,000 years from now, people say, Oh, this is an iPhone 16. This must be from. But that means it has to be at least that old or at least that old or old. So it's at least 2,000 plus years old. But how crazy there's no known records. You're going quick and just bury some like shit from a long time ago. How much artifacts you just leave it in there? How much? Like that is still out there in other parts of the world where they don't know about it. Well, it's like no one found it. That that that that my guy said he was like, yeah, no one knows. No one that he gave me. My my friends know about it. So it's just like everywhere. Well, we were talking about the Aztecs, about how the Aztecs and this is another thing that I found out through perplexity. But I was just I was writing this thing about Mexico and about how crazy the history of Mexico is. And you know, that the Spaniards came over with essentially like 12 muskets and took over the whole country. But when they when the Aztecs were living in these temples, they didn't build them. They called them the place where the gods were born. So they found them. So there's a previous civilization that like Teotu, but Teotu had lawn and all these other beautiful pyramids and temples. They don't know who fucking made them. So they don't know who made them. That cave in Vietnam was found in 1991. Oh, they're I saw the 60 minutes thing on that. Did you see that? Look at that. That dude from 60 minutes, like a dude in a lady from 60 minutes went and visited this cave. And I was like that. That's one cool thing about something like 60 minutes that they would do something like that. Because it's a long journey. You have to fly in, drive along distance, then hike along distance. Any nothing's there. You get that skyscrapers inside of these. How they have their own ecosystems. Like there's clouds in there. They're probably fucking rains inside the cave. There's insects as animals live in these caves that have over time lost their ability to see because they didn't need it. So their their hearing goes up, their site goes down. But there's like bugs in like Thailand and like sappang and plays like that where it's like, oh, yeah, these plays these animals only exist here. To hear you breathe. There's a sound man or a Barton Creek Springs. Yeah, especially salamander. Yeah, really? It only lives there. It'd be salamander that got mixed with weird people swimming in the creek. Yeah. Whoa. It's a vibe about chicks with arm here. It's all survival here. It's all cycle. Yeah, I was doing bottom of the barrel last night. And somebody brought up that there's like there's nude beaches at Lake Travis. And I'm like, what is it like in the spring? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, when you take a, well, maybe, but yeah, when you take one of those boat rides out, chicks, they show the bro. It's noise noise. Yeah, noise. It's noise. Hip-hop. If you somebody who grows hippie tits, some of them are like real tits. Real, influence goes there too. Oh, like girls have dude too much ayahuasca and they wear wooden beads and they want their tits out. Dude, so I was in I was in a Patagonia or I was in a hollow park. 4.6 stars. That's a lot. I was asking people through it was a rafting thing. And I was like, who's the worst? I always tried to do this, especially at comedy clubs, who's the worst person you ever had here? So there's like, which country, which people are the worst? And they go, I don't know. I'm like, listen, I'm from Jews. So you can, it's Jews, right? And they go, I mean, they want three of these for sure. But like, uh, we're trying to get which, which country's or city goes, well, the worst overall though is influencers. And they have no country, but they make everything about them. They make you pause too long to take their shots and make you get out of their shot. We're all just trying to wrap. They think they're there for them. Yeah. One of the influences got arrested in Korea. Johnny Somali, do you know what that guy is? He was in Korea. And apparently they have some statue that is about, I think it's something about sex slavery or something like that. So he was like kissing the statue and being rude to people. And they just sentenced him to, he did a bunch of shit over there. They sent him to six months of hard labor in Korea. We need some of that here for influencers. Quick doing fucking selfie talking on the while you're walking. Not a black lady. You don't get to talk to your phone. Black ladies get to talk with their love speakerphone. Why do they do like that? I don't know. You see like ladies like that. It's like, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't. And it's like, why do you think they like that? Why do they like it? They want everyone to hear their conversation. Maybe because they're fucking nails will cut up their face. If they break it too close. Like a possible reason is weird. We're like certain cultures gravitate towards certain behavior and activities. It's new racism. It's fun because it's like, this isn't in the books. This is a brand new observation. Speaker phone is like, I remember being outside of Roscoe's chicken and waffles and saying like, how come so many black eyes are on speakerphone? And people like, that's racist. I'm like, no, it's not. That's an observation. Observing. No, I'm not mad at them. Yeah, I don't care. Why? Like, why is it worse that I hear both sides of the conversation versus one side? Like if someone's just talking on the phone, why is that less offensive than someone talking to your brother? Sure. Why do the Hasidic Jews always talk on flip phones all the time? And you're like, there's something up or what? Yeah, there's some where it's like, what did the people use to ask me when I would do it, you and A's when it's doing the Jew hour building it. So they ask questions. Don't get check drops. I'm like, ask questions. And I'll build my material that way. Oh, that's smart. But one of them was like, why do they all wear matching clothes that daughters? Or like if it wants 10, one's eight, why do they wear matching stuff? That's the only one I couldn't figure out until I finally figured it out. It's two for one sales. United threatens to kick off passengers who don't use headphones. Yeah, good. Oh, well, that's because people are like listening to like loud YouTube videos right next to all. That is all over South America. Oh, it is scroll Instagram videos. Loudly. There's no even thought. We were over night bus once and there was a guy listening to like best Hollywood screams. And it was like, dude, we're sleeping. Oh, God. It's crazy. They just don't do it. And you want to be like, be quiet, but they're like, why? It's not part of our culture. It's like the Dominican pool hall. Yeah, exactly. This is how we do it. There is used to a chaos. Is weird that like people get used to a certain amount of chaos, you know, and that's just normal. Yeah. New York is a normal track hammer. It's like, right. Nothing. Yeah. You live in New York. You're totally accustomed to, oh, that was what I wanted to send you, Jamie. I don't know. Maybe I did send it to you the other day about where they figured out that there's a part of your brain that recognizes when birds aren't chirping. Oh, and you kind of freak out. Like there should be some background. Right. Well, birds aren't chirping. It generally means that predators are nearby. The brain is a circuit. Doesn't know you live in a city. It's only job. It's a monitor where the birds are still singing. Right now in this room, it's on the circuit predates primates. Whoa. Mammals have been using ambient soundscape continually as a predator detection system for roughly 200 million years. Birds stop singing when something larger moves through their territory. For most of the million history, the forest full of song meant that no large predator was nearby. And the cessation of sound was the warning. Your nervous system never updated this software. A loud quiet. It really sums up. The Max Planck Institute tested the inverse in 2022 with 295 participants, six minutes of birdsong dropped anxiety with a medium effect size. Six minutes of traffic noise raised depression with the same. The effect worked on subjects who lived in dense urban environments and had no regular contact with nature. The brain still ran the check. Listen, I'm a hippie. I live in New York. And it's like I got to get to nature once in a while. They're all go crazy. That's why we have to protect the parks. That's why we have to protect the parks. We have to tomorrow. Tomorrow. We're protecting the park. Tomorrow we are. Yes. It's back. Fuckin this new guy. Listen, I'm a one issue voter. I'm not a voter at all. But if I was. I'm not a guy. I'm a guy. I'm a guy. Yeah. And it's this we saved another park, Elizabeth Street Gardens, classical park. And they go, no, the other guy was like, we got to tear this down for low income housing. And then lower side in the East Village, that's a community oriented place. They take care of shit on their own. Always have. They made the park. It's a parks district because they were like these buildings collapsed. And they're just like, let's build it into parks. And then the city when it came back, like, let's take those back. Like, no, no, no, no, fuck that. We made these. Each of the parks massive, but Elizabeth Street Gardens is tiny. And the other guy, the black guy, whatever his name was, but there's a cat. There are catams. He goes, I'm going to protect that park. And I'm going to protect all the parks. That nicer they redid them all and they paint all the benches. I like them. And he goes, OK, so this community goes, we will find you another place to build low income housing. And they did. They had this whole platform. And they go, we can do it on this block down the street there. And there, it's actually more houses than you were planning on building. OK. And now this fucking new guy goes, now we're going to raise that to the ground. What? And like, no, no, we did it. We found another place. I thought he was for a game. He's trying to get him to like, just say you're going to protect it. And he's pretty much like, I won't. I won't. Elizabeth Street Gardens is fucking gone if I have my say, real. Yeah. And like, dude, come on. You're supposed to be of the people. What? See, I had a single issue voter. I don't know about the rest. You got to protect that park. So do you think that there's some sort of a financial interest to someone getting someone's always getting this? Someone's always getting that. You would not think of him. He's a democratic socialist. There's a non capitalist reason why green spaces are important. Yeah. It doesn't bring in money. You try to fuck up with this. This is your park. Democratic socialist. There's a non-capitalist reason why green spaces are important. It doesn't bring in money. You can try to fuck up with this. They try to fuck this one up. Zilker? Yeah. With underground like garages and stuff and like totally redoing it. The people won. So it didn't happen. But like there is a thing that helps all of our level of life level. Central Park is a huge great idea. It's a huge idea. Now if it wasn't already done. Yeah. I would we were talking about this with Brian Simpson. I was like if I lived in New York City or something happened and I had to do JRE from New York City. Yeah. I would have to live near the park because I would have to have my dog. I'm not going to get rid of my dog. Yeah. So if I'd have to take this. I just have to like have a place where I 100% were able to take I'd have a routine where I'm taking him to the park every day. Central Park rules. I need to see somebody playing in San Zafojo and you feel like you're in a Woody Allen movie. Bro Central Park is incredible. It's so big too. When you stay in a hotel that like looks over the park you really get a sense of the scope. The size of it. Like the scale of it is incredible. It's so and by the way they're in love to sell that off. Oh yeah. And just like stacking it up make it look like China. You know like one of those big cities that they have with their spaces. They are important to our way of life. Yeah. It's good for you don't. Obviously it's good for the fucking mind. Yeah. It's healthy. But even Central Park it's like it's not as good as like real wheels. Real wheels. Yeah. Real wheels. That's a part of the five or two days of sanity. I gotta get to the actual woods and then I get a week or two. Central Park will balance you out. Yeah. It'll balance you out. Like it's way better than no. And it seems like people are cooler there. Like every time I've been in Central Park people seem like a little nicer. Like like if you run into people on Broadway they don't seem as nice as people that you run into in Central Park. It's not this fucking yeah. It's also that thing with like hey no smoke in here like I'm really sorry. And then you put it out like I'm lighted up as you're going but like you can't smoke in Central Park. Nothing really you do but weed but cigarettes they get more mad at. But also like yeah if I got a cigar and I'm with a friend I'm smoking. Yeah. Like well I could see how that would annoy you. Sure but also chill. But you can walk down the street in New York and smoke a cigarette right? Or joint. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Still weird to me when I see a black guy on a stoop rolling a joint. Like what are you doing? You're going to go to jail but it's right. I know it's totally. Well now it's different nationwide because Trump just changed into schedule three. Again this is something that Obama could have done. Biden could have done. Trump wanted to do it. Trump wanted to do it. Yeah. And now it's schedule three which is still not good. I mean it should be moving up just like alcohol but at least it's getting close. It's getting close. Did I had moments out there in nature where like you're in the middle of nowhere and you'd really do feel rejuvenated like that. Where you're like you're not even it's not even hiking culture so it's like you're not passing anyone. Right. For hours and hours and hours. You're a piece. You're just at peace. And whatever that thing is that they've just discovered about birds. Yeah. There's a similar thing that you your body recognizes when you're actually in real nature. It feels different. There's no cell phone signal. You know anything about grounding? Yes. What's your take on it? Well human believes it's a real thing. And so I always trust you really because he's very objective about all the electromagnetic waves coming on the ground that you need to touch with. It does feel good. Well I take the dogs out in the yard and I walk around barefoot. It feels good. I mean I'm just judging it based on how it makes me feel. It's like that word tree hugger got a bad rap but it's like it comes from like touch that they're in the ground so you're connected to the ground. Probably comes from people that were tripping balls because if you're tripping balls those trees hug you back. They're like, they talked to you. They're like your face. You could feel the cells. I'm in Oak Tree. I've been here for 300 years. I've been here before this was America. Yeah, it's pretty wild. When I go to the mountains, especially like the Elkhonting Mountains because it's so hard to get there. When you get there there's no cell phone service. When you're up there you feel different. You feel different. You feel better. You feel more relaxed. Do my brain was firing in a way that it hadn't fired in so long. It was just like all the shit holding you down just like pulled off and after not very much time it was just like just thoughts creative thoughts were just like pouring out of me. So in the six months you were gone. No social media. No social media. I took YMH's on a piece of paper. A couple people from YMH's emails. I got two months ahead on my ads and my podcast on YB Trippin. So my you guys are set for two months. You don't need me. And then after. So did you record a bunch of episodes in advance? A year's worth. I did my work. Oh my god. That's crazy. Yeah. They're all evergreen episodes. How did you do that? Work. I one worked hard to love hearing about travel. I love it. So like it wasn't much work for me to come in and be like telling about Cambodia. Tell me about Thailand. Tell me about Taiwan. Tell me about, you know, Uruguay. Well that's how I feel about podcasting in general. Yeah. You like it. Yeah. You'll have to hear there like this guy was sucked. I wish I should have stayed home. But generally like that's really interesting. Yeah. So I love it. And I just got way ahead. It's funny when I like Danny Paul. Check I put out an episode. He was like two years ago. Like I wasn't time yet. I don't know. Oh wow. We're all safer for if a comic has a special like this is recorded now in nine months. You'll have a special. How many do you have banked through July still? Whoa. Yeah. That's great. So how many did you do a week? Sometimes none. Sometimes sometimes like six or seven. I was very, oh, you'd be tripping. Dude, I see every mistake I made for the skeptic tank and I was like, let's avoid that. Like we're going to mistakes you make. So like minimum of effort on my part technologically. So why, why I make these my Jamie? Right. Right. Here's the footage handle. By the way, settle down because they're not at their my version of James. This is the only, this is the goat. Well, I have 15 people doing one Jamie job. Yeah. So that's the problem. Yeah. Like when people talk about like, who should I hire? I'm like, I don't know. I don't know what to tell you. You need a guy on the spectrum. But yeah, but I did, I did that. It's a couple of times. I've like two, two a day for four straight days. Any comic who goes, hey, I'm sorry, I'm busy. I'm like, buddy, let's reschedule. This isn't supposed to be stressful. Right. Let's do it. We have time. There's no chill. No big deal. That's what you do. And I'm when you're ahead, you can afford a week with nothing. It wasn't like, I got to find someone. We got to do this now. Yeah, that's out. Yeah. That's out. All the music choices they used to make. And like, that's a lot of work for it. Yeah. What's the music thing is the problem is like, you get flagged now. It's super good. We used to be able to play music on YouTube all the time. And now everything gets flagged. You got to be real careful. We used to play songs almost every episode full song. Yeah. When there was nothing when when the show made the hero money in West, it was so fun. You're actually making a fun thing. It was so outlaw. It's a little more corporate now, just sad, but also fine. It helps people a lot more now. But man, podcasting was just do whatever the fuck you want. Well, we were at the early early days. Like when I started this thing, it was 2009. It's almost 20 years old, which is so nuts. Have you figured out a way to monetize you? Not yet. I'm working on it. I was I think I'm so rubber pussy. You were for a bit. Yeah. You were for a bit. I was my first sponsor. Only sponsor. I don't need another one. We're good. It was funny. Because Sam Harris was like one of his requests when he first did my podcast. He's gonna make a pussy. Would you let me do an ad for the flesh like I said, okay, okay, it doesn't matter. Like it's not like it's paying a lot of money. It was just fun more than anything. Yeah. But so I would I would wait. So after two months, I go, Hey, um, I needed the next months of ads. And I would say one day I would just do all the ads on the bumpers. Like this guy's got a new special. Here's his tour dates. I'd find a water follow something and I would do it in a fun place. Oh, wow. Yeah. I was like, let's do it fun. If I can do a remote, let's be remote. Yeah. How did you do it? Do you do it videos well? Yeah. iPhone. So Jamie told me this a lot. I was like, first trip to South Southeast Asia. I was like, I need a pocket camera of like, what's the best when he was like, bro, you're not going to hear this. It's the iPhone. Yeah. Best one or a galaxy. Yeah. Like any modern cell 2017. But yeah, any modern cell phone, the videos fucking incredible and all the visitors. Yeah. The video stabilizations. Amazing. And all you do is you set it up on a little tripod and you'll go for fucking hours. Yeah. So I'll put a little tree far away. I did one for Danny Brown episode in like, sucray Bolivia in front of the statue of sucray. Oh, wow. And it's just like guys are in Bolivia. That was everywhere. Wow. Dude, I was I was talking to our duration for the first present they had in 20 years. Where in sucray in Bolivia? Whoa. They had the old guy was running things for 20 years. Okay. A crazy dude that everyone hated. He said farming is more important than industry here. So we should give the farmers two votes per person. And the cities get one. Now they also run the media there. So everyone in the in the farmlands in the, you know, the heartland. They didn't see any of the problems. Right. City shit. So they'll go, I don't know. Everything on the radio says the guys doing a great job. Let's vote him again. He's what a great. I listen to radio. The guys doing a great job. And everyone in the city's like, oh, he's lying. So everything went to shit 20 years. Like, well, let's turn on the radio again. Let's turn on like, Trump Trump news and see what Trump is saying about Trump. It's going to be pretty good. Right. Um, yeah. There I am. This is the video. I pretend to be talking to myself because I'm so embarrassing. So I pretend to be talking to my phone, but I just have a coreless mic. Is Danny still sober? I think he's back on weed, but like, yeah, he's like, he's off the house. Alcohol was the issue. Yeah. That's the only thing podcast he got obliterated. He's sober. Nice. Yeah. Good friends. Great. Bolivia. What is there like, it was always Bolivian marching powder. It was what when I was a kid, what do people call cocaine? Interesting. The salt flats were really cool there. Yeah. Just like miles and miles of salt fields. Oh, there's me and O'Neill in Peru. Look at you guys where you're stupid hats on. Yeah. I would just try to find weird spots and like, I don't know. Let's just film something. Why were you wearing those hats? Where's Peru? This is the alpaca hats that keep you warm. Oh, I went hunting my first time hunting and wore those hats. The great. And Steve Riello was saying that's a very left left wing hat. I'm like, why? Why is it left wing? It's warm. It's warm. It's I don't know about your hat. Like, I'm not even alone. I'm about to kill something. Steve chill. I'm about to murder something. I killed that deer with that fucking my left wing hat on. But that's all I do. I just weigh in once and a while get my months worth of stuff and then go back to disappearing. And I'm telling you about it. My brain was so alive. I would just like, you just don't realize what your dealing with responsibility was all the time. And then when you have none, it's like you just kind of be here. So I came up with this whole, my storytelling shows out. I came up with this whole like how to frame it all, how to do everything. I had a vision of like this prologue that I want to bridge the gap. It's called the end. It's out now. And this is the dot com. And then did you film all that with your mom's house studios as well? Yeah. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. They might be the only group like that that's actually Tom was like, how much do you have? Like I have about 80% of it. He goes, I'll put in the rest. I'll supply all the, all the people you need to make it happen. And then he's not a network. It's a gora and he's a fucking dirtbag. So he's like, say whatever you want. There's no censoring when it's the gora. You know, well, it's also like, Tom has made so much money that he's out. You know what I mean? He'll do whatever the fuck he wants. Yeah. You can't stop him. He's going to do whatever he wants now. Yeah. Oh, nice. Look at all these episodes. Miss Pat, the stuff. No. Look at that. Talking to the great one. Nice. Shame. Shame. Be kidding. Big J. You know, we made the show again. Hey, and then there's pro logs. It's something I had a vision of this on that mushroom trip. Wow. About how to frame like what happened to this not happening and what is this thing now? And how do I go through it? And then then I talked about your artist while it was gone and something made pictures and this guy, this guy will be a child. He actually did a Danny Brown video. He's just shit. I don't want to ruin this. Where'd you film these? The box in New York City. Place where she'll pill would have his comedian balls. Let's get that gay outfit. The gay outfit, Joe, is from you remember a show called This Not Happening? I said completely legally unrelated to this new show. You can say whatever you want, but I cannot. That was a comedian telling stories and a strip club. This is a strip club with comedian told stories. The first year they go, hey, you got to wear the same outfit every day. I go, no, it's fake. Like, no, we got a mission match day. So we got to do it. Oh, why? Does anybody get to now? Because they say it'll be like, it's weird or suddenly you're hosting a different thing. So I start wearing ridiculous suits. I made in Hong Kong. And then my final year I had this Indian outfit picked out that I went and sourced in LA and had this cool Indian outfit. All right, now it's cool. I thought it was gay. And I saved it for seven or eight years. But that show got taken away from me. I was like, I'm saved. If I ever do this again, I'm wearing this fucking outfit out of respect to overcoming. Those days were very fascinating. The days where Comedy Central is trying to force you into doing a Comedy Central special, but you had a deal with Netflix. And even though it was completely legal and contractually legal for you to do a Comedy Special with Netflix, Comedy Central was strong arming you into doing it on Comedy Central. And canceled your fucking show because you wouldn't do a special with them. So you got a successful show on what people want to know how gross Hollywood can get. Yeah. Are you had a successful show that was doing very well on Comedy Central. And they canceled it because he wouldn't do a comedy special. Because I hate him. I hate him. It was one of the early ones, paid for my own special. And then it's like, I got to figure out where it's going. And they go, it should be here. And I go, no, no, I don't think it should. It's also it was a double special. And it needs to be on a streamer more than a network. And I was like, no, I'm going to Netflix. And yeah, and then they like, let's go blackmail then. It's crazy. I get it from their perspective. No, I don't. They're like, hey, we can't be losing power. And they never really, they always thought it was an open mic. But it was not losing power because the reality is that that would just bring more people to the Comedy Central. And Netflix back then was so much bigger to do a special. When I did that 2017 special in Netflix, I was the mayor of New York for like three weeks. Everywhere I go, I'm in bike at a red light. Three people would recognize you. It was a different time for specials then. And of course, that was the biggest thing. I'm going to do that. Yeah. Well, there's still pretty big Netflix. It's still pretty big, but not you. It's special. So picked it up. Oh, that's right. They picked up you. Yeah. That's on Netflix. But yeah, and so people asked me with this show, like, why don't you go to Netflix or like, I'm like, dude, networks killed me. Not only that. I don't want. Yeah. I thought that just goes straight to the people on this. Why do it? It's like, there's no reason to at this point, especially like Comedy Central doesn't even exist. That's what's nuts. It was a while time. You said you would host for free. Yeah. I was on the phone with you crying. I was like hearing it that they're taking it. I said tell them I will host it for free because you were going to take out a loan to pay off all the all the crew because all the crew had signed on for, you know, X amount of episodes and was going to cost them money. And you were like, I'm trying to figure out a way to keep us on the air. I go, tell Comedy Central. I will host it for free. You were already. It was 2017. This podcast was already going. Oh, yeah. It was huge by then. Yeah. But it was number one in 2019 when it started being number one, but it was probably it was pretty big for you were had pedigree on the show. You done two stories. One you liked when you haters. But the one you liked was a great story. That's a great story. Dolph em Alabama. Yeah. And I was like, oh, he's part of the show. This kind of goes. If someone's got to do it, let's I'll do it for free. You'll saving money and getting a much bigger host. They just wanted to fuck you. They just wanted to fuck anyone I suggested. They said no, I always said all these to deeks to do it. They said no. Yeah. First I was really good. It was great. But it only lasted. Like it was over after that. But that show could have gone on a long fucking time. It was such a great idea. It was great execution. It was fun to do. It was real. It enjoyed it. In a moment where all comedy and the ironic distance was getting bigger. Yeah. This was a more real thing. Yeah. And people responded to it and listen, but it just shows you the grossness of the business sometimes when these people who are just gatekeeping executives, they're really saying, are you not on the list? Yeah. And they don't exist anymore. That's what's that's what's most amazing. That's cool. That you can go to Tom. You can go to God like that or whatever. And he goes, no, I love the show. It made me it made me bigger. Let's get it going again. Yeah. Yeah. And it's also like nine years later. Like the internet is completely taken over. Like it is drowned out. All of of those comedy networks. They don't exist anymore. Yeah. You need a some level of curation, or your loss in a sea of content sometimes. But there's people you can trust. You know, if you want meditation, that guy Sam Harris is at the meditation guy. You know, whatever he's going to say, you could probably going to believe in meditation was, you know, if you need some to hear an MMA fighter, like really speaking, this is a great source for that. This podcast. She needs some curator, but I mean, like I'm the guy, I'm not. Yeah, but even the show make it quality. I'll make it look right. You can always trust me to do that. So come to me for that show was the coolest stand-up show of all time. It was a fun show. It was a really good show. And it was a show that I remember you created from scratch. I remember when you were doing it at the lab at the improv that tiny little room, you were doing it for free. And I was like, what are you doing? Basically the same way that you were talking about to me about my podcast? Like, what are you doing? What are you doing? What are you doing? Do I have to have a show for 20 people? I'm like, this is so weird. I'm like, are you telling stories? But I thought about it. I was like, it's probably a good idea to develop material that way. Oh, yeah. Yeah. No, I a lot of people was like, hey, we're doing a show. It's about heartbreak this week or this month or it's about drugs or whatever. And they go, all right, let me, let me, I have a story. Let me get all my thoughts down. You know, all the metaphors and stuff that stuff, flouries, stuff, you put on them. That J is so good at and stuff. But like, then they became a lot of people. Like, that's my closure in my special now. I had no big. I thought of it because of this, it became, you know, the biggest thing I had my act. It's nuts. It's nuts. I love giving people an excuse to like write something. It was also such a fun show because it was comedy outside of like, regular stand up. It was like another avenue. And it was a really fun thing to do. You know, and the thing about like the gatekeeping of it is like, those people have nothing to do with it. And they had all the power. And by just exercising it in that way. And then everybody talking about how gross it was. Nobody ever trusted them again. And the thing is some of the stuff they do that like, we need some diversity. And it'd be like, I don't think you're wrong. I think you don't want it to be all the same thing. But there's something me and Eric Abrams came up with is it's a diversity of experience. Yeah. Is bigger. Two white dudes is not what we're talking about. If it's like Ali's Hadiques life, closer to Gary Owens life than mine. You know, Gary Owens and Ali are closer to each other than me or Gary. You know, right, right. So that's what I want different. Whatever. And they had these checklists you would go to in LA here are the gays get one of these seven here. Oh, the black. And it was like, well, I'm not going to fuck up my product. Don't wait. You at the end of the day, it has to be a meritocracy. So so then we would just work harder, which a lot of people don't want to do. And it's like, well, there's a great black woman in Indianapolis. She's not in LA or New York. But let's get her. She has great stories. Miss Pat. There's a great black comic and Houston. And he has these great stories about prison. Let's get him. I'll stick. They're not on these lists. Yeah. You just got to work a little harder to make your shit. You know, it's like Seinfeld letting everybody else shine. Right. But it's like forced diversity without the merit, without good quality comedy. Yeah. But it's just gatekeepers fuck themselves really because now that we don't need them anymore, like they're, what are those people do? Well, the things that we're running comedy central, what do they do now? There's no jobs. Well, the thing is with like, we're like, cabs overstepping that made Uber possible. Yeah. So let's focus on the positive of this. And then the Uber people kept robbing and murdering people. Yeah. So they, they just got way mouse. Yeah. Exactly. They'll be going to take it back. Yep. How many co-gaddics you need driving. You're like, bro, that's a red light. Please stop. I mean, they barely fucking vet those people. Yeah. But the cool thing is because it's easier to film and because I have friends that are fucking billionaires, you know, it's like, we can actually get it done now. It's a golden age for this. It is to be able to make a TV show level thing on our own. Well, look at even movies like Theo and David Spade made a fucking movie on their own. Self-financed it and it's doing well. Like, we know how much it's going to cost. We'll do it. Yeah. We're rich. It's incredible. Yeah. It's a cool time. I mean, we made our budget back day one. That's awesome. A massive project flying in 23 comics, you know, putting them all up, paying them all. They're cutting in on the shares. We've never done that before. So are you going to do that in the next season as well? I don't know if it's going to be a season. A lot of this was just a, there was a hole in my, in my resume where the show didn't end on the terms it should have ended on. And that's why it's called the end. Yeah. Yeah. It's a play on words for story titles too, you know, like the end. But like, I like to try to get it done right. Nice. Nice. And then all these huge, like Shane Gillis, who when he was like, open, Mike, or it was like, all these guys like, I want to eventually do that show. Yeah. The show went away. In the interim, he's like supplanting the Philadelphia 76 or so. You can get off me. Yeah. But he's like, I'd love to do that show. Do I four people take private jets to go to go to the show? That's amazing. Yeah. That's amazing. Fuck yeah. It was, I'm so happy with it. It came out right. Everyone who's seen it was like, oh, this is like not just something you did. This is like a TV show. Yeah. It's like, I'm so happy. That's awesome. Yeah. I love it. I'm so happy to hear that, dude. And that's great. That prologue that that guy did, you should also send your, I'll send your $2 off. Um, I'll just pay. Yeah. We said we had to figure out a way. You know, Neil and Abrams, we all like, right in it. We're like, I have to figure out a way to bridge the gap of does not happen to the end and what happened and everything without being too woe was me. And so we got this claymation guy who was like, yeah, let's just fill it with fucking punchlines. So it doesn't become that like, I love shorts, but I little like, they couldn't keep us down. Like, I don't want to do any of that. I don't want to be earnest. Right. So let's bridge the gap without, without ever being serious. Oh, nice. Yeah. Yeah. So it was like a three minute prologue. You get for free. Yeah. Yeah. That's what we're talking about. That's some keys video. Oh, wow. How did they do that? Did they use real claymation? Oh, yeah, dude. In a time of AI, wherever everyone's doing the easy stuff, he is painstakingly, it takes him a day to build each one of those characters. That's three day work. And then a backdrop takes another day or two. And how long does it take to actually do the animation? A long time, all day long. So if you have notes, you're like, dude, I need those notes before I start filming this. This is click, move, click, move, click, move. You go back and erase the stuff that, you know, the wires and shit too. Are there wires or just moving the class to be held up? Because it's click would fall. Right. Right. Right. Right. Well, there's wires in the arms. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you don't necessarily have to have wires like to make it stand. What is it going on with this tits? Well, this is music video. It's in that bowl. Yeah. He's making a, it's like, things like a turd. He didn't trip you red video. That's really good. That's awesome. Yeah. That's cool that people are still doing stuff like that. Like the old school, the way they did King Kong. Well, here's what I noticed too. When you start talking to some of these artists, you know, like some of my stages signs and stuff like that. Like for America, sweetheart, what I had was like this idea that like, what if we left society, how long till nature would just take back over and like, let's do that with plants. And then the first ones are like so expensive. They're like, oh, I can't. Okay. I got to rethink again. That's far, far out of the ball. I'll spend a lot, but not that much out of the budget. But then you tell these people, like, well, here's what I'm trying to do. I'm trying to say, you say the whole thing, like, here's what I'm trying to get across. Here's what I'm trying to say. Like, we're too caught up in them news and stuff. And if we all just like, whatever. And then they go, fuck dude, that's a good. Okay, we can do it at cost. And then him and then he shepher they were both like these great artists that were like, fuck, they stole your fucking show from you. Hold on. That's fucking bullshit. I can bring my costs way down. Let's, we can do this. Still very expensive, but they're like, I'm really part of something. That's dope. You know, if Tarantino was like, you're on a hold of boom, Mike, I'm like, yes, I would do that for you to be part of something. Yeah. There we go. That's fucking dope dude. It's what? William child. That's his Instagram account. Whoa. That's me. Look at you. You deliver me a message. Oh, your ass will kick. You know, that is only that I was a fan of like that. That's real. February 18, 2010. The show is born third most vapits in an American. Me and this comedian tell us stories got psychedelic drugs. We're team people showed up. But goddamn, it was the best show I'd ever seen. February and that's awesome. A lot of hard work completely in my own with help from no one. I got a TV. And that helped launch the careers of so many great comments. That one's who lost weight. Someone's who somehow keep getting fat. Or many of the influence elections. So, go on. I realized. Good. Then with a lot of hard and ending. That's the irony. Secondly. Where it watches. You're in it. Hold on. There's wrong. I mean, that might have been the drugs. Out in ending. The iron weight rush right after this hold up. I mean, it might have been the drugs. I think there's nothing. There's nothing. It's not all. There's only clips of it, I guess. There's a moment where I have to go. I realized that had to be a man and not just a man who will go on to tap Shane Gillis twice with witnesses. By the way, that's a new environment. Raise your hand. It's like, I witnessed it. I like, let's just have some fun, dude. Let's have some fun. I got Duncan to do a theme song on the way out of his episode. Oh, really? His stories about taking his kids to a Taylor Swift. Taylor Swift concert film and how awful it is. He thinks she's a 15,000 year old vampire. He has this long song. You can see it. She's feeding off them. She gets bigger as they start cheering. It's so funny and it's Duncan. He's so out there. And I'm like, hey, Duncan, he does this song. He breaks down every one of her songs because it's just this. And I was like, you know those crazy garage band songs you're making for 25 plus years. You want to do the theme song just for that episode? Just the 100%. So it's just like demonic song about being a 15,000 year old vampire. It's a Taylor Swift original song. And you don't have to do okay with a network. You're like, let's just do it. That's like, what do you do? You made up some crazy credit for his band. That's awesome. That's amazing. Nobody's embraced that kind of AI technology more than Duncan. He's always sending me things that he's working on. Always he doesn't know how long those garage band songs used to make. It was an AI, it was just him. I know crazy. A long time ago. Yeah. The sunset days. Yeah. It was like, oh my God. That's awesome dude. Okay. So that's it's available on areshafear.com. Orshafear.com each. That's fine. I already great.com. I went away. People didn't know how to find it. But is it still there? We go to are either great.com does it take you to areshafear.com? I know anything about me. There's no way I'm going to pay those fees every year. If I know anything about me and my people, I doubt I still have that. Yeah. I'm not the YMH staff. I had a production card. You know, you need a production card at the end. One of them says YMH then Eric Abrams directed his and I was like, the one I was using was just still frame from this not happening. Just my dick pixelated. And I was like, put my thing on that. I hate the, you have to get a plan on a producer or whatever. Right. And I didn't have it and then we couldn't use anything with this not happening. So it's like, don't, and I was like, fuck, I didn't know the one. I'm out from the jungle. So I told YMH I was like, guys, you guys are all fucking idiots. Make me whatever production card you want and I will use it. And they were like, we're going to make seven. I was like, all right. And I've seen a few of them and they're all so retarded. They're all so, one of them being a giant coin out of my fucking giant nose. It's just so retarded. Nice. I love working with people I like. I don't know what's going to be big of a giant coin out of my fucking giant nose. It's just so retarded. No, I love working with people I like. Yeah, Tom's awesome. It's nice having a guy like that that's like really just acquired an enormous amount of funds. Yeah. It does whatever the fuck he wants. Fun. Yeah. Yeah. It is Netflix show is fucking great. Oh, it's so out there. It's so crazy. But it's like perfect for him. It's like his mind. All right. Let's wrap this bitch up tomorrow protect our parks. First protection parks. Quite some time. I would get recognized here or there when I was traveling. Not much. I'll tell you a couple things I saw. One, people know Shane Gilles name except in Brazil and then they only know Rafi Bostos' name. Oh, really? That's the only comic they've ever heard of. He's a big comic. I had him on the show. Really? Yeah, he's great. Good dude. I'll tell you this though. There's a lot of business as shit that gets caught up in this. Who's interviewing which politician and what all this guy's doing this. He's friends with this guy and all the money and everything and like am I doing well enough? People try to do that. Keep up game. This guy's getting more views on his clips. I should start doing shorter stuff. Anyone I told that didn't recognize me when it came up what my job was. First I try to avoid it. But if I kept myself like, no, no, no, for real. What do you do? I'm like, all right. Well, I'm a stand up comedian. I mean, this is 10 for 10 countries. Everybody would be like, what? What do you mean? I'm like, I'm a stand up comedian. And they go like as a hobby, I'm like, no, it's a living. They're like, what grandma, come here. This guy to stand up like we meet with a microphone. I'm like, yeah, that's so cool. That's so cool. I'm like, where? Just in New York. I'm like, in the country and the world really like, what? You pay your rent on this. I'm like, yeah. And then some like, no, fucking way. I couldn't get over how cool it was. And they didn't know if I'm successful or not. They just know I do this. Bro, we have the coolest job. And I've tested this in the world. There's no cooler job you could tell people that they'll be like, that reaction. They start smiling just so the idea of the job can they actually exist? And that's what we do. And the high level ones in the low level, we're all doing the same shit. We're all just coming up with a better dick joke to entertain some for strangers. Even gay in. Even gay fucking, and even holding the wall. Blow in a dude, and they go, oh, I just got an idea for a bit. That's cool. Let me, hold on, I got to write this down. Hold on, I'll jerk you while I write it down. Oh, that's awesome. Yeah, it's an amazing job. It's kind of incredible. We live a very blessed life for sure. Yeah, it's just, yeah. It's just, I don't know. I mean, yeah, it's fun to just focus on some positives and realize the negative thing. Yeah, nothing compared to the positive. They keep it up with the Jones' stuff and the paying attention to the numbers. I mean, obviously that's easy for me to say that you shouldn't do it, but you shouldn't do it. Well, there's this thing. It's concentrating on what you're doing and enjoy it. It's talking to Maddie, Wiener's really funny comic, and she was like, you know, all these people, and everybody really likes. She's gonna be a star. And she's like, all these people are getting clips. It's cryo-books. I don't do crab work. And it was like, well, then you shouldn't do those clips. Your road's just gonna be a little longer than them, but don't think about it like that. Like, just do this shit you're good at. Yeah. And then eventually you'll get found out. I mean, just do whatever you do. Whatever you wanna do, but don't let them decide or I need to write an under 60 second bit. It's gotta have a punchline at 59 seconds or I can't put it on YouTube shorts. Like that's a dumb way to be building your stuff. Absolutely. Big Jay does kind of cryo-work that no one's ever done. Long form, crowd work with you. Yeah. But it's also been doing it for so long, and he has that kind of personality and like easy-going style that makes it work. You see Big Jay at like somebody heckles him, like an angry heckle, not just like a comedy part of it. Like, he's like, he doesn't, I get worked up. He just goes, oh, what was it? You don't like, like almost as if he's on my ship. He's like, no, yeah, I could see that. But what's specifically, I just wanna know. He's an easy-going guy. Yeah, he's just like, let's mind this for laughs. I'm like a caught up screaming. Well, he's also done so many shows in New York where that must happen so often. You develop strategy. Yeah, you got practice at it. Yeah. Big Jay, my co-host, the Legion of Skanks. All right, that's right. You're back, Legion of Skanks. You're running it now. Dave Smith decided to be a political commentator. Well, it's three for life. I'm not running it. I'm just part of it. No, no, no, you're running it. Oh, it's printed, joke world. I heard that you were the leader of the Legion of Skanks. I am, the leader of Skanks. Well, I'm the president. In the past, you're already like, you ran for president. I think you won. I think, yeah, I won. To one day, I'm one of these podcasts. We got to talk about the presidential election, Legion of Skanks. It was a three month process of just non-stop creativity and stupidity. What's I gonna do tomorrow? OK. Oh, shame is evolved. Yeah, shame is my first president. There you go. All right, let's wrap this up. I love you. I love you too. It's great to see you back. Yeah, we'll see you too. Do this up both times where I thought about you out there where I'm like, you would love, NASCAR lines was one of my choroggin would love the Mayan temples you would love it. I want to teach you needs them once, way back in the early days. I'll solve it, or you would have loved. I'm sure. Just with the stuff you were into, there was so much. Anyway, I love you, buddy. I love you too. Jamie, everybody as well. I love you, Jamie. Bye.