The Joe Rogan experience you're an Applebee's guy. I love Applebee's really what's it about Applebee's I love the name Right man That the spirit I love the atmosphere. I love I love the drink they give you that comes with a gummy shark Which one's that I don't know it's calling one of them signature cocktails? Yeah, but it's so good and they have a special mountain Do Applebee's they do yeah, it's special and special. It's only an Applebee's what's the special? You looking for another one of it. Oh, I got this right. Yeah, it's uh, it's like it's like a raspberry flavor I think it's kind of like space pun. It's got a very bash dark very bash It's called actually NASA uses orange filters I swear to god check that shit out look into it They might I think what Jamie is saying about color correction though is accurate Yeah, but I was just looking at photos. They all come black and white I think right It's I think the thing is that they're just getting data They're getting data and that data has to be interpreted into an image And it's a lot more complicated than like you taking a picture on your iPhone and texting it to me And I get it and it's in full resolution look up Mars look up Mars copy and paste look up NASA copy and paste Let's see if this Just add Mars for a buzzword. What do you think about all this UFO disclosure shit? You pay attention to it? Yes, sir. Yeah It's I think it's pretty cool. That's pretty interesting, right? Yeah, you know It's interesting like how little people seem to care because we already know I know But it's interesting that like there wasn't like some moment where people like will like holy shit Aliens are real. There was some that's coming You think I think it's good because this slow trickle it's gonna be we just accept it. Well, they try to normalize it with like yeah Like war the world which is like the world or battle of Los Angeles and shit like that That was a real fucking thing that happened the pictures of battle Los Angeles Is crazy what happened exactly there's this big Object in the sky and we're shooting machine guns at it. We got it in spotlights. This is like in the 50s maybe Look at this shit Wow, so we're putting fucking rounds on this fucking thing spotlights on this thing in the sky Look at the rounds Right, but what is it what is it that they see that's weird that all you can see is spotlights? 1947 it says in the corner boy that looks like a fucking flying saucer Look at and look it in the middle and look it but those things around it those are fucking like my do surrounds Like they're shooting at this fucking thing. They don't know what it is. Well, you know that there's a there's a famous story from the Soviet Union that these guys shot at a UFO and it turned them into stone Is it true? Okay, I don't know the CIA investigated it here. I'll send it to you Jamie Because I sent it to Jeremy Corbell. That's what I asked him fuck. I should have had links Jamie. God damn it Well, this is the only link I have it's CIA UFO turned into You definitely want to watch this. Yeah, so there's literally like a CIA document about it at these guys supposedly Shot at a low flying spaceship According to the KGB materials a quite low flying spaceship in the shape of a saucer appeared above a military unit that was conducting routine training maneuvers For unknown reasons somebody unexpectedly launched a surface-to-air missile and hit the UFO It fell to earth not far away and five short humanoids with large heads and large black eyes Emerged from it. It is stated in the testimonies by the two soldiers who remained alive That after freeing themselves from the debris the aliens came close together and then merged into a single object that acquired a spherical shape that object began to buzz and his sharply and then became brilliant white and a few seconds this fears grew much bigger and Exploded by flaring up with an extremely bright bright light at that very instant 23 soldiers who had watched the phenomenon turned into stone poles poles Yeah, only two soldiers who stood in the shade and were less exposed to luminous explosion survived No shit the KGB report goes on to say that the remains of the UFO and the petrified soldiers were transferred to a secret scientific research Institution near Moscow specialist assumed that a source of energy that is still unknown to earthlings instantly changed the structure of the soldiers living Organisms having transformed it into a substance whose molecular composition is no different from that of limestone It turned them in the limestone turn them literally in the limestone and this is a CIA pay CIA Work well. This is you know, they're reading from a KGB file right so It's it's just we'll go to the very bottom of that again Jamie the very bottom of it It says one of things that says the CIA representative stated if the kg but be file corresponds to reality This is an extremely menacing case the aliens possess such weapons and technology that go beyond all our assumptions They can stand up for themselves if attacked The thing is they're saying if the file corresponds to reality that means there's a question. This is real there tough Yeah, they they can fuck with you. What year was this released? I don't know Source is a newspaper 1991 1993 93 so there you know There's all these disclosures that are going on right now and they're very very fascinating Because it's hard to know what's true and what's not true, but it's interesting that they're talking about it But no one showed me anything yet I'm waiting for them to show me things I've seen some things already like those videos that they took off the The the FLIR video in the go fast video and these these videos of these things we just jet pieder fighter pilots are trying to track this thing It's like zipping across the sky and like what the fuck is that I've seen a few of those I've seen talk to two different fighter pilots that are adding counters And they're all in they're all in I think there's a real thing going on What that real thing is is what would is what's confusing to me? I think some of it has to be ours I think some of it has to be like super advanced drone technology that we Don't want everyone knowing about and it's probably some black ops shit But I don't think that's all of it. I think it's also possible that we've been visited It just makes sense. It's just it sounds so stupid That's part of the problem of even talking about it because it sounds dumb because there's no evidence So you have to believe in something where there's no evidence of it like some blurry photographs But but then we need to think about the size of the universe itself and the fact that we exist We exist here on this planet. We're real. We know we're real. What if it's fucking a Martha or whatever and they're from fucking the center of the earth in the holes in the polar The poles or whatever north and south and it's where the holes are and that's why Google Maps blacks it all I Know that shit well that would be a great theory before cell phones like that But it's not that you still can't see it. How do you camera satellites and also flight patterns? Like the people that copy and paste I know who doesn't think the world is flat Pilots true Anyone who's been on their plane. They fly around these motherfuckers. They know they know where they have to go They go to the flight patterns. You look at it. Yeah, you look at it also by the way everything's round Go out in the fucking sky and look at Mars look at Jupiter Can it telescope look at all the stars notice how everything's round seems like there's a pattern going on Why would this be different this ass is round? Yeah? I Don't know it's it's so weird man It I don't know and you're talking about the ocean moment I think we've been so like normalized to it like ET all this shit. You're only watching this shit to where it's like yeah No shit everyone no matter what the surveys say or anything everyone thinks there's like Something going on everyone. Yeah It had there's a few people that still are very incredulous Elon believe it and not this is incredulous He's famously said if aliens are really sure our subtle Very subtle bigfoot subtle too Doesn't mean he's not an interdimensional being that could teleport it will know where the cameras are He's an odd-neshian being he shuts down. Tricky. It's just Jesus Christ full beard all over He's just with Jesus Yeah, that's what he also in the woods. He's a mythical creature Looking out for humanity our brothers and sisters. They need our help He's a benevolent kind being he's got a big heart