Joe Roman, Mike. The Joe. Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe. Rogan, Block. Ask my night. All day. It's amazing, though. Not traveling all the time affects your health. You feel so much better. Yeah. And it's getting crazy on me. And I'm playing snow. Oh, I know, man. Dude, like what happened where these altercations are fairly regular. Like at airports, you see in brawls at airports all the time. Yeah. I have a theory. What is it? They don't want you flying. No, no, no, no, no, no. You think I'm crazy. You think I'm crazy? I'm dead serious. There's like a agenda 2050. And literally in there, it lists no more commercial flying. And you see them at all these like WEFs and all this stuff in dollar. I know it would be hilarious. Like it was only the elites that cut the flying. Dude, that's literally the plan. For ill? OK, but you think that can't be responsible for brawls at the spirit airlines. Yeah. I mean, dude, they send in all these people all the time. I mean, it's crazy to me. We like to always say, right. Right. But a lot of that happened because of the pandemic. All these military planes are almost hitting commercial. I'm telling you, dude, if they want you in a 15 minute city, why do they want you flying around? OK. I see what you're saying about the 15 minute city. And I think that's true. But I don't think this is grand planned to make planes slam into each other. I think it's a lot of his incompetence. Whatever happened with that. I mean, it's not the black hawk in DC. Yeah, that was a weird one. That was a weird one because apparently that lady was instructed to not go in the direction that she was going. Right. What was the specifics of it? Well, they looked the wrong way. Like they go, hey, there's a, and they looked this way, and it was coming that way, or they looked that way, and it was coming this way. They didn't, they looked the wrong way when they just tried to see what was coming. Was she a part of the Biden administration at one point in time, and then left and went back to flying helicopter or something like that? Listen, it's somewhat so hard to know because you see stuff online. But if you even study like the Vegas shooting, or I mean, the LA fires, they want you to blame DEI. Like, do you remember when that one fire chief or whatever was like, oh, if I come get you and you're too big, you're in the wrong place, the wrong time? Yeah. Why would you say that? Why would you? It's hubris. I don't know. It gets in a, listen, you got an all lesbian crew. You got a woman who's the first head of the fire department as a woman, and this lady's a woman, and they're all talking about how great it is if someone who looks like you comes to say if you help you mentally. So they're wrapped up in that cookie ideology. The absence of meritocracy and the absence of like physical standards for difficult physical jobs. To pretend that that's not necessary. You shouldn't be able to take the guy out. The guys that I knew that were all firefighters, the guys that I've known, one of my buddies is a firefighter, he's a Brazilian, she just said black, and the one is a fucking big giant Irish guy. Like, they were always big people. Because you had to be able to carry folks. I agree, then you had to be able to do crazy physical things. You have to act down doors sometimes. You know, it's right. But that's when you take 100 pound woman and tell her to act down a door. Okay, so I agree with what you're saying. But what I'm saying is what causes more chaos, what causes more infighting is if you push everybody to this is DEI messing up, and not that this whole thing is purposeful. Okay. So you're thinking that they're instituting DEI on purpose, and they're putting incompetent people in positions of power on purpose so that they'll fuck up, so that people will complain so that it creates more chaos. Yes. So I mean, I don't know if they're, they, the narrative instantly became who are the bullshit leaders people. I don't know. I mean, like, well, I don't know if they're lizard, well, they probably are lizard people. But I mean, this is, I mean, when Karen Bass, here's the crazy thing about LA, very few people are calling out anything anymore. They've, it's a city of conformity then nobody wants to rock the boat because to get a job in LA, you need a 20 green lights. Yeah. All you got catches one red light and you're not working. Right. So if you're out there going, hey, dude, this is like, hey, man, what's going up with this? This seems pretty purposeful. You're not gonna work. You're just not gonna work. You could get mugged at a gas station, pumping $7 gallon gas, and still never complain about what's going on and still vote the same way because you don't want to rock the boat. That's, if you ask me, it's a big part of moving everybody into these big cities. Is the force conformity? I don't think it's like that everywhere though. LA is particularly like that because of the, it's a city of conformity already because of Hollywood. Yeah. Because you're auditioning for us. 100% auditioning for things thing is crazy because it's really the only way to find out if someone's really good at acting, you get a chance, right? But the way it's set up is like people choose people and if they choose you, you go on to have this incredible life. You become Brad Pitt. Yeah. If they don't choose you, you become that guy that everybody sees at the party that's 45. Yeah. You know, dying is hair dark and it's not happening. Everyone knows it's not happening and maybe he's got talent because it's weird. So you have to conform. Yes. You have to say what they want you to say, whether it's about whatever political issues gives you transition, climate change, yup, whatever it is. You can't have any opinions that break from the narrative. I totally 100% agree. And that's kind of why LA nobody's saying anything right now. It's a culture. It's a part of the culture, but I really think it has something to do with the original way that LA was founded. Before the whole reality star thing and everything else, but there's definitely a lot of that going on, but it was all acting. Everybody wanted to go to the act. So it was like the primary way that someone would get a gig, was an audition. Yeah. There's a there's a term into a communist term. It's like Coronee fee is a. I'm probably will go to that. But it's unbuttering. By the way, that will be a theme. A dope sweatshirt. Oh, Timmy. And if they're an I, he's one of those. You got one one? I got you older. Who's running 10 plan at that? Oh, no shit. He brought you, he gave it to all the. He's here. Oh, yeah, dude. Bro, I need one of those. No, I need the Wu time. Okay. Oh, dude. I'll get you one. Good. No, how bad is that smile? Why you want this one? I mean that one. Okay. I later later later. No, no, no. Okay. Okay. Okay. Sorry, you guys see my. You're going. I never watch this. I never watch this. It's yours. That worked out perfect. I'm like, I'm going to sweat like a pig the whole time. Anything Wu tag I'm down with. That's like a van. I'm just getting Merced by Mexicans the whole time. So they took the V and the end. Yeah. I made it just like a new tag. It's a great. It's a great school, dude. I'm trying to get a blue bell. I'm just old and fat. It's hard. Bro, I've known older for fucking. More than 20 years. Yeah, he's great. I love him. I think 20. Yeah, probably 20 years. Yeah, dude. He's great. I love jujitsu. I just got to old man jujitsu where I got to wrist locks and chill like that because I can't move these fat legs. I got fat old legs. I can't throw them and I'm taking on these. Are you on any hormone replacement? No, I want you so bad. Look at you set up. I got fat. I got fat too, dude. That's why I got to work out. No. Yeah. It's just the wheels are a little off. Did you get it looked up? No, I got to do that. Okay. I've been running nuts. All right. Well, before you do all this other stuff like jujitsu and you have an injury, you should make sure that you're not making that injury. Probably making it worse. Yeah, it's kind of important. But I love it. I know. I like pain. I'm glad you like it. But just listen to daddy because I've been down this fucking surgery road many times. Would you do it too? Two knee surgeries because of jujitsu. You have to make sure and I had a bunch of back issues. You have to make sure that it's not like a labrum tear or something like that where you're continuing to tear it and make it worse. Yeah. Because you can get that fixed. And if you get a fix, you'll be way better off. Yeah, I got to get a fix. MMA fighters do it all the time like sugar Sean. Yeah. Before his fight with Marab, he tore his labrum the first fight and he was going to get a surgery, but he realized he couldn't eat what there was no way he was going to be. He wanted to make that sphere show because they're doing it at the spheres. Like fuck it. I could still beat that guy. He's an animal. Yeah, he's a judge. He took a chance. But he needed to get a fixed. Then he finally got a fix and he's like, dude, I feel fucking infinitely better. Infinitely better. You have to fix it. If it's a labrum tear or something like that, you just don't want to ruin it. You don't want to get it so you need a hip replacement, which I know a gang of guys who have hip replacements. Okay. Yeah. I mean, I can't believe how many people I know that have hip replacements. I went home for the, I brought the kids back to the homeland and all my family was like, yeah, I got this fix. I got this fix. I got that fix. It's nuts, man, because I know guys that are 40 that have hip replacements. Like not just one. You know, I think it's a Conner. Did you ever meet Conner on your? Yeah, he got his hips done. Yeah. I know like a bunch of MMA fighters that had to get their hips done. John Wayne, par, Muay Thai guy. He had his hips done, at least one hip. It's rough, man. They saw the top of your bone off and put a fucking cap on it and a different socket and screwed all in there. And then it's good for about 20 years. I think I messed up some joints during my running and gun in days. I'm sure you did. Not drinking enough water. I think I probably got injured a bunch of times. Didn't notice it. Just kept going. Yeah. Like a champ. The thing about those hips though is what they can do now. Like before in the past, if you had a chronically inflamed hip and arthritis and you were missing calcium or missing meniscus or whatever would be cartilage, labrum tears and your hips, you're crippled for life. Now they just give you an artificial one and they say, well, it probably lasts about 20 years. Well, at least for 20 years, you can, like everyone I know that has one walks normal. Yeah, I want that serve badly. You don't. You want to fix your hip. Yeah, I know. That's what I want. I want to fix my hip. I'm going to do it when I go back. No, we'll get it looked out while you're here. Really? How many days are you ever? I'm here. I'm leaving tomorrow. What time tomorrow? Like seven. Seven AM. Yeah. Maybe I'm going to raise that. I'm going to raise that. Maybe get you in this afternoon. Did my hip looked out, fly right back. Someone should look at it, but you really need as an MRI because they need to find out exactly what's going on inside there. I'm paying a gazillion dollars in health insurance. I better go look to bro. That doesn't get you nothing these days. Don't you know? It's unbelievable. Do you know what happened to Ben Askin? Oh, yeah, dude. That's so tragic and sad and just disgusting. It should be like if they don't cover it, they should send all your money back. How crazy is that? I've had health insurance. He got a terrible infection in his lungs that led to, I think it's called Necrotic pneumonia. He had to give a double lung transplant and health insurance as we're not covering it. How is that possible? That is an obvious catastrophic illness that just hit a guy. This is not like a chronic smoker. There's no terrible thing that he did. He just got sick. Isn't that what health insurance is for? 100%. I want to know on what grounds can you deny something like that? That seems to be like a break in the narrative. Something like that is you can't say, oh, this person's responsible for that. They did something they weren't supposed to do because of their insurance. This guy just got sick. Yeah, 100%. That's what the whole Luigi thing was about. That company was using AI to determine whether you should be covered or not. An AI doesn't have any emotion or you can't look at it going, well, maybe we should cover this. It's very analytical about it. That's why I guess he's having problems with his back and just got pissed off. That's what happens, man. That whole thing was weird too. Yeah. He had a screw loose too, though. His friends were saying that there's like, he had a break. Something went wrong in his life. That might be connected to the surgery, by the way. If all of a sudden you need to get discs fused in your back and your constant pain, that could completely change the way you interface with the world. Michael Bismillan had his neck fixed. It didn't go well and he had to get it done again. He didn't even so much pain. Brutal. That he couldn't do anything. He could only basically lie in bed and then go do his UFC duties and then go back and lie in bed. Just mother fuckers is in agony and keeping it together. I say he keeping it together, but some people don't keep it together when they're in pain all the time, man. Well, you know, a lot of people think once you get to the hospital, you're safe, right? That's where the safe place is. You know, medical malpractice is one of the leading causes of death out there. And you know, nothing's an exact science, but yeah, they could mess it up. My grandmother and my father side just went in to get a bag change and she never left the hospital. She passed the waste. Jesus Christ. Yeah. I know this lady who went to get a kidney removed and they took out the wrong kidney. Oh. So she had one bad kidney and one good kidney and they took out her bad kidney or they could took out a good kidney and left her bad kidney. Yeah. And the doctor would not would not in many fucked up. The doctor would not admit it. I mean, the whole thing is fucking crazy. Brutal. But that's medical malpractice. The denial of insurance claims on stuff like that is like the medical miracle is they did give him a double lung transplant. Ben Astron is alive right now and he's trying to build himself back up. And they had to go fund me it, which is absolutely ridiculous that we live in America and you have to have your friends and fans support you to have this like life-saving surgery. I think a big chunk of it was Jake Paul. Yeah. I think Jake Paul gave him like half a million dollars. But it's just, it's really kind of crazy that the insurance is allowed to not cover something like that. But what did they have a response? Is there a response for why they didn't cover that? Let's try. He looks like it. It seems insane. I mean, unless there's some legal loophole, how could you not cover someone who just gets some crazy illness like that? You know, when Obama was, uh, I knew Obama was like, not the guy I thought it was. Obama's first term is the last time I voted for either Republican or Democrat. I was the last time. So you know, everybody want change and get into how they basically rigged that thing for them. You know, because America after George Bush and Dick Cheney hates old white kneelcons. And then who do they have? Who do they have run against the slick good looking young black guy who nobody knew was a bush at the time? Who they have, John McCain, who is the, you know, the poster child or the mascot for the old white kneelcons, right? So they basically run everybody to Obama. And we're like, yeah, we're going to have change. And he was running on like everyone getting healthcare and all that stuff. And then so there have this giant debate and watched in about, you know, universal health coverage. And this dude gets on a plane and runs the Germany to give speeches and stuff like that during the debate on his major campaign, you know, issue. And I'm like, oh, dude, this is just a giant setup. It's all BS. And I've never voted for another guy. We didn't explain that. So he went to Germany to do what? Give speeches. He was going to go give speeches to German diplomats and politicians and all that stuff. And while we are debating his, his campaign promise. And I'm like, why aren't you here fighting for what you said you want to get us? Now you're out of the country and I am part of the debate. Is it possible that they set those debates up at the same time where they knew that he was going to be out of the country? Yeah. And I can't paint and they're like, this it's in the heat of the debate. When you like, I can't go right now, do you think it's possible that that was a plan that they didn't want him there to defend it? And it would be easier to shoot it down? Yeah. Of course. On purpose. Yes. On purpose. And when you think they scheduled those meetings at a time where they knew that they were going to be doing the debate so you could get out of him having to defend not having lived up to his campaign promises. That's my whole opinion. Well, there's got to be some 3D chess going on, right? And I know all that isn't, but there's some really smart people that are involved in the government, obviously. So they've got to be thinking like this is a way we can handle this. Like there's probably a bunch of nerds in a room and they're brainstorming and someone says, listen, here's how we get out of it. Yeah. We sent him a German and he's not even here. We say there actually are no files. Yeah. We say there's no video. Even though we said there's 10,000 hours of video, actually it's not true. Those people should not have spoken. We can't find it. We don't know where it is. There's no list. There's nothing. And I love how like when they shoot her just eating a salad. She's perfectly shot. You can hear everything she's saying. She's not, dude, my whole thing goes everything is who's eating a salad? Pam Bondi. Oh, she was eating a salad once I started with this. Yeah, when when Vertosser James O'Keefe puts out that video, what is the video? The video is heard talking about how there's like tens of thousands of videos of him hurting children. Oh, so that video is comes out like so that, but that video is like one of those Vertoss type. Yeah, so Keith. Yeah, he's also the one who put out Karen Bass's phone call about her going talking. Have you ever heard it? The super creepy. Brother gets everything. He gets everything. Everything is usually chatty gay guys. Yeah. Oh, dude. They do send lists and send in some ass and they'll give away all the secrets. So I didn't know that that was how that I'd only read that she said that there was tens of thousands. No, she talks about interesting interesting covertly recorded April 28th revealing previously undisclosed information about Epstein regarding tens of thousands of videos of little kids to a complete stranger in a DC restaurant. Okay. Well, let's hear what it says. I want to hear how she says it. Yeah, it's easy to find because it cuts her in a cafe. You'll find it right there. Just get kind of jumped jump. Oh, there it is. That's her talking right there. I've seen files are going to be released. We've looked soon. Okay. So you know what it is. You know what it is? It's a thousand. It's hitting the rules. Yeah. And it's all what little kids say they have to go through every one in the past. Official. Okay. She didn't even say underage girls. She said little kids. Yeah. And that's a big part. I said this a long time ago is that they're just trying to set it up. So it's like do their high school chicks. You know, they're hot and reality. It's like really, really, and there were, there were statements I believe and you can't find it on the internet anymore because you know, they, they clean everything up of like people talking about like what Bill Clinton was fooling around with. And it wasn't little girls, you know. And I've always said this, you know, it's like Bill Clinton is the Andy Dick of the White House. He just sees holes. He wants to hit them right. Oh my God. You know, he just can't say that if you don't know it's true though. I just did. You know, he likes to fuck. He was a good looking guy when he was young, super charismatic. Love them ladies, which is listen, that's Kennedy. That's classic presidents. It's just we found out about it. High sexual Kennedy by sexual. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But candy was bisexual. George Bush senior was where you get a spindle. Hold the fuck up. I do deep dives in all this shit. Joe, I'm telling you where are you diving. Dude, I'm telling you the finders. You remember the finders. JFK bisexual, a viral tweet is reigniting speculation. And he's like, yeah. I mean, they're just, he dude, he was on speed. He's a guy, queer history. They're just horny as people. Woodrow Wilson, they believe they black, blackmailed him through being gay. I mean, Obama stuff coming out right now. Bill Clinton. So let's think about that, right? We know that like the Spartans were gay, right? We know that they had sex with each other. Yeah. You know, it was a big thing. It was part of like why they would go to battle so well. Yeah. Talk about the samurai's. Yeah. You know, back in the day about how they were all gay. Could you get a fight harder if you know that, dude? Got some DSLs, right? You're gonna fight way harder. Don't kill Bill. He's the best in the bunker. Yeah. You're fighting for your lovers. Yeah. Right? But it's also like there's a lot of ancient cultures that think of having sex with women just for procreation, but with boys for fun. That's Afghanistan. Exactly. And my friends that have been over there that have served over there, one of my buddies. I don't know if you said this publicly, so maybe I shouldn't say his name. But just the stories that he told me, I was like, what? Like how, like, we're talking about how we saw this truck driver with his son. He thought like, oh, that's cool. He takes his son to work with him. And the guy goes, that's not his son. Like that's his, that's his toy. It's called Dan Love Thursday, dude. Yeah, that's not his call. It's Thursday. It's like they go into the mountains. But he was telling me that there was this one guy that was, he worked on this base. And he was kind of slow, like he was mentally slow. And he had a colostomy bag. And he've heard a bunch of noise and saw a bunch of dudes in the room. Like I'm one of the storage rooms. These guys were fucking his colostomy hole. This old mentally challenged guy. Yep. And these dudes were fucking his colostomy hole. He's like, bro, I just had a guy on right now. he's going to get weird. But Dom, the hypnotist came on and he was talking about how he, he has a mentor who he also works with who was Hillary Clinton's, um, security detail. And they were in Afghanistan. They saw a bunch of kids going the room and never come out. Was that mean that they like three in the morning? This is Batcha Bazi, right? Yeah. This is kids dancing and shit. Yeah. That is so sick. Like don't interfere with the local customs. Yeah. Are you implying that they were dead? I'm implying that he never saw them come out. Maybe they took a nap. Maybe, maybe they, there's another next story. Yeah. You said, go to bed. Let him sleep. We got to check out. Let him sleep. They'll figure out that the, the creepiest idea about pedophilia is that there's people that know about it and cover it up because they don't want to get in trouble for having known about it. Like this is a Sandusky thing, right? Yeah. You know, I mean, that's, that's essentially what tank Joe paternal, right? Oh, yeah. Everybody really knew. Yeah. And they all let it go because they were winning football games and then the Penn States right back into title competitive. But here's the thing to over time what they can blackmail you with changes. Like way back in the day, if you, they thought you were cheating on your wife, they could blackmail you with that. But as, as culture grows and we start accepting more and more stuff, it's got to get weird and weirder. You know, back in the day, you remember, I mean, we're, we're around the same age. I mean, remember when we were debating whether boy, boy George was gay or not and they were like, we were like, we were after it was like a real discussion on that. And he's like, no, dude, I pom, pull us, dude. How about George Michael? Yeah. Same thing. One was just so beautiful. There's no way he could be strange. His hair was so perfect. His voice was so amazing. Like guys, Scott, it'd be super gay. Have you seen the Minnesota Vikings mail cheerleader? That is the shiniest dude. I've ever seen it. Show me this. Yeah, look, he's a mail cheerleader. Shane was actually just talking about this. Shane was talking about this in the green room the other day. Yeah, he's shiny. Do you? Oh my goodness. So shiny. Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. Yeah, he's so, and you can see him like on Twitter. He's just like dancing around and he's the shiniest dude. You've got to see the sky. He's got to the skirt. They wear the skirt. Yeah, there he is in the front row. He's got shorts there. Okay. Cheerleaders are useless anyways. There's really no purpose of them. They don't do anything for the game. It was back in the day. How can we have hot chicks in football? It's a weird role and I don't have a problem with a gay guy doing that. Well here's my opinion. Why would I care? Like here's the thing. If you're in a stadium of 16,000 people, football is like 70,000 people. Right. If you're in a football stadium, 80,000 people, how many gays? How many gay guys in the world? 10%, we'll go 10%. It's probably 10%. Maybe in a bunch of them are hiding. Maybe a bunch of dangerous people. But it's always kind of like one in 10, right? Closet gays can get dangerous. What's the problem with having one gay cheerleader for them? Here's my whole. What's the cheerleader for? You know, there's always going to be the fight. What is the point of a cheerleader? It's having an additional visual aspect to it. I like all the flips they do and all the jazz and it's fun. It's choreographed. And when it's done well, it's entertaining. Yeah. I mean, it's going to go on. I have a great bit about what their purpose is. They're like, remind the players how important the play is. He's like, you know, defense. Oh, dude, we got play defense, dude. You know, it's an extra pageant tree that adds to the experience. But why shouldn't a gay guy be doing it? Like how many, how homophobic are guys that are watching that? There's all these hot chicks and instead they're caught. What's this fucking guy doing in the shorts? There's 16 other girls with perfect bodies. You could be paying attention to it. But you're focused on the gay guy. Yeah. And they always complain about how much money they're making. I'm like, dude, you get to go to the game for free. You're on the field. It's like you would have a great reality show. See how they accept it. And how many downhill players are staring at them, dude? Sure. That's my favorite player. 10% is 10%. Yeah, 10%. So here's my old thing, dude. You know, there's always going to be culture wars between the right and the left. I'm on nobody's side. Like I'm on nobody. I'm like in the middle. I'm old school liberal. Yeah. Living let live. As long as you're hearing people in particular, children, you'll never hear anything from me. I don't care what you do by yourself. We're consenting adults. Get as weird as you want. Yeah. God gave us free will, do whatever you want. Pick your path. You know, but when you start to demonize certain people, you're setting up a market for blackmail. So when people can't be themselves and they're so afraid of people finding out who they really are, you're setting it up so people can manipulate them. And that's the story of Washington DC. Now obviously hurting children, there should never be a time where that's culturally acceptable. But that's why it's had to get so dark is because we don't care if somebody's gay now. At least I don't. There's gonna be, I think it's like they just always want to do the forbidden thing. So like what would lead someone, let's get as dark as we can get. What's the dark is it? Probably child's. Her, her. No, yeah, 100%. 100%. And we're, I think that that's happened before. I don't think that that has not happened in human histories. In fact, I know it's happened because my friend Shane Smith covered it when he was over in Africa when he interviewed that general butt naked guy. That guy used to sacrifice children from the enemy tribes before everyone in Liberia. He would sacrifice them and cut open their chest and eat their heart. He would eat a piece of their heart before going into battle. Dark energy, dude. Right. But that's a real human being that did that. So we know that this, he didn't invent that. Right. He didn't invent that. He was in the Bible too, like when they wanted to take out the canonites and, you know, atheist uses as like, oh, you want to kill all the women and children. What do you think about that? Well, the canonites were practicing child sacrifice. There's a reason why. Now the language we can get into like the Bible language, especially in the first testament, like is it the language of the time and they were a lot more blunt with it. But that, the canonites were, were, were sacrificing children. I mean, that's a big part of, it goes all the way back to Cronos to the first God, which is the God of time. And the whole story about it was told that his kids would slay him. So every time his, his female would have children, he would eat the kids. Jesus. Time. Black Cuba Saturn. They get weird. I wonder how they're going to look at some of the things that pharmaceutical drug companies have pushed through in the future and the impact that it had on kids and whether or not they're going to think of that in a similar way to child sacrifice. Because it really is kind of if you know that it's causing damage, but you're doing it for money. You kind of sack or 100 for money. What is this? How to stop India's superstitious killings ended in exile. What's this about, Jamie? Read the caption there. Oh, just covered up. Human sacrifice, particularly that of minors has been prevalent in many parts. killings ended in exile. What's this about, Jim? Read the caption there. Just cover it up. Human sacrifice, particularly that of minors, has been prevalent in many parts of India for long-time jeez. More than 85 kids all under 13 were ritualistically murdered in the country in the last six years per government data. Last year, there were 14 cases of parents or relative sacrificing or attempting to sacrifice children on the advice of a sadhu, a holy man. Bro, that gets in the whole world. How crazy is it that that was a part of history? It still happened. That's what I'm saying. It's still in 2025. People think that a sacrificing of child is the right move. That's what we need to do. We need to sacrifice a child. What that's the whole thing, kids are the closest to God. Yeah. When you think about things like that, drugs that are pushed on kids, that's just for profit, medications, and kids are forced to take, that's just for profit, things that are fucking them up. It's just because people want to make money. How are they going to look at that in the future? When we look at child sacrifice and they were doing voodoo or the Mayans thought they were sacrificing people to the gods, we think of it as barbaric. How are they going to look at what we've done, what we just lied about stuff and skirted around the truth and gave distorted versions of what we're actually selling to kids. And then those kids want to die in. They want to have a heart attack. They want to have a cancer and it's probably directly related to this medication. And no one wants to take credit for it, no one wants to admit it, and everyone's making money. Everything's programming did, even those people in India, their programming of their religion tells them to sacrifice their own children. I mean, like, raise it. It goes against everything you're wired. It's like, that's the ultimate control you have of a person. You get them to sacrifice their child. Right? I mean, if you're at a kid's park and a kid's in trouble, it doesn't need to be your kid. You run over to make sure the kid's okay. I've done it a thousand times. But now you have people like, especially like you feel like, like, what's going on in Gaza, you have people labeling newborns as terrorists. Like that is your programming overriding your basic instinct, which is to protect children all costs because they are the future. Yeah. And that's powerful, powerful, powerful. So my whole theory is that that anxiety and depression and anger and all that stuff comes from when you're programming and your reality clash and they don't meet up. You're programming from generational trauma, you're programming from school, all that stuff meets reality and you start to just go a little crazy. And I think a lot of that is purposeful to get us on pharmaceuticals for life. You think it's purposeful. So how would they engineer that to happen that way? Through, well, first of all, your grandparents, your parents telling you the trauma of your past beating that into you forever. Like I had my buddy's girlfriend on my show and she's Jewish and she was telling me I go, what's it like the girl of Jewish? And she was telling me that her parents would tell her that she has to have three kids, one for each parent and then one kid lost for the Holocaust for a someone lost in the Holocaust. And like think about that programming, dude, think about what that over and over and over again and to the point now where you're like, well, you know, these kids in Gaza are terror. I mean, newborn babies are terrorists. I mean, that that is heavy stuff. I mean, I've heard about the Armenian genocide. My whole life to the point I got tattoo right here about it. You know, like that is, you know, that is that is your programming, then you go to school and it's been infiltrated by all these cultural Marxist and they're just pushing this thing to get you to hate your own country, hate the establishment, hate all this stuff. So you have this entire country where everybody's fighting with each other. And that's all done because, you know, maximum chaos because people are easy to manipulate and control when they're anxiety. They're going to demand like this whole thing with like taking over Washington DC right now. Everyone acts like this is just started. This started way back would be a limb to fund the cops. This has always been, been the goal. It's called pressure from above pressure from below. You have, you're afraid to go on streets and you have no faith that your politicians are going to save you. So you have no hope. So you're completely in our elite loss and you're just demanding that you be kept safe, which is the ultimate goal, which is martial law. That's what they want. And that's what they've been doing. And it isn't starting in Washington DC. This is started a while ago. If you study all these different kind of cultural clashes that starts with BLM, that's black people, then you go January 6. That's why people, then you go to Asian hate, that's Asian people, then you go to no kings. That's Latinos. And now you have the Supreme Court that is going to debate the legality of gay marriage. And if you say, I'm, what do you think's going to happen? I wouldn't, I wouldn't doubt if they overturn it. Because that's going to cause even more chaos. The streets are going to be burning in rainbows, dude. And then that is what they want martial law. There's all these, you know, these judges who are completely politicized are like releasing people who are hurting kids or murdering people. That means you have no faith in the system. And that, that, that, grows your anxiety. Now, all of a sudden you're, you're angry, you're depressed and you just, you don't trust anything. And now you want to basically give up your God given rights to be safe. And that's, that is the goal pressure from above pressure from below for Marxist. If you ever want to watch a doc on it, it's really old. It's in 69. I watch it last night on Twitter. It's G. Edgar Griffin. And it's called a capitalist conspiracy. I've sent to a bunch of people. I can't get anybody to watch this thing. And it breaks it down, dude. There was famous cases in the, you like, this, the 50s and 60s where kids were like radical communists on the, on the campuses and they said that something's going wrong here and they broke off and they gave, they testified in front of either Congress or Senate. And they basically said the goal is to basically bring in martial law and these kids who are all think they're raging at the machine. They don't realize the machine is funding all of this stuff that, you know, it's like the no kings. When he, the Latinos are really smart. Like when Eddie and I do shows all time, there's tons of Mexicans, tons of Latinos in the crowd. They get conspiracies. So when no kings was happening in LA, there were like gang leaders who told their entire block, nobody can go to these things. Because they all found out was funded by the Walmart air. Like that's what always happens. They, the billionaires fund these kind of radical groups to sow chaos. Well, also because they don't want that kind of crackdown on illegal immigration. Like there's a lot of people who don't want that kind of crackdown. Yeah, because they don't want to pay anything. Well, there's that. And they're already hiring people that are illegals and they have them working in their factories and working in their businesses. You know, I mean, and then there was, there's also the dispute about SNAP about, you know, cutting back on Medicaid and SNAP and like who get who do you have to pay benefits to? Who do you not have to pay benefits to? That was one of the things that this guy was telling me about someone told him that he had a conversation with someone who said it's really upset they're stopping illegal immigration because it's a big part of what he uses for his business. And he was like open about it. He was saying that he does it because he doesn't have to pay them benefits. You can pay them less and you don't have to pay them benefits. Like he was just saying it out loud. You know, so that that was part of the thing too of letting people into the country. There was like, you need more of a supply of people that are willing to do the construction jobs and the, you know, the slaughterhouse jobs like jobs that nobody wants to work in the slaughterhouse. Right. But I also hear them most always say Americans don't want to do this job and then my fat ass is going to fucking Wendy's at 11 p.m. And I'm wondering chicken sandwich, the guy handed me the bag is 55 years old. I mean, Americans want to work. That's a whole sign up that they don't want to do some of these jobs. But those jobs are brutal backbreaking labor. All right. If you're picking vegetables, if you're, you know, you're working in a fucking slaughterhouse dude, that's a brutal job. You're around rotten meat all day. Yeah, I guess freezing cold. You're cutting things up. You're covered in blood. You're just around death all day long. Death is supposed to be something you occasionally see. You fucking kiss it to the sky. Thank God for the deer. And then you go, you're not supposed to see slaughter 24 hours a day. That's crazy. That's like not normal for a human being. And what's really weird is how like I've seen so much death in movies. When I see a dead person, which I think the first time I saw a dead person, I would be incredibly shocked. I remember I was driving home from Vegas with my then girlfriend. And there was a giant car crash like a giant car. I mean, it was nasty. She's like, don't get out of the car. And I'm like, I'm a hero. And I get out of the car to see what's everything's okay. This one card flipped. And there was somebody laying there in the car was on top. Oh, and somebody ran over with a car jack. They like, get it up. I go, you're going to, you're going to look at some. You're not ready to see right now. It's like, it's done. Yeah. But what I was blown away by was how not affected by seeing that. I was like, it's the first time I'd seen like outside of a funeral. I'd seen a dead body like that just had a violent ending. Why do you think you weren't affected by because I think I've seen so many movies. Where I was just seeing dead people that it just was like a movie to me. I didn't have any reaction to it. When the first days I moved LA, you know, I lived in LA since 1998, 99. And like, I was back there in the crazy days on Hollywood Boulevard where it was still thriving. And there was this weird store and inside you could smell death. And I looked in and there was something laying down there. And again, not affected by it. I go, I think that's a dead body. I think I like, get out there. There's no dead body. Go away. But it smelled like death. But I still was really amazed. That was probably the first time I saw a dead body. And this was the second one. But I was just amazed by not how affected I was by seeing this. Like, I've been programmed in condition to see these things, which normally back in the day would be a giant moment. I think a lot of people would be horrified by it. Maybe you're hardened by life. My man, I'm a matter. I think a a lot of people would be pretty horrified. I don't know if it's necessarily deconditioning for movies. Well, I could tell you something. So I used to do a USO tours. And the first time I go, I think it was with Brian Callan this time. No, that was my first one. But I do, yeah, that was the first one. I do with Steve Byrne, Deb, David off and Brian Callan. We had this very nice man who was showing us around. He was our kind of our leader of our tour. And he was telling me that in World War One, they, they found that the guys couldn't shoot the enemy because they didn't want to kill them. They didn't have it in them to kill another human being. So he says that's when you start to see in movies, guns coming out and shooting people. It's programming. And that's when it got real way easier to start shooting people. Now you got these video games where you're just going into somewhere in your mercantile and movies and movies and video games. Tons of movies, tons of video games. We were just talking about the day when you see people getting in fights like in parking lots and shit that it's almost like people think life has a movie. Like you don't really understand what a fight is. Like how dangerous it is and scary it is. And you're doing it like like it's like you're in a movie. And I wonder how much of that is because people have seen people fight in movies. And they just don't understand how crazy it is when there's no rules. And you're just hoping this guy fights worse than you do. You have no idea. You don't know what you're doing. You're probably drunk and high. What about having all the women in a movie? You think you're in a fucking movie man. What about all the women that now are kicking everybody's ass. I'm flying here. And every movie is a wave model beating a shit out of a fucking 300 pound Russian. Oh, yeah. Every movie is. And then you see videos where girls just go up and start swinging on guys. And I'm like, it was Brian Holtzman's bit. They used to do way back and about Charlie's angels. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was a great bit. That was a great bit. Holtzman's the best. It's so nice having him out here. I love him. He's so crazy. I want to get out here. He's the best. But yeah, that's a crazy thing to show in movies. I mean, it's one thing if the woman has like superpowers. But if it's just a regular cow, who's 100 pounds 250 pound Russian dude with a neck as big as my waist. Like, what do I talk to you? This is crazy. You're not going to hurt him at all if you hit him. I was watching. I'm going to fly over as watching the latest mission impossible. And it's insane, dude. Have you ever seen it? It's amazing. Oh, dude, it just gets cranked up cranked up cranked up. But there's like two chicks in it. Coonway more than 100 pounds beating shit off everybody. And I'm like, this is a, you need a cyborg type chick right? Right? Right? Right? If you're going to have somebody like, yeah, flat line. No next cyborg like that woman. Cyborg is like the wilt Chamberlain of female MMA where like you could drop her 20 years in the future. And she's still be working people because she's like that well, Bill, and she's that skilled. Um, but that's who would be doing it. Not like, like, not like 100 pound women. No, Kayla Harrison. Yeah, I think it fuck up some dudes. Oh, what she won 35, 140. Well, she has to weigh 135 for a very small amount of time, but she was the 155 pound champ in the PFL. She's a big lady. Yeah, she's Jack. She's a juggernaut. She's super powerful. And I like that. She gets a hold of these ladies. It's like the difference is so obvious. She's so fucking strong, man. Also, if that lady was in a movie, fucking people out by, I believe it. I totally make sure I believe it. If I was a henchman, I'd be like, I'm running this bitch. But some super model wave in eight inch heels is fucking throw at side kicks that are perfect. Like, come the fuck on. I just have a joke about Karen Knightley and Pirates of the Caribbean. She's like, fighting everybody. I'm like, the only thing that chicks fighting is anorexia. You know what I'm saying? There we go. Working bits. Yeah. So, you know, it's just everything's programming. Well, it is. But I wonder if it's because we like that stuff because it fits in our head and not like Joseph Campbell's, Joseph Campbell's a hero's journey. Like it fits in our head. We want someone to kick their ass and then you're winning the end. Yeah, you go through your trials and he hit her. Oh, my God, she's bleeding. But she kicks us ass. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's this thing that we want to see. We want it all night nicely tied up in a bow. Yeah. I mean, like, Sigourney Weaver used to do it, but there was something about her where you believed it. You're like, that's a bad bitch. And you fuck people up. But she did it in the greatest science fiction movie of all time. She did it in Alien. Alien is the greatest sci-fi horror. It was I'll say sci-fi horror. Greatest sci-fi horror. Yeah. It was amazing. Of all time. And you didn't even care that it was a woman that was the lead. It didn't even come up. It was so awesome that no one like made a big deal. So, Gorny Weaver, finally a woman, takes the lead role in an actual side. Yeah. No one cared. No one cared. It was just awesome. It was just awesome. She was awesome. The movie was awesome. She got credit for being awesome, but just for being awesome, not an awesome woman or any no caveat. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, come on. It was, you could do that in 1979. You could just have an amazing movie because there was no fucking social media. There was no hen house. And you think that they make sense. They don't make any sense. Like, stop. We could just stop concentrating on fucking these stupid little classifications of each individual. And whether or not they should be elevated and magnified because of gender or sex or color or what. Stop. Everyone stop participating in it. It's dumb. I meritocracy. I would love to see for personality, meritocracy for the way you can hold the conversation with people, meritocracy for being a better musician, meritocracy for being a funnier comedian, meritocracy. Everybody's the same. Even playing field in terms of acceptance of what you do in the world. Just do your best. Yeah, we want the best. The best rise everywhere. I don't know because maybe we didn't know as much about it. But like, when I think of a 70 or someone who looked like you came to see from a fire. 100%. I could give a shit. A lesbian. Maybe more comfortable. Is he someone looking like them? Yeah. What? No, my house is on fire. I'm not going to be comfortable. Let me talk about you. You can't carry me. I broke my leg. What do I do? Well, you should have thought about that. Yeah. You're in the wrong place. It's crazy. Like Apple TV is putting out insanely great programming, but you don't realize how woke it is until you're already captured, right? And then you're like, well, what did I just watch? Like I was watching Hi, Jack. And I forget the name of the actual marketing market movie. No, no, no. It was a TV show on Apple TV. And it was the British Black British actor who was in the wire. I forget what his name is. He's such a great. Did you sell that? Yeah. He's phenomenal. Right. He's awesome and everything. But I'm watching this show. And in about five episodes in, I realize this is a story of a black man who stops white hijackers from hijacking a millies certain plane. And you don't realize it to your halfway in. What is the Mark Walberg one? The one that Mel Gibson directed that one was good. That was another like some sort of a hijacking type situation, right? What's it called? Flight risk, flight risk, solid one. Yeah. Wallbird plays a great cycle. He's got some darkness behind the eyes. He plays a great cycle. He's also very lucky. Didn't get out of play on 9-11. How lucky is that guy? What are you trying to say? He got a heads up. I'm just saying, how about people just get lucky sometimes? Some people, him and Seth, who did family guy, Seth? Originally scheduled to be on American Airlines flight 11. Wow. He changes plans took a different flight to Toronto, Canada for a film festival instead. Later made comments out. He wouldn't have fought back against the hijackers if you had been on the floor. Yeah. I don't buy that story. Not his story. By he would fight back. I mean, he shredded at this point. He still shredded. But I'm by that whole thing. They have box cutters. Come on, man. Yeah. What do you think happened? Do you think that there's like automatically flown into the towers? Like there's remote flown into the towers? Oh, well, now you're getting into like high impact events and how there's like layers. There's so many layers to it because I have to ensure that the actual hijacking itself. Do you think that those guys that we found luckily was like amazing coincidence that even though everything from the plane was destroyed in an incredible burning inferno, his passport. Yeah. Magically floated safely to the ground. Was it cinged at all? Was it even cinged? I have a show called Doom scrolling where we just watch all these conspiracy videos in one of them passport man where they made a superhero just out of passports. I mean, let's what can I mean, I'm not not to make light of a tragedy, but could we see the impact of one of the planes into the towers? They found four of the hijackers passports. Oh, one of the points he had. Well, sometimes you just get lucky. Maybe God was looking out for us. Can you show me the video of the impact? Can we just see the video? Let's just imagine being a passport and saying, listen, it's your job. You're just holding another bottom. Yeah, all the other people on board with passports. Their passports for whatever reason didn't hurt. Yeah, all those like American citizens with passports. Yeah, they did. So we can get into it. All those people from other countries that were just here on vacation with their passports. Yeah, those passports didn't make it. Just go on a check out New York should be cool. Nope. So let's watch the impact. Watch this and imagine if you're a passport and you got to do your job. Here it goes. What happened? My control. Oh, that's what it did. Oh, the not showing the impact. He sends a bit. But I want to see the real one when it like flies. Yeah, where you see it go bang and then it's yeah, see if you can find a video where it flies right into it. So one of those four were found at the world trade center. The other three were not there. How about 18 views of plane impact on South Tower? This is like, you know, those come compilations on porn. Oh, dude, it's the only thing I watched it. By the way, 26 days off porn. Every bug at this 27. Okay, that one it flew into the backside of it. So you couldn't see it from that. But you have that one where it's kind of up like here and then it goes in and then it like it's some weird. Okay, here it is. Let's watch this one. Okay. So no, we're seeing it from the other side too. But I've seen it from the other way. I've seen the plane actually fly in. So I had that angle, right? Yeah, it's from below up. Is that it right there? I mean, try that. Try this. I know. I'm just saying. That's it. Okay. That's it. Yeah, if you show that thing down, look, look, there's some papers flying out. Look, boom, look at all the papers. Then any papers. That's glass bitch. There's no way a passport is making it through that. First of all, there's nothing left. That's just go in incineration and fire and jet fuel. And then the jets had just took taken off, correct? Yeah. And so they had a full, they took off from Boston, which is very close. Very close. And so they had a lot of gasoline. How the fucks a passport? How, how many passports were saved? One, that one was found below the World Trade Center. Two were found in the crash in Pennsylvania. And one was found in the luggage that didn't even make the connecting flight. Okay. Well, that's different. And then the fire is the big one, the crashed one file. That, that one's like, that's the magic bullet on steroids. That's crazy. And then some out took out those two and then two other buildings. Nobody talks about building five. Okay. Here's a big one. The one that Bill N. roll, the litz roll one. They shot that out of the sky, right? I mean, I have theories, but doesn't that one seem like they shot that one out of the sky? Yeah. Because that one is weird because the wreckage is spread out from miles, not like it crashed into the ground, but like it got shot out of the sky and slowly drifted to Earth going 500 miles an hour. Yeah. And then what is this? That's his passport. I mean, that's a passport. I'm just nine, is that it? Did they actually have the photo of it? That's a pretty burnt passport. Yeah. It's pretty burnt, but come on. How about how weird is that that in Neo's driver's license is the day of the attack? Also, like what would cause a passport that's on fire to not be on fire anymore? Just curious. Why would it stop at its face? Just curious. I mean, once things are on fire and they made out of paper and plastic, generally, they don't stop being on fire till there's nothing else to burn. How does it stop? Well, that's what to his face. Well, how about all these fire? This is the big debate on Tim Faul hat. We debate it all the time. You have all these houses that are insinuated and then there's all these trees that are perfectly fine. So then you get into the bait like what causes fire? Oh, it's drought. Okay. But why are the trees okay? Because they have water in them? Well, are we in a drought or do we have water? And that's when you get into vibrations, dude? Like high for, you know, like, yeah, like radio waves and stuff like that. That's that they can do. Everyone thinks it's a direct, that's a big part of this that people think it's direct out of the wild. You're, you're, you're, the fires across by radio waves, this what you're saying? Like, like, you know, well, some people are going down around. Okay. So I want to tell you this story. So right around the paradise fires right after that Eddie and I are doing Tim Faul hat. We do Bakersfield first and then we go to Sacramento. In both, both shows someone from PSG shows up. What's P P G P S E. What is the P G need? Excuse me? The, the people who have the smart meters on all of these houses, they're the ones who run the electricity and the power for all of California. First first show we doing front in Bakersfield a bunch of guys who look like zero dark 30 show up. They're like, yeah, we're competing. I'm like, oh, that's super interesting because that just happened. Then the next night, I'm in Sacramento. And I remember this very well because it was last night I ever drank alcohol ever in my life. There was some hot blonde with a fat rack and I'm like, today's my Friday goes away. So I have a shot with her. She tells me she's from P G E. So both nights in a row, we have people show up through our show from this company that everybody says could be behind, could be behind it with these smart meters. Okay. So I asked you a question before you go on. How big were it hits? This is you're in Bakersfield, is that what you're saying? The first show is Bakersfield, that's where the zero show Sacramento. And where do these people work? Where's their building? Like, we're in P G E. And he's all over California. Right. So they were at different offices. Both of those places, a lot of people don't go to. Right. Like, it's when you like, when people go, when we do it, show in Bakersfield back when I lived in LA, they'll be like, holy shit, someone came out here. Right. Like, no one goes out there. So that's I would imagine if you're at P G E and in you're stuck in some podunk fucking town. I mean, it's possible. It's very weird that two shows and two nights. I'm just saying it's super interest. It's also it's like those people that work for these organizations, they live probably just regular people living lives and they like your show. I like conspiracy. I like to think that's like, so put the brakes on someone. So so with the radio waves cause it virus is going to be a problem. Okay. So Wednesday, Pacific gas electric revealed to federal judge as utility equipment issues may have caused fires in some California counties, including Kern County. According to the court documents, made 30th and 31st, Bell Ridge fire burned 53 acres after a power line fell, causing the grass to catch on fire. The documents also said that P G E need worker to identify the broken tie wire, but was not fixed in time. So this is from 2019, right? So caused fires, including Fresno, Mariposa and but yeah. So so I had somebody hit me up one time and they were talking about how there's a, there's a weird percentage that insurance companies do. Um, whether your house could catch on fire. Yeah. Yeah. Fire insurance stuff like that. It's brutal in California. Now you can't get fire insurance. Well, she was telling me that everyone on her block had like a really high rating except for her house. And I go, well, does your house have a smart meter on it? She goes, no, I'm the only one on the block that doesn't have a smart meter on it. She goes, holy shit. Right. So what's really interesting about the Sacramento show besides the big, titted P G E person or the whatever is, is I'm outside on the balcony. Right. I'm outside in the patio talking everybody after a show and this woman comes up to me and she goes, you know, I live in paradise. I go, really, I go, what happens? She goes, I have to tell you the story. She goes, I was just chilling there like on her porch or something like that. And she looked up and she saw this like silver cigar thing in the sky. Right. The silver cigar thing and she said, lights are going back and forth, back and forth and this is right before the fires, back and forth. And then she said, suddenly the lights all just went, and then there were fires everywhere. And I stopped thinking about this story a long time ago, then suddenly videos now are popping up all over Twitter. If you go to my Twitter, Sam, triple e dot com. There's a video right now of a guy playing catch with his dog and he throws the frisbee. And when the kid, the dog goes up to grab the frisbee, suddenly you see something just fly through the air that is a silver like cigar looking thing. Okay. Let me see this video because there was a time where Eddie Bravo and I got way too high and we thought that rods were flying through the air. We watched this documentary on rods. Do you remember rods? I know. Okay. You're you didn't you got into conspiracy is a little later, son. I've always been conspiracy. This was this was one of the dumb ones. This was a really dumb one. So there's these things that supposedly flew so fast through the sky that you could only see them in video footage. You couldn't see them with the naked eye. Turns out what it was was bugs flying quickly close through where the lens is. in video footage. You couldn't see them with the naked eye. Turns out what it was was bugs flying quickly close through where the lens is and it's a video artifact. So it stretches these bugs out and makes them look like rods that are flying through the air. It's just because the video's not that good. So there was a show, I forget the show, something finding monsters or something like that on the History Channel I believe, one of those shows, you know those shows? Yeah. And they were trying to find out what rods were. So they set up cameras just trying to see if they could capture them and film. And then they set up a super high speed camera in the same location. And they did it over like a little campfire so that bugs would be flying around. And every, I think it was a campfire. Whatever, some kind of a light where bugs were flying around and then they were filming it. And then on the high speed camera you could clearly see it was bugs. But on the low speed camera it looked like aliens, like these things are long tubular things that we've never identified flying through the air, but it's just video artifacts. Okay. This thing slows it down. It doesn't look like a bug. Let's see. Did you find it? It's like, it was like one of the newer videos I put out and I thought it is. I think it's a UFO. Why don't believe in UFOs? Oh. Well then if it's... Do you know that we've had identifying crafts that have been going 200 miles an hour before the Civil War? We could talk to you. Here it is. Give me a moment. We'll talk about that. Okay. Here's a dog. Here's a dog. Bro, that dog's gangster. That's a good steep ledge. Okay. Okay. Let me see it again. And that, just like play because it shows you what it is. Okay. Yeah. So, I'm not a bug. You think that's a bug? Okay. He's going to slow it down. Are they in a fast moving bug? Do you think that there's that thing behind it? Is that... Here's the thing. Is that the inability of the video to catch it? Because it doesn't seem like it. Because the video is catching it. I don't know enough about high speed filming or about what this is. The slow-mo filming. Man, the blurry ship behind it's weird. You know where it looks like it's almost has like a jet coming out of the back? I think that's all part of it. What do you think that is, Jimmy? Right. But what's that trail, bug? You think that's a bug? The wings. Looks like a fucking... Yeah. As it's moving fast. So it's stretched out as a video artifact. Just like the rods thing. Yeah. I wouldn't even say a full video. I just looks like the wings of a bug. And it's like there's a body. And it's got some giant wings. I don't... And what kind of bug looks like that? And what kind of bug looks that fast? I'm sure. But I mean, I think it's a perspective thing. I think the bug moves... Bug's move pretty fucking fast. Yeah. But bugs moving fast in the right direction. And that far away? Because it's a little... Because it's a little... Because it's far away. It's so little that as it passes by, it gets small so quickly and gives you the illusion of more speed. Because it's so little, it disappears quickly. You ever see a mosquito and you see it float into the air? And then it's got... You can't find the fire. Because there's too little. Right. I understand that. Once they go a certain distance away, it's like they went a million miles. But look how far away that is. I mean, that is way... I think it went right over the camera. That's what I think happened. I think it went right over the camera. And I think within a couple of seconds, like look where it goes. It's like right... I think it's right over the camera in the right direction. And I think it only takes like, you know, a millisecond for a fucking bug to do that. I think it's sound good. Let's see it again. Watch. Here it goes. Stop it at its farthest point. Let's just stop it. Here it goes. There it goes. There it goes. It's already gone. It is pretty fast. Okay, I changed my mind. It's tailing. Maybe, you know, maybe there's a type of bug that I'm not aware of that moves really fast, though. But where is that? Where is that supposedly? I don't know where that comes from. That means a lot. But we need to know where it is. But they've had crafts since before the Civil War. They were building crafts that went 200 miles an hour. Okay, who's there? And where did you go for the Civil War? Yeah. So before 1865, yeah, they had crafts that could go 200 miles an hour in the air. Yes. Who made them? You could look it up. A pre civil war aircrafts. Well, there was a a bunch of like German scientists in America that were working with the US government. So this predates Orville Wright. I'm just telling you, right? Doesn't it? Yes. I don't know. I don't know dates. I think it does. And will be right? Is that the end of the 1800s? What was that? Well, you know what? I love that. You just ask your phone. I'll ask my phone. I love it. Go on chat, GPT. When did Orville and Wilbur Wright fly the first plane? 1903. So you're telling me that in 1865, I'm telling you, in 1865, they have multiple train crafts that go well, as long as you've done multiple shows on the end of the trip. I'm the truth. Okay. Where the fuck did you hear this? I did. I had two guy Joseph P. Ferrell's on and he's like amazing. And he was breaking down that there were. What is Joseph P. Ferrell's area of expertise? In history, he does a lot in religion, particularly as he's self taught. No, he's he's really a great interview man. I believe you. But he's a great talk. Does he have a good look at this? Can you look at this real quick? Yeah. Education and stuff. Yeah. I'm a thousand books on it. Wow. That's a lot of books, dude. I can barely read one book. I'm stuck on Alexander's second right now. And what is he saying? He's saying that in the pre civil war and during the civil war, they had crafts that were traveling at 200 miles an hour. Okay. And you can find pictures of it on the internet. Well, as long as he has pictures of him. Well, there's drawings. He can tell him took time. What is his drawings? Come on, man. Well, I Jamie, you're leaving me here. Hang on. It's got to be legit. It's there. It sounds so legit. Well, you look up to him. Why would they do it? You have to be fair so many years before they flew the first very primitive plane that could barely get off the ground and credit those guys with developing the first plane. It is a plane. You said aircraft. Oh, that's true. Thank you. Oh, so is it like a blimp? I'm trying to dig down. Listen, Jamie, get an old pissy. Yeah, it could not be a plane. Mom gets. It's true. It's true. Now it's a good point. Yeah, it could be a blimp, right? When they first start doing blimps. When is that start? Was that the whole point of like lead zappling that they want people getting on blimp? So they like crash that shit? Everyone thinks I'm crazy. You guys think I'm nuts. I'm just telling you, bro. Everything's a sign up. I love it. I want to hear more sayops. I'd rather go that way than the other way. That nothing's a sign up. I want to hear that everything's a sign up. Everything's a sign. I did so much to do conspiracy news. It would be 10 times better than what you see on television. I was watching my girlfriend can't stop watching MSNBC. Doesn't matter how much they lied to her. She's like, dug in and that's her team, right? And so I'm listening to Rachel Maddow the other day talking about like demonizing RFK Jr. About mRNA vaccines, right? Yeah. You want to see a guard smoke cigar? No, I don't. But I'll put another zen in. Get it. Get that zen. Please continue. So I mean, they're up. So she, you want to try one? No, I'm good. So Rachel Maddow, who just completely told everybody if you get the vaccine, there's a hundred percent chance you won't get COVID. You know, it's not telling everybody how important mRNA vaccines are. Right? She was only off by a hundred percent. Yeah. Break. It was a trying time. We didn't know. You know, there's a lot of mistakes. How did I know? I'm a dicjokomac who's functionally illiterate. Mistakes were made. Not on my part. Yeah. Well, it's just, it was weird to me where a lot of lefties, all of a sudden, we're trusting the pharmaceutical drug. It's really weird. What happened, guys? Like, what, what did we used to believe in? We used to think that the big pharma was like trying to make money and you should really be taking organic food and, you know, taking vitamins and eating healthy and drinking water and going to yoga. Like, what happened? What happened in everybody was like inject me. What happened? And then, you know, I live in California where they're all about my body, my choice, or when it comes to vaccines. And I had arguments with people. I'm like, I thought you're my body, my choice, and now you're telling me I have to take a vaccine. They're like, it's different. It's not. No. It's not at all. None of it seemed like it was to some people at the time because some people got way more anxious about the pandemic than other people. And those people just, they reacted so strongly. They thought that these other people that weren't doing the right thing were fucking it up for everybody. Because that's what they believed at the time. The problem is most of those people have never kind of owned up to what they did. Because they were wrong and we did get hoodwinked. And there's still people that are trying to defend it and like stop trying to defend it. The data's out. It didn't stop infection. It didn't stop transmission. That alone would have stopped almost everybody from taking it or a lot of people from taking it. And they knew that. They knew that from the jump. They never did studies on whether or not it would stop infection. They just wanted to see if it created antibodies. The whole thing is when you listen to RFK, Junja, you're talking about it. You're like, this can't be, it can't be telling the truth. Yeah. And then you find out he is. He's like, this is nuts. This is nuts. Right. And then they have you ever seen when they broke down how long it would actually take to make like five billion vaccines that they wanted for everybody. But it would take 10 years. It was just the thing that it was that they had done it in front of everybody and everybody agreed to it. And then once they realized they agreed to it and they realized they got duped, they don't want to admit that they got duped. Yes. They want to be right, not duped. Yeah. And then there's how many like really nutty like Marx's left with lunatic like conferences. Do I see online where they're all masked? Dude, I'm flying 24. 24 and a half. There's still a mask. Everyone else does have a mask. We're all living. They're wearing like the super heavy mask. It's a set of before, but it's the Democrats. Maga hat. That's what it is. Yeah, I did. It's you let everybody know exactly what you vote for. You have a mask and you're wearing it everywhere. I love it. Like I know who the retards are. But there's like groups online where they talk about the importance of masking and they meet up and about how irresponsible these non-maskers are. And COVID hasn't gotten away. And I have respiratory this and infectious that and immune suppress this and fuck man. Yeah. What happened? It's not good. But it was just one cold that was a little harder than most flus and everybody got duped. Yeah. And then you go, what about the 5G either cranking up? What about what they're spraying in the sky? He said now is an acceptable fact that they're doing geoengineering of our sky. So like five years ago you were crazy conspiracy theorists. Now there's laws being passed about it. And you put all that together. You're like, that's how people get sick. It's weird like even cloud seeding, you know, which is legal. Like you can seed the clouds and you can make it rain. But like how exact is this science? Yeah. You know what I mean? Like what happens if you cause floods? Like they didn't do by. Did you see that? Yeah. Camels just flying. You swung down the rock and Lamborghini's drowning. Oh poor Lamborghini's. I found something. Tell me something. Nothing about 200 miles an hour. But I found multiple things talking about aircrafts including helicopters used by the South. The South. The Confederate Army had it. I found for a second just to see if I can find it. I was digging through the truck. They had a general helicopter. Here's the transcriptary. He's talking about the history with his friend Beasley or something like that. Who was saying this? The guy Sam was talking about. What is his name again? This is Pod His Podcast. What's his name again Sam? Joseph P. Farrell. Yeah. During the Civil War with the Airship Mystery. My friend Walter Boseley has written an interesting book called Origins about the Black Projects World and Airships that exists in this country. Priorities of the war. But it didn't say anything about the speed. I was talking about it. Was either him or the two episodes later they talked about how it went 200 miles an hour. Airships. Lincoln went to Congress to get funding or is trying to get funding for some of this. There's a whole thing here about the balloon core of the Army back to the Civil War. Is Lincoln another one? They got rumors about? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Closeted dog. Oh, maybe like everybody did it back then. Yeah. That's what I'm thinking. Back then. So they just fucked? The thing with the Lincoln stuff. They just said that they were like, come over here. They're all gone. They're all the same bed. No, that's true. That's true. It's probably not that weird for us. Back then it was like you got excommunicated. But yeah. But yeah. They're called on airships. And there's a sort of like, and this so was that supposedly a thing where a person could get in? Oh yeah. So the boats with airbags is what I've been seeing. Other flying machines here. Okay. So what that looks like is like sails. Right? Can you show me that thing again? Look at that, Sam. That's like like sails like a sailboat. But it's even pretty hard to do a base. So do you just jump off a cliff with that? How do you get that pitch off the ground? One of them I had was describing and I think it's a nest. There was a traveling gas thing that went along with it. So I could keep refueling right here. See a mobile gash generator. It was a company by a wagon consisting of a nest. Oh my gosh. See if you can look up. That's crazy. Timfowl hat 901. That's the episode. And there's a picture of the craft that they had made. So they're just refueling these balloons with gas. But these aren't even balloons, dude. It's like it's like literally like aircrafts that could go 200 miles an hour. So the reason I'm bringing that up is because if we go, they got these silvers cigar things. Like think about how long ago that was. I mean they have bug. Okay. Yeah. I mean whatever else they can buy sleep at night, you know, but they got the tech. That's it. That's that's what they had in 2000 in a pre civil war. My Walter Bosley, he came. I talked about it. Who drew that? You can find those on the internet. I don't know who's specific. The guy's names up in the corner. That thing you go 200 miles an hour. Yep. What's a powered by? Oh, those that that's it. It's skies wouldn't and YM VA arrows and the secret. Yeah. I'm doing you know I'm retarded. Right. I do now. I want to know what the images with what power these are. These are the crafts that they had. Wow. But they were working on a person gets inside that. Yeah. Look at that. And then there's a program back there. Who was working on this? The South. No, the North. The North. The North in Germany. The South. No, no, I did. You said the South had some sort of helicopter. Oh, the South had a different kind of thing. So but this thing is different. Whatever this is. So what is it a bunch of fans? I don't know. It looks like a bunch of fans, right? Or propellers, you know. Right. Oh, they had that way back in the 1850s, too. Look at those guys. The only thing that thing went 200 miles an hour. I think somebody lied. Maybe. But they had that 200 miles an hour step right up. Just think what kind of dominance you could have at that time with that kind of craft. Moving that quickly. I think they backed in these to thought if you went that fast, you were going to explode. Right. You know, yeah, these things. Which craft? Well, they thought that before the trains. But again, Germany's involved. Germany basically funded the North when they needed money because, you know, Lincoln was issuing greenbacks. I have one in my house. I bought a Lincoln greenback $20 greenback. It's pretty sweet. I'm off for that. I forgot how much I paid for it. But yeah, that's like one of my favorite things I have. But what is this, Jamie? Oh, this is a box. These pictures on this. The guys throwing a baby. I don't know what the box is. Sacrifice. Sacrificing a child for the air gods. So you don't do you think that most of the UFO sightings that people see are US government crafts. Yeah. So do you think it's back engineered stuff? Or do you think we invented all the technology that we were with entities? I give us technology. I mean, it goes back to what we talked before about, you know, Admiral Bird and, you know, that whole thing. What I think it was Eisenhower made a deal. And I talked, I told you this. And that's where the missing 401 comes from. all the people go disappear in force. There's really weird like connections between all of them. They tend to be of German descent, of high IQ. And they just disappear in the forest. And Eddie Bravo is a really interesting theory about it, about how there's all these movies about all these people dying in force and everyone dying in the ocean. You know, the scary from going out there. Like I'm afraid of sharks. Like I don't want to go out in the ocean. What's going on in the ocean? And we see stuff coming out of the ocean all the time. What's going on way deep down there? Well, sharks are real. Sharks are real. We should be scared of our notion. Our notion is unforgiving. And alligator. And it's a, it's a rational fear. How about fear the ocean's very right. You know, jaws makes this thing boom rain your face, right? Probably before that, nobody was thinking about sharks. Well, you know, jaws is based on a real event, right? These things could apparently go fast because they use something, an antigravity feel called N.B. gas. What? What? That? And they had, they had anti-gravity gas in World War, I mean in the Civil War. Yes, so they're apparently with something this guy, Dela Shoe, who would look at who was credit with the drawings. He was in something called the Sonora Arrow Club. I also add that they found all this in a junk pile. He moved somewhere in Texas in 1850 and they found it in the 60s. Yeah, and they were working with German scientists. Wow. N.B. gas for lift and propulsion. So it's like some sort of I guess secret Arrow Club or a bunch of guys that were into that's what they're I guess. But what does that mean in anti-gravity fuel? I'd like to have someone read that that knows what the fuck those words mean. I'm not even sure it's real. It doesn't sound like a fuel could turn. Because we do a base on our timelines and this notion that we came from cavemen and you know that I don't think that I think there's been multiple society, you know, civilizations like just keep getting reset and reset and reset. I think that's true. Yeah. I agree with that. I think there's a lot of really compelling evidence that shows that. Have you seen Jesse Michael's new video? No. He's got a video on those tridactyl mummies in Peru where he went down there and had them CAT scanned and had them dude. Try dactyl like we're talking like what is what's good that's good after this and be a Mona gas. Is it say it's bullshit? I mean it's like how is it going to defy gravity unless you're talking about like just lift like a helium balloon. That's kind of anti-gravity gas. I think of it. But that's not what I think of. When I think of anti-gravity, I think of like space tech that allows you to like shoot down giant distances instantaneously. Like you hear about from these crafts. But if let's just say this is real and I do believe it's real, 100%. Like what do they have now? I mean it's so far down the line. I mean that's so long ago. That's like well 175 years ago. Technology that they could have. It's interesting about this club. I don't know how many says flight enthusiasts in the mid 1800s. There would have been you know people would have been interested in flying I guess because they couldn't do it. But then Nazi Bell which is a big part of World War II that nobody ever talks about. Right that was like a flying craft that they were trying to develop right. Right. So the Nazis were apparently trying to come up with a bunch of different shapes for crafts. One was a bell right. One was kind of flying saucer like right. Yeah. I mean that's a whole part in life. But here's we ever heard of our embarment. I always wonder that's pretty dope looking. I always wonder when they talk about stuff like that. Like the Nazis trying to make a flying saucer. Was that because they were trying to emulate something that they had seen or that there was a some sort of a hidden historical record of you know it because if only the people that are at the head of the military today or the head of these military contractors really know whether or not there's back engineered UFOs. If there are they have them and if they don't know about them they probably don't exist or the other companies have them. Right. Yeah. So you know you got to wonder what were the Nazis doing? Were they trying to emulate something that they knew existed? And when like when did governments if if there really is a real phenomenon if this isn't just total gas lighting and propaganda and bullshit to get you to believe that aliens are out there because they've got like crazy high tech that's 50 60 70 years past where we really think it is. Both of those things are hard to believe. Right. It's hard to believe that the government would be able to hide the kind of whatever kind of program that would develop a genuine anti-gravity engine that could move through space and time. They could go through the ocean. It makes a device trans-medium. It creates like a portal around it where it exists completely independently of everything that we're experiencing in 3D space. It just just goes through stuff. The idea that they have that they've kept it secret seems kind of crazy. I don't think so. It's seen. I'm not saying it's possible. No. And I did what I'm saying by that is like you hear famous stories of people whose fathers worked at Area 51 and he never once told them what they did there. Oh yeah. People keep their mouth shut. People don't know that they have to keep their mouth shut because if you don't you can get in real trouble. You know if you have top secret clearance and you go blabbing. They're listening to everything you say. They're checking your emails. They know 100% 100%. I think people can keep secrets. I really did. And they have you looking over here when it's really over here. They do that all the time. Like Area 51 is kind of like the shiny object that everyone's all there's crazy. And then it's really the mountain that's like 10 miles away that they've hollowed out S4 or Lazar worked or or you get into NASA right? Everyone thinks it's it's in in Houston. The real NASA is in Huntsville, Alabama. So this is a funny story. So Eddie and I are doing stand up and we're doing the Timfool Hat comedy night. And we go we do Nashville. We pack it out. Zany's I think it is. We pack it out. We're great. So they said it's a Huntsville. And we go. You know, I'm like, yeah, man, we're going to be stamping Alabama. This is going to be great. Let's go. So we drive up. We get to the hotel. We go to the comedy club and the fucking parking lot is packed. And we're like, dog, we packed this motherfucker. It's going to be great. Well, it's like Sharon Underwood or one of those black female comics is performing there. And it's all her crop. No, it's not her. It's the one who has the daytime talk show. I forget what her name is. No disrespect. She's hilarious. She packed it out. And it's her crowd. So and she runs the show goes late. Surprise. And all of a sudden, her crowd leaves and our crowd comes in and it's 45 people. And I'm like, oh, fuck. And I just keep looking up. They're going, oh, fuck, fuck, fuck. And he's like, Eddie's going. I know we're in trouble because Sam's always positive about it. And you just can't stop yelling, fuck. So we do the show 45 people. It's great show. We have a good time. We get off stage. The sound guy comes up to me and goes, whoever sent you here set you up to fail because this is the real NASA. This is where all of the satellites are controlled from. This is where Vaughn Braun went when he came to America. And in Huntsville, Alabama into the late 80s, you were not allowed to talk about how he was a Nazi because they had all convinced himself that he was forced to do it against his own will. And even though he was a horrible, horrible person, if you hear the stories about it, it's real Nazi. Yeah. But they convinced themselves that he did against his own will. So that's where the real. So they always have you look over here when everything's going on over here. Well, that one with Vaughn Braun is undeniable at this point. You know, I mean, they hit it in the 1960s because they wanted all those amazing engineers, but they got some evil motherfuckers. There's a video out there. It's called American Nazi 60 minutes. Can you look it up? It's basically when 60 minutes did really good work. And they interview this Boston lawyer who was like wanting to get down to what was going on. Why are all these Nazis here? Why isn't anyone getting them? And so he's pressing and he's doing like freedom of information act. And he's pressing and pressing them. And one day they got agreed to it. So the CIA says, you could look at these documents. You can't take pictures and you can't take notes. You can just read it. So he reads it and he finds out that basically what happened was a Rockefeller Nixon. And I think it was Eisenhower, former committee and there are all the ones that bring them over this little commute. Yeah. So you got all these guys. This is the operation paper this is part of it. But this I never knew that. Like like if you're going in hiding dude, why wouldn't you change your name? None of them change your names. Right. Yeah. Yep. Yeah. Right. None of them change. Yeah. That was it. So 82 US agency lied to cover up Nazi spy program. Wow. 60 minutes Eisenhower yep. It was Nixon Rock fell in Eisenhower. You imagine 60 minutes doing that today. Nope. It would never happen. Nope. Government would talk to them. Hey guys. Yeah. Let's not. Yeah. What's not? Right. What's pipe? What Nazi shut the fuck up? I agree to do that. American here is they got us on the moon shut the fuck up. Nobody ever talked about Martin Borman who was like if you don't if you don't know Martin Borman, you know nothing about World War II. Live peacefully in Argentina with the fact Carter tried to get him out of there. It looks grow back up. It says John left us a former prosecutor with the Justice Department office of special investigations that was set up by in 1980 by President Carter to root out Nazi collaborators made the allegations in an interview with Mike Wallace on the CBS program Sunday. Yep. I am not two collaborators or given jobs the United States and some were later sent to the Soviet Union and parachute teams in an unsuccessful attempt to perform assassinations and start civil wars. Yo, that is crazy. Lion Nazis into Russia to start civil wars. So I this guy on I think I talked about last time with the dark journalist who does really great work and he was talking to big reason why JFK was assassinated that NASA was involved because JFK wanted to give Russia all these documents and information they had about these UFOs because he didn't want them to think that they were like like nuclear planes like dropping bombs and stuff. And because NASA was so full of Nazis and they still hated the Russians, they didn't want that to happen. Well, that might be one reason. Well, one of the reasons why there's multiple reasons. It says that he said the State Department's Office of Policy Coordination is the first covert spy agency set up in the United States predating the CIA by several months smuggled several 700 Nazi collaborators into America. Hundreds after World War II for intelligence purposes. Wow, Barney Frank, Massachusetts, today called a house. He's got some big ones. This is all before we had knew about paperclip. Interesting. Interesting. Interesting. Wow. I don't remember when I don't remember. But it's kind of crazy that they hit it. And then meanwhile, these guys working from NASA had these Nazi dueling scars on their face. They look so sinister. In the video, they interview Nazis who still defended everything they did. It was none of them changed their names. They all just defended what they did. And it was crazy. It's a crazy video to watch. That's crazy. It's imagine, Warner Von Braun, they, these to hang the five slowest Jews in front of the rocket factory to motivate workers. They hang them. That was where his Berlin rocket factory. Yep. And that goes ahead of them now. Yep. And they convinced themselves he didn't want to do it. And it's gets into this whole thing that about what's going to happen in Gaza and in the middle it's it's basically it's all been prophesied dude. What's going to happen next? What does this say, Jim? State Department's quote. Gaza and in the middle it's it's basically what it's all been prophesied dude what's gonna happen next what is this a gem? State department's quote for this is 1982 so it's only 30 years after it's crazy. Says we never comment on intelligence matters and we're not commenting on something that happened in the 1950s. That'd be like saying we're not commenting on anything that happened in the 90s fuck off. Right could you imagine you mad we're still trying to find out what the fuck happened to JFK. Those 63. I think there's one person still alive and that's why they don't want to tell you about it. Really? It's a woman. What'd she do? I don't know exactly her role in it but she's supposedly as a part of it and she was like kind of some life. So when she dies though released the house. They'll release more of it. Unless the families don't want but that's why they're slow rolling this out because they don't want anyone who's still alive to face any prosecution. My question was always though what could possibly be in there. It's not like we shot them. This is where we stood. Bobby took the first one. That's right point with the Jeffrey Epstein list is like what do you think they're going to do? What their name and what they ordered? Right. You know they're never going to have that. Well the list is one thing. What she was saying about videos is another thing. That's crazy. Well that's the whole point that they believe behind a P Diddy trial is that it's really about getting his tapes. And why would they release the names when they can have the names and blackmail everybody on the list and then the videos? Right. Why would they give that away? Why would the intelligence agencies do that when they can control these people now? Right. Have you seen one of them in a Pfizer commercial? You know what's up? You know what? You're upset. I'm like, I've never seen them ever during the height of it. You're like, oh, they did something weird. I like to watch politicians who are pushing all this fucking bullshit whether it's COVID or BLM or Nazi or Zionism and all this shit. And I go, what weird shit do they got you fucking on video? What weird shit when Pam Bondi who was a part of the whole Jeffrey Epstein thing in Florida? And now she's like, yeah, there's videos. There's no video. I mean a part of it in Florida. What was she a part of? So when he, the first time he gets arrested, she was part of that whole thing. She was part of the process. She was like some AG and like her something in Florida. Was she on involved in that kid? Yeah. Interesting. And you're like, what do they got you doing? But there's so many people that would be implicated. That's what's nuts watching it not play out and watching these powerful people sort of huddle up together and hold the line. It's kind of crazy. And you got all these pedo hunters and they're doing great jobs getting these guys off the streets. But they're all low level. Yeah. And makes you feel like, oh, we're doing something. No, you're just getting low level guys out. You're not getting, you know, when the meat too movement and they were accusing people all this and they're trying to make it seem like these guys are a part of it. No, dude. You know, if you're, you're 17 year old going to a comedy concert and then you go home to your parents still, you're not part of that. We're, you know, it's like 80% of the children go missing or from foster care. Like people don't understand that. It like involves dark as shit. Do you remember there was, there was a story that was in some sort of a television show about a scandal that involved child sex trafficking with politicians. It was like in the 90s or something like that. There was weird stuff in different strokes. They constantly had episodes on that stuff. Did TV show difference? Yes. They had one where like the guy owned a bike store was giving the kids wine. What? Yeah. I just saw that pop up on one of my feeds, my algorithms. But like wasn't there, there was some sort of a story that I got. I can't remember what TV program it was. Was it the Franklin scandal or the, or the finder scandal and where the, where the FBI conspiracy of silence? The camp investigates nationwide child abuse network, reaching government officials, exposes systematic exploitation by politics. Franklin scandal, which involves Ronald Reagan. 93. That's it. It involves Ronald Reagan and involves George Bush senior. Imagine if you are a government official and you're also a pedophile and you have to like sniff around to find out if anybody else is a pedophile. I think they imagine how crazy they are. I think they you get in there because they know that about you. Everything's about data, dude. So you think they get pedophiles into office knowing that the pedophiles because they control those people. And then they feed them their, their addiction and then they control them through that. I mean, I'm convinced that's why porn hub is free. And you they find out who's commenting on these videos and what they're into. And then they can find out, hey, does this guy have any political desires? And then they kind of push them in the direction. There you go from the kind of porn you're walking off to 100%. That's why it's free. And that's why they're just seeing just trended recruit politicians. Do you, you've heard about it? 100% but gay programs, that's what that's all about. who's in smart ones, who's a psychopath? And before they had all that, they were just going on campuses talking to the professors, who's a really smart guy. And then they, that's what they did with the unibomber. They, they knew he was a super smart guy. So they put him through all the CIA stuff and they fractured him. Well, he was fucked up from the beginning. Do you know a story? Do you know what? Oh, yeah. He had a disease when he was a child. So he wasn't touched for like seven days or something like that. He was not longer than that, I think. I think it was a long period of time during like his childhood developmental process. And they said he just like never had any empathy and he would snap on people. And then they put him in the Harvard LSD studies. And so the studies involved like humiliation, a lot of crazy shit. But they never deep programmed a master. It's that famous. But it's how are you going to deep program a guy who got broken from childhood because he got left alone when, you know, during the time that his mother's supposed to be holding. You're supposed to have contact with a person. Yep. And baby. And he just no one's touching him for like however long time it was. And then you get him involved in these LSD studies. Because his brother said that he would like snap at people and like he would write like horrible letters to ladies if they rejected him. Like he was already fucked up. And then they get him in the LSD studies. Does he end up in Stanford? Yes. Yeah. That's got a lot of intelligence. Wasn't it? Wasn't it? It might say that. Wasn't it? I'm not a just I don't know why I agreed that that's so quickly. I know he was eventually in Montana alone. Right. That's where he was launching the bombs out of and like sending shit through the man alone people up. He had like a cabinet in Montana. I think it was easy. Why do I think it was Berkeley? That whole Kavanaugh trial? He started. Was he from Berkeley? Did he teach at Berkeley? Or he was a student or a teacher's aide? Yeah. I briefly. Yeah. Where all the loonies were. That whole Kavanaugh trial for Supreme Court was a giant charade. But to get you to not actually look at his history. That's because the woman who accused him worked at the CIA program at Stanford. And they didn't want you to look into that Kavanaugh was a deep state guy. He wrote the he wrote the Patriot Act. He helped cover up whitewater. I mean, they didn't want you looking at it. So they made it into a sex vote. The Patriot Act. He will help write the Patriot Act. He doesn't believe in he believes in warrantless entering the houses. He thinks the presence above the law. They didn't want you ever discussing that stuff. So they make it a sex trial that a biowoman who has deep connections to the CIA. Her father was in charge of finding funding for black ops operations. So she's spook to the core. And she comes out. She says his stuff. So you think that was a diversion and it wasn't really that she was calling him out. It was just to get you to concentrate on that and not for people to focus on 100%. Wow. Where'd you read that? Streets. The streets. I'm just telling you just I'm telling you this. This is all charade. No one ever discussed his actual background and what he actually was a part of. Interesting. Nobody will want a guy who thinks the presence above the law and the cops shouldn't have warrants to come in your house as a Supreme Court justice. Yeah. Oh, I, I, this guy did something to me in school. He journaled about it. Who's journals? I know one guy that's journaled in my life. My buddy Tony, that's it. Nobody else has ever journaled. And so it's easily refuted, but it's, it's, you know, contentious. But the means to move me to go as main attention to it. Yeah. Like female comics in LA are commenting on it. Boy, that's nuts. That's nuts if that's really what it is. But what a, what a great way to use social media and the whole outrage machine as a tool is a smokescreen. Because the outrage machine is, it's so fun to pull the buttons. You know, like we're doing something. Release the crackings. Release all the, release all that stuff. I love to get involved too, because it makes you feel like you're part of a movement. Give you purpose. Yeah. Yeah. It gives you something. I stumbled across this one day. Remember we found out information about the Epstein people who were on the island, I suppose. Right. You know how they found this information out? No. So you used mobile phone data and did like cross references to felt like, you know, like this person's been here. They don't know who the people are, but like this phone at least has been here here and here. So it most likely could be this person, something like that. Wow. What's interesting though is about this, the company that did it is owned by a person that was tied to Brett Kavanaugh. He was like in that, I think he was in the college story. That's this whole hearing was about. So did you ever hear how they use phone data with the Kamala Harris arena shows? They were yes. Right? And it was all the same people. People go, how did she blow a billion dollars filling arenas? Yeah. They tried to manufacture a big grassroots movement behind her because they know that's what killed Hillary Clinton. You know, Bernie Sanders is doing arenas and Hillary Clinton's putting Sam Tripoli numbers in a cafeteria of like 40 people. So they realized the illusion of that. Like what that, what that shows that there's no way following her. So when they run her out, they got, we can't let this happen again. So we have to, we have to fill these arenas up and they did data that was like, it was like a grateful dead concert. People were just following her around everywhere. Well, they were professionals. Yeah. I mean, they were making a living doing that 100% is also people that are professional protesters, which is wild. This guys that have documented people protesting at different places and he's talked to him about like how much do you get paid? And like people are making a living, protesting. And how is that legal? How's it legal to hire someone to go and annoy people? I thought, was illegal? You're not allowed to protest something you don't believe in. What's your shoes are show up and all these? I mean, maybe they believe in it. They're getting paid and they believe in it. That's what they would say. You can't tell someone they don't believe in something. Well, some people are dumb and they'll be like, I don't even know why I'm here. I'm just collecting checks and getting a sandwich. 100 is always going to be people like that. Yeah. They give away secrets. There's always going to be like really dull, minded people that grew up in a house with a gas leak and there's just no saving them. Yeah. I mean, just common sense is in that common. No, what's not just that? I think some people's brains don't function well. You know, I just think you're just born with a bad brain. And then you also maybe have environmental factors like what if you're a fucking working with certain chemicals every day? You know, how many people are doing that for a living? How many people working in print shops just like sucking in all them fucking chemical fumes? What does that do to your dome? I can't be good. And who knows what, you know, about what you took in as a child? Oh, yeah. Lated gasoline when we were young. That shit was everywhere. We got lead poisoning in the brain for sure. Drops your IQ a little bit. Measurable. Yeah, I took all the way. We talked about that the other day. They fucking knew that lead was going to poison people and they put it in anyway because they could save money. Do you ever hear the conspiracy about that? About what? Lated gasoline? About lead? No. That it doesn't really cause that. And the reason they wanted to get lead out of paint is because it made it harder for them to see through walls. And that's why all these new houses have class windows as for walls. If they're like, look at your amazing view through this class window, I was watching like one of those home flipping shows. And they took out a wall and they just put a giant glass there. And the theory is that it's easier to look through that. And, and you know, now they've discovered that there's these mystery vans driving around that can look right through your walls and watch what you're doing. Is this too much? How are they looking through your wall? What are they using? I know they can do it with Wi-Fi now. Yeah. That's basically what they're doing. They're yeah. They're me just have the Wi-Fi is bananas. The fact that they have technology that allows you to see like 3D images in a room based on how the Wi-Fi is somehow or another, like sending it back to them. Like, what is even what is Wi-Fi even doing to you? Like, what is happening to you if this shit is just around you all the time passing through your cells, have you ever like see it on a, I mean, the fact they can see it. You know, like everyone's scared of radar machines, right? Everyone's scared of going through an x-ray. Right? You don't want that radar machine. The guy's giving you the, the actual age, behind a giant wall protecting the go fucking hide. They go hide and they press the button and, and we're just cool with Wi-Fi. It's not as bad as an x-ray, but it's this weird low level signal that they say it fucks up bees, right? Or at least cell phone signals and the birds up bees really. I don't know if this ever happened to you. I've seen this this week or two. I did. Yeah, new contact lenses give people infrared vision, even with their eyes shut. Sci-Fi style technology uses nano particles to convert infrared light and divisible light that humans can see. Fucking yo. How about those night vision goggles that they had to change the color? Cause they were seeing things that weren't on the radar. What? I think it was like red. They were do aliens. They were yeah. Yeah. Really? They were seeing things flying around them. And then they were flipping out because they had red night vision goggles. And that's why they change it to either green or blue because the rest went in red. They show up. They don't show up in other colors. Yes. Jamie. That's too weird. The account of early night vision goggles used in Vietnam more revealing alleged demonic entities. Wow. My dad did drugs and made up stories about Vietnam. That's perfect. Yeah. I mean, distracted you from the tridiactyls. Oh, yeah. That's right. Thank you. Um, so Jesse Michaels released a new video. He went down to Peru and they, these people have been telling them about these mummies. They're like, you have to see them in person. They are humanoid, but they don't seem to be human. They have a different amount of ribs, but they have like all the cartilage and all the ligaments and all the bones and and everything is in place that makes it look like if you can go to Jesse's show, go to his YouTube channel because he's got some video footage of the actual like cats, and they're showing you the tissue. And look at those skulls. Bun nanas. So this is Jesse's take. I'm paraphrasing. I hope I'm not fucking this up, but some of these things are forgeries. Some of these things are just fake stuff. It's just like an art piece that someone created. But he thinks they actually have some of them that appear to be a real creature. And this real creature has three toes and three fingers. And there's depictions of these in Peru in these ancient like carpets and ancient weaves that are hundreds of years old. I think even a thousand years old. So some of these they think are 1700 years old. And some of these are as as recent as four or 500 years old. Long ago. Look at this, but look at this tissue elongated skulls. But look at how everything is in like if this is a piece of art from 1700 years ago. So many created this. That's nuts, man. That's an amazing piece of work if it's really just art. And if it's not art, well, they've managed to find some kind of creature that might have been another type of human that we didn't know existed. There might be look, they find out and Jesse was telling me this on the phone. Like look at this is the scan of this thing's bone structure. This is the actual thing. Like how nuts is that, man? If that's fake, that's fucking extraordinary. Cause it looks like a real creature. I mean, the amount of detail. It looks incredibly real. I mean, this is incredibly real. And the head is very different. That one is creepy. Very different than ours. A elongated, but also matches up with so many descriptions of people have had with encounters with beings, including the James Fox movie moment of contact about Vargina Brazil in the 1990s. They describe things that look exactly like this. Very small like three feet tall, three fingers, three toes. That's what these things are. Like they might have been another form of human that we just don't have any evidence for. Well, like Dennis Ovens, they just found recently. I think it was in the last decade, right? And then there's those new people with his homojulee ends. Is that what it was? The December of 2024, they released his paper. We found another type of human. The floor as people, the hobbit people in floors, they, that's like, I think the 90s. You know what is interesting, dude? All of its interesting. It's like there's a bunch of stuff that we're just now finding out, but we want to be rigid and pretend that we know the entire landscape as far as like what different type of human. Time lines. What the fuck is that? If that really is 1700 years old, that's true. Or 700 years old. If that really is that, and that's a real being. And then there's more than one. And one of them has a fetus inside of it. They think also has three fingers and three toes. So they're trying to get better scans on this thing, but it has a fetus inside of it. Like if that's a hoax, like what, like I want to know, I want to know who carbon data did, what's the results? Have you done it more than once? Okay. Do we know for sure how old it is? You're some metal in there. Yeah. One of them has like an implant on the back of its head. I'm going to wear a metal that's hard to. Yeah. I can't recommend this episode enough. Alien Mummies found in Peru and it's on Jesse Michaels channel. American alchemy. Great fucking show. And he goes deep and he actually went to Peru to see these things and get them studied and scanned. And there's biologists that are looking at this that are saying, this is a real creature. Whatever this is, we need to do more tests and find out more. And they're very suspicious about the actual location in which the guy said that he found them because it's basically these are like grave robbers that find these things. Man. Yeah. And they found more than one. And the crazy thing is show them the ancient art from Peru that shows three fingered three toad beings because they look just like that. 100% this ancient art is hundreds of years old, man. Like look, they'll fucking three toes and three fingers. This is all in Jesse's episode two. Just go watch that episode if you're interested in my theory on our reality is every movie you've ever watched in your life all going on at the same time. All of it. All of these movies just kind of tell you what's really going on and aliens and three fingered be hairy in the Henderson's. Every thing. Big thing about the camp. I went up. It's very interesting. I had an interview with a guy named the paranoid American and he came on my show and he was talking about how based on your religious beliefs is what you see. So like if you if you're atheist, you see aliens. If you're if you're religious, you see angels and it goes down to cryptids and all that stuff. Yeah. It's like, so it's like you only see what you want to see. And it shows up in the form that is acceptable to you. Right. And so I think, yes, when you go big foot, 100% 100% one of the craziest stories ever told to me was by a guy I met at a show. And he was telling me he he did a show where people would send in their, their like high weirdness like stories. And he said that a guy was driving through the forest with his girlfriend and doc and they pull over a second to piss and the dog takes off. So he goes and chases him through the, through the woods. And he looks at his dogs, dogs can up. He looks up there's like what seems to be a giant green screen with something crawling on it. And they're just staring at it. And then the thing stops, no, system there camouflage stuff. He looks down his dog and I ran back and banded him and he ran back and his girlfriend's on there. Like let's get the fuck out of here. And that gets into like kind of like the whole again, missing, missing 401 is that it's almost like Grand Theft Auto. You ever drive a Vegas and Grand Theft Auto has a render itself forever. So the whole theory is that these people go missing because the simulation doesn't want to render for just one person. And that's why they disappear. That's possible. Let me give you another possibility. Getting lost in the woods is easy. Getting out of the woods is hard. You could easily starve to death trying. You could easily break a leg, get injured and no one would ever find you. That is not what kinds of you right now. No, no, no, well, listen, the odds of you getting found if you die in the deep wilderness are not very high. They might find your clothes, but your body will be scavenged. All kinds of animals will eat you. They'll drag your bones away. They'll, they'll be nothing left. If there's bears in the area, there might literally be nothing left. There's pigs in the area. There'll be nothing left. Nothing, they'll eat your bones, they'll eat everything. They'll be nothing left. So if you're just a person and you go missing and you're in the deep, deep, deep, deep woods, like miles in, you're, you're in a bad, bad place. And they might not ever find you. That's just a fact. There's too much acreage to look over. There's millions of acres of public land that people could just go into and people go missing, man. And you can't find them. Have you ever heard of the dad or dad? I'm a four-wheel one. Sure. Yeah. And how they like these people disappear and then they're finding totally somewhere else and they can't remember what just happened. Well, that's the Travis Walton story, bro. Yeah. That I just thought I just found it. Oh, yeah. That is a crazy story. Yeah. He was one of the more interesting people that have talked to that have had experiences because he, you know, I'd say the same about Bob, bizarre. They don't seem like they're lying. They don't seem at all like they're lying. Well, Zara seemed like he was telling me you're just going to sound crazy. But here's a story. That's what it seemed like. Like it did not seem like a guy making up a story. And then you go back and see him talking about it in the 1980s. He's talking about the same way. Zach's saying talking. I mean, the more time goes on. That's the meeting with Eisenhower where they, he makes a deal with them. But the aliens is that they can't, they, they can't, they, they want to be able to do tasks and kidnap and all that stuff. But he makes a deal that you can only do it in the forest. You can't do it in a regular places. So that's why people go missing in the fort. And obviously bad things happen in people. You know, it get here from that again. But supposedly these people disappear. And then they're found a couple days later in a totally different place. And they can't remember what just happened. Well, if I was going to do it, I mean, I had a bid in my act about it. That's what I would do. I wouldn't land on the White House lawn. I'd find something dude cooking meth. Statch him up. And like go tell somebody you're not going to, no, no, believe you believe your believe you. Yeah. But that's if you're just looking for biological studies, if you're just doing tests on people, a lot of people have talked about hybridization programs that they're exposed to like their children. Like they had been multiple times they had visited and then they were shown like a human alien hybrid that they were told as their child. Why do that is crazy? Yeah. Guys are getting fucked by female aliens. Female aliens like hold them down, riding their deck. Like actually having sex with them. Trainees are from the future. Not, I'll think they're trainees. I think they're, they're aliens. They're just a different kind of whatever the fuck we are. I think we're a combination of whatever some intelligent, advanced species, whatever. Well, the God ultimately for the whole thing, for the whole ball of wax. But I have a feeling just like we've done weird shit and created poodles. I think, I think someone might have come here and for lack of a better term, monkeyed around with our genes and added some good shit. You know, and that's, that's in a lot of ancient texts, man. That's in a lot of ancient depictions of how the gods created men. And that's how the Nephlims come. Paul and angels. The daughters of men. It gets weird. That's where it gets weird because nobody wants to even consider that possibility that we have been genetically engineered. No one wants to consider it because it's kind of crazy. But also, guys, look out different. We are than everything else. Yes. I mean, it's kind of weird. Yes. And they can't explain the jump from monkey to man. Yeah. There's no link to that. Well, there's links. I mean, there's, there are transitionary fossils. Like you can see like Australia, Pithicus, you can see the different ones. But there's a lot of weirdness in there that it doesn't cover. And one of them is the doubling of the human brain size over a period of like between, I think it's somewhere around a million or two million years. The human brain size doubled. And it just they, like what happened? What happened? I know it was mushrooms. Maybe it was also maybe mushrooms or aliens. And that's real possible that it's alien life form that like exists on our planet and gives you enlightenment if you consume. I want a micro dose during jujitsu. That's what I would like to do. I would love to do. Didn't you just have that one politician on talking about? Rick Perry. The book of Enot the woman. Oh, yeah. Anna Polina Luna. Yeah. You know, it's like that's a super, you know, you bring up narcissism. Christians go get really upset. I don't know what the answer is. You know, I mean, I'm a spiritual man. Like one God, Jesus is my savior. That's what I'm into right now makes me, makes me happy and vibrate in a higher level. But if you study narcissism, you know, the whole story of the demi urge, is very interesting. That's where Paul and angels, meeting with the daughter's a man come from. And that's where the original feminist was the first ever feminist was Sophia, who was a, a, a, a, feminine energy of the universe. And literally she was like, I don't need a man, right? She literally sounded like I don't need a man. And she creates life. And she instantly knows she made a mistake, which it sounds like every single mother to me, right? So she creates the demi urge and the demi urge doesn't understand. About the higher table of God's and he thinks he is God. And a lot of people believe the first God of the testament is, is the demi urge. Oh, okay. And his whole thing is about just basically he wants to destroy humanity. That's kind of what everyone talks about in Satan, but Sophia gave us the spark of life. She gives us spark. Wouldn't you want to know like it would go back to the time where they were writing the bug about Gita? I would love that. What do you know? Yeah. How are you writing? I think about that. What's a Vmana? Yeah. Like what are these flying crafts you're talking about? Yes, dude. And evaded texts. And so, so you talk about fallen angels, a lot of people like think that's Christian mumbo jumbo. I don't believe it is at all because the Vedics talk about it and the Hindus talk about it about God trapping entities in this realm that we live in. So I think the Vedics were for the Hindus, I think are two or three. And then we have the 33% which is the fallen angels. And then they come down, they get trapped here. And that's the whole thing about transhumanism is that they're trying to figure out how to get out of here. Have you ever seen Lazar talk about the weirdest shit that he heard when he was at S4? No, I was. Said the weirdest shit was he had, they said they had a very thick file that was about religion. I'm seeing Lazar talk about the weirdest shit that he heard when he was at S4. No, I always said the weirdest shit was he had, they said they had a very thick file that was about religion. And basically what it boiled down to is at least what this file was saying was that that they view us as containers. Yes. And he wasn't specifying containers of what, like containers of souls, like I don't know, but that's the terminology they used. They view us as containers. He imagined if like a soul is an energy that you have to farm or you have to extract, just like how you we extract oil from the earth, that souls are things you extract. And so you need to grow a bunch of them. So you need people just fuck up a storm and clutter up a planet and really what you're doing is just farming souls. Yeah, dude. That's so crazy. You think that you're an only fans model and you're a DJ at a strip club and you're a football player and you're a top scientist and you're this and you're that and every, but really on the highest level you're just in a farm. You're in a farm and there's a super intelligent entity that's above and beyond anything could ever comprehend. And the only thing it doesn't have a soul, so it needs souls. Or a real element. It's just like you need cobalt to make a battery. Yeah, that's to believe you actually need a soul. Where the battery that runs this simulation. So deep, dude. Why would it like why is that weirder than black holes? You know why is that we're I was watching this thing on Twitter yesterday. I still say Twitter. I do. So they were discussing this black hole that's as big as our galaxy. That seems weirder. That seems even weirder than we were genetically engineered. We were genetically engineered. It seems like some shit that we would do. Yeah. Like I met the I've had Ben Lam and best of Shapiro on from Colossal. Those are the people that brought back the dire wolves. Yeah. Like what are we doing? By the way, do you know what else that guy did? What else is that guy do? That guy created it so that you can store files in DNA. Wow. You can actually store. So I the guy on he's like, you know where the Epstein files are? They're in somebody's DNA. That's what they get. You could look it up, Jamie. The guy literally created that you could put files in people's DNA. Wow. That is some guy that did that. But the one who did the dire wolf. Well, they're doing a bunch of stuff. That's Ben Lam. They're doing a bunch of stuff. And you know, they're eventually going to bring back the mammoth. Oh, and they're going to. Yeah. I don't know. It seems like some drastic park shit where it gets way. What does that do? I said, it's, you know, this is like the beginning of the movie. Yeah. It's kind of crazy. We're shit. You're bringing it back. The thing is if they, it was a purpose of it though, too. What's your thought on why we should be bringing these back? Because it's cool. Oh, that's it. Hey, sometimes it's simple answers are right. Yeah. Sometimes you bring things back just because it's cool. Should you bring back dire wolves and let them loose? No. They're bigger than regular wolves. They're super powerful. You're making a mistake. Regular wolves are hard enough to deal with. And dire wolves might very well like to hunt people. It's like super possible. Yeah. If I get introducing those anacondas, or boas into like the Florida Everglades, it's like they're just dominating. Just bringing regular wolves into a place fucks everything. Yeah. Like what's going on in Colorado? How about the Q animals? Can we bring back Q ones? Yes. That's why I'm looking for a Q-Pies. Bring back the Q-Pies. But then they're all going to get eaten. Because you're going to have to eventually let them go, and then something's going to fucking prey on them. And then you're going to have a disaster. Every where they're going to wind up eating a bunch of shit that they're not supposed to eat. They're going to kill some species off. That happens all, like Australia's like, got multiple cases of like different animals they brought in to combat different animals. And now they have like feral cats everywhere. And cheese. Have you ever heard of orphan trains? What? Have you ever heard of the orphan trains? What is it? What is it? It reminds me of the orphan train. I remember when I was a kid, I would see cartoons. And they're like, this orphan train's going to go off the tracks. And I'm like, why are there a bunch of orphans in the trains? And then you start getting into what that really is. This is where cabbage patch dolls come from. What? Genetic coffee. Yeah. What the fuck are you saying? Orphan trains, dude. What is an orphan train? The theory is, you know, they kind of did this in Canada with the indigenous, where they sent them to other parts of the country so they couldn't learn any of their culture. And basically the thought is that either they've brought kids from where they were born and brought them to the other parts of the country and gave them to the elites to raise his children or do whatever they wanted to do with them. Yeah, here it is. Okay. So orphan trains were large-scale social experiment in the United States where orphaned to banded our homeless children. were transported from crowded eastern cities to rural areas in the Midwest to be adopted or placed in homes. Between 1854 and 1920, excuse me, 1929, and estimated 200,000 to 250,000 children were relocated primarily by the children's AIDS Society and its founder. Charles Loring braced this movement is considered a precursor to the modern foster care system. So that's a very clean version of it. Right. But the whole belief is that these are the children of, I'm just going to throw out a name of, of, to Tariar stuff like that. And that they're the children of this to kind of erase history. Well, it gets even crazier into cabbage patch dolls, right? These cabbage patch kids, and they had these world fairs where they would literally sell like incubated children. Yeah. Have you heard of that? No. And the sign felt says both his parents were those type of kids. What, what is an incubated children? Was it? If you look up world fair cabbage patch style kids, basically almost like science grown, science laboratory children. Hold on. What are you saying? What? I can't hear you, Jamie. Something weird popped up when I go to what I'm trying to figure out what this is before I was. What is it? I just, well, I'll show you. We're not anywhere really yet. Cloning, cabbage patch, kids, and the mystery of repopulation postcards. And Seinfeld says his parents are both those. And they would have displays that world where you could go and get a kid. Wait a minute. What do you mean his parents? Would you say his parents were made in a lab? Was that what you're saying? I think he said his kids, his parents were either orphaned trading kids or cabbage patch kids. And a lot of people think that's where the NPCs come from. Orphaned trained kids would mean that his parents were orphans or shipped off to another. Or whatever they were being told. You know, but that's what he said. We have to go to that. That sounds like a Sam Triple E crazy thought. You have to make sure that that's great. Okay. That sounds crazy. But the whole show starts. I don't understand what the cabbage patch thing is, though. What are you saying that is? They were cloning kids. Well, when was cloning even possible? When did it first become possible? Hundreds and hundreds of years they've been growing. up here. There's a thumbnail that links all three things he's talking about together. But I don't know where this goes. Bro, you go down the wrong Reddit threads, don't you? No, dog. Or from my on my cabbage patch baby. So they're growing them in a cabbage patch and then world's fair incubator babies. Look at that guy over there holding two babies up. These are incubator babies. Look at what he's saying. So what is an incubator baby? Sounds like it raised entirely in an incubator? What does that mean? How early 90 bucks? Boardwalk attraction saved thousands of premature babies lives. Oh, okay. So it's premature births. That sounds like I don't know, man. Because supposedly you can get a kid at the world fairs. But I do know that people do do that when a child is premature. Right? They put them in an incubator. But the word is that you could get a kid there. So you could buy a kid? Yeah. So if someone would have this premature birth and then put the kid up for sale? Maybe. I mean, that's what this is trying to tell us. I don't know if that's real though. But that goes back to the world fairs. And we talked about before. It's just like technology beyond what we understood. And what we know now. And they wipe that all out. Why would they do that? Do you think they wipe it all out? Or do they think they hide it in secrecy? Well, they probably still have it. And but they they don't want us to have it. Like what do you think happened with all of Tesla's notes? When he died and whatever organization. I don't know. I don't know. We'll try some. Well, Trump's uncle. Well, that's right. He went in there early because he's in the album. And then they grabbed them all before. And that gets into that little Baron Trump book. And the last question. Yeah. And all that stuff. That's like time travel stuff. Yeah. Which I think is totally possible. I think time is in this. I think time is in this. And everything's going on at one time. And it's like a book. Like if you're reading a book, you can be on page 46 and 46. That's the reality at the time. But you can jump to page 320. And now that's reality at the time. Then you can go back to page 18. And that's a reality of time. I think it's that's. So do you think that you will eventually be able to manipulate that? Or we can. I think we already can. Who's we though? The the the Masters of Mankind. The man. The Masters of Mankind. The 13 families. The 13 families may deals with fallen angels. That's my power. That's the power structure of the world. And what method are they using to travel back and forth through time? Whatever technology they got. So do you think that if let's say they back an engineer UFO in 1947 and these companies get involved that know how to make technology, all these different contractors, Boeing, Lockheed Martin, whoever it is. They manufacture a time machine. They manufacture a time machine based on what they have learned and they start to use it. And they go back and forth and move around the time. Do you think eventually they want to tell somebody? I think they know again. It goes back to data. They know who is who who's crazy enough, who who can keep a secret, who can do all that stuff. They like that's what they always say about if they if they if if they fake the moon landing wouldn't they're like wouldn't somebody in there say something? Well people do say something and they end up going missing, but most of them understand that they're in on it. The only people getting in that room are the ones that they know are in on it. Have you ever seen one India landed on the moon? Have you ever seen that video? It's just a probe, right? It's not even a probe. It's like an Atari graphic that lands. That's a few of them. Cuber had better graphics than that. And they're all cheering in the room. They're all high five in each other. You don't think India landed a problem. A problem. Can I see it? I want to see if see if I believe it. I've had so many people that pretty bad. Do you see this guy full of shit? What happened? All right, let's see it. No, that can't be right. Yeah, that's what they're landing. Wait a minute. Hold on. We're seeing just flashes of it. I mean, this wouldn't be a live video of it because it would be landing two things at the same time. But I want to see something that happens when it actually touches down. Wait a minute. That's it. Hold up. Okay, everyone needs to go to jail. You guys all need to go to jail. Yes, I'll need to go to jail. That's something. But they're all you do with the money. What did you do with the money? You got their own island bitches. Yeah, I do. I dare you. Imagine how much money they spent on that probe. But that's everybody in the room. So if you look at the JFK assassination, right? So he goes into that plaza. They're all assassins in that plaza. Yeah. Like everybody's in on it. Well, there was a lot of people in there. Yeah, and they all go missing and end up dead. You know, my friend Evan had a really good point about that. My friend Evan Haver from Black Rifle Coffee. He said during the Bay of Pigs when they told Captain Mcaul if he can I ask him? Get in there, Tom. Sorry. You know, when they told Kennedy about it and he didn't allow the air strikes, he didn't allow air support. Yep. That fucked everybody. Yeah. The beach is like, you know, the Northwood hardened. No, that was different. Operation Northwoods was the, um, whether they were going to arm Cuban friend Lee's and attack Juan. Well, that was all part of how to pull Cuban to war. Right, right, right. So, but when, but the Bay of Pigs thing in specific, those guys had a plan based on air support and then they didn't get that air support and a bunch of people died that should have died. It's like those are the types of people you could have gotten to kill Kennedy. Yep. Yeah. What do you got for us, Jamie? Play some. They look better in the other video. No, no, no. I was looking to see if there was. They did land two things at the same time. But whatever that was, it's clearly not supposed to be a video of the live landing. There's no way. Um, looked like it to me. Oh, look at that. And the guy standing up and he's like, no, I just did that. That's not, that's not even supposed. I don't think that's what it's supposed to be. It's like a description to show them like, instead of just looking at numbers. Oh, so they don't have actual video of it. Yeah, you have to have a live camera with it. Right. That's like a third thing that you're just. Yeah. Well, moon landing from the 60s when I did it. You only saw it from inside the lunar module that beautiful aluminum foil craft. Yeah. And the golf cart that's like almost twice as size. I think it's a golf cart. Yeah. And how'd you get enough power to get off the earth or get off the moon, rather? Yeah. And then we had to get that camera to pan perfectly and catch it. And how'd you get the signal of the video footage from that camera and send it up into space in 1960, fucking nine. And how'd you talk to Nixon on the phone from space? I don't know. Lay it like how you call in Nixon from fucking space. Stop. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But here's the thing. All the garkies help all the garkies. So they're all in on it. Well, I bet they're all in on a lot of shit, which is good. Because that's what keeps us from going to World War three for real for real. So, so recently we're being told there's this giant AI race with China. OK. You don't believe it. And we, you know, they want to pass the law. No, I don't believe it. And I'll tell you why. I was so pointed at finger. Yeah. I'm very serious. I'm very serious. I pointed at the sign. But the point is, so they they tell us there's this giant race with AI. And if we allow China to just get a fraction ahead of us, it's over. So to the point where they they pass a law where you cannot at no state can pass any laws that get in the way of technology with AI. And everyone's really upset about because 10 years of AI is an insane amount of time. So who knows what will happen with it? So we're being sold at we're in this AI race with China. Well, just about a month ago, we sent China a bunch of AI superconductors. And I go, hold on. We're like in a race with these guys and we're sending them superconductors. We do United States government. So what did they send? They send a bunch of, will you look this up superconductors or something like that? To the people who are supposedly in a race and it reminds me of when I was a kid. I'm going to need no specifics. Okay. That's why Jamie's here. I'm just, I'm just reminds you of when you were a child. When I was a kid and we were in the cold war with Russia and we were in a nuclear arms race, I remember being a kid and seeing on the news that we were sending aid to Russia. And I always go, why are we sending aid to these people if we're in a cold war with them? And then I realized because Russia was never going to be able to keep up with us. It was, that was just, use as a, as a smoke screen to get us to be, hey man, spend all the money you need to build all these weapons because we have to be in lead. This is where we're paying off the Taliban. 20 mil what a week. First of all, how many people are even in the Taliban and how many more they were recruiting because they're making 20 million a week? I remember when Joe Biden pulled out of Afghanistan, I was like, oh, dude, great. He ended, you know, and I wasn't a Biden fan. When somebody does something you like, you got to kind of give them their props. And then he's like, yeah, and we're leaving all the weapons there. But have you ever seen the video of the plane leaving? You want to look at something that's just a complete joke. Well, people were falling off of it. They were trying to hang on to the wheels. No watch when it's coming out on the runway. It looks really weird to me. It looks like the plane's fake. It's got painted windows. Okay. People are running a lot. It's the weirdest video I've ever seen. It makes no sense. There's a 9 11 on it or 1 1 9 on it. It's a very weird. But it did happen. Like people did like take off in the last planes and people did. I'm not saying that didn't happen. But I'm saying that video is super weird. Oh, you know, sometimes video just looks like shit. Have you ever seen an age crash? Have you ever seen that video? Yeah, this is one thing at a time. Look at that. One thing at a time. It's a plane, right? So it's an enormous plane. Looks man. It doesn't have any windows. So there's that. Well, the windows at the top are the black ones. Well, that's for the pilots, bro. But the rest of the plane is all solid. Solid. So it's a cargo. No, it looks like a giant cargo ship. And these people are trying to climb in. Like, look at this, man. They're trying to get inside that cargo ship. That is nuts, man. And the thing is moving along on the ground. You can see through these nuts. Yeah, you can see. that's a regular cargo ship, brother. That's a giant military cargo ship. That looks weird. But this weirder, these guys are like laughing and cheering. Yes. It just looks weird to me. But like the whole thing was crazy. First of all, they felt like they had seen it in America and sent them home. So there was that. And then there was the fact that we left behind all kinds of crazy ships, black-hawk helicopters, tanks. And then they do parades where they parade them. The street was all our shares. Yeah, yeah. I mean, you get into Afghanistan. It's the same thing reason we went into Vietnam, which was the poppy. Yeah. Nobody knows about Vietnam. Everyone thinks about stopping communism if you watched the fog of war. He says they were never going to, Vietnam hated China. They were never going to work together. But you sell it as we got to stop communism. Now you go in and you get all the poppy fields to golden triangle. Well, the most transparent of that was when Fox News had Geraldo Rivera talking to one of the generals on the ground. Yeah. It was like, one of the military leaders. I don't know if it was general. Why do you have military people guarding the heroin fields? It's like, well, we need to get the trust of the farmers. OK, one R. Sorry, against two minutes. It literally like fucking US arm soldiers guarding drugs. And then the production goes through the roof. Yeah. And it becomes like 94% of the world's heroin is produced in, or where we go. And I rack in the first things we go to are the museums. Oh, well. And we're grabbing artifacts. That's an on a nucky shit in there that we need to know. Who knows it's in the Vatican type shit? 100. They think that's the weapon of mass destruction they were talking about. Was the Stargate and I rack? That was a weapon of mass. I thought it was a gateway. Well, that's what they're talking about. Well, that they want control. That would be the weapon of mass destruction. You go into the future, get some awesome weapons, come back, fuck everybody up. Everybody watching a movie about the revolutionary war. They're all running around in muskets. You just imagine, bro, imagine just storming in there with a tank. Fuck, everybody. They didn't even know what a tank is. Yeah. Just do a car to shoot them at helicopters like pigs. That's what you think of when you think of modern weaponry. Now imagine applying that times 1,000 years, getting that modern weapon and bringing it back to this timeline. Do you think that you can travel back and forth through timelines? Or do you think once you travel once you're stuck there? What if you travel back to a time that's no time machine? You might be fucked. Yeah. Or it's like, you know, you see movies about this all the time where you're like, you got to go exactly to the place. You got to get it right or you go to a dimension you don't even know what it is. What was that article you just pulled up, Jamie? Iraqi Stargate conspiracy, a modern perspective on an ancient mystery. Look at that building. Bro, what were they doing? 4,100 year old, massive teered shrine lined with giant staircases. How weird, man. Dude, our timeline is way more interesting than anyone even understands. It really is. It really is when you get into ancient history. Yeah. It's so strange, especially when you read their stories. And like all the Anu Naki and Nephi Lim stuff. And then you see the buildings they were creating. Or the doors that are so huge or the steps that are too big for people to go up. Put it back up, Jamie. It says, mysterious military bases near ancient sites. US established military zones near ancient Mesopotamian ruins, such as Ur. How do you say that? Nineveh and Babylon. Some speculate this was to prevent independent researchers from accessing the sites. Control the information. The alleged time warp incident. Some claim that strange time anomalies and electromagnetic disturbances were reported by soldiers in Iraq, further supporting the idea of an active portal or advanced technology buried underground. Is there any scientific basis for a Stargate in Iran? How could there be lack of physical evidence, no concrete rule, you don't have access. Mythological misinterpretations, humanitarian texts describe the Anu Naki as deities, but scholars believe these are mythological representations rather than historical accounts of extraterrestrial beings. Okay, but that's just someone's opinion. And scholars are notoriously poopy pants. When it stops you're all pleased. Notariously poopy pants when you get a coming out. Yeah, they don't like to change their opinions on shit. No confirmed technological technology retrieval, despite years of military presence in Iraq, no official reports have suggested that any advanced technology was discovered. But if it was, where would it go? Defense cock tractors. Right? The same thing is like the UFOs. Like if they really did have a crash UFO and I'm in the middle of a great book, Richard Dolan has a, let me find the name of this. So I'm fucking up. It is UFOs for the 21st century mind. Why can't I fucking talk today? But there's a lot of stuff in there that I had never considered before. And one of them, when they were talking about the crash UFOs, they did a bunch of like high altitude explosions of nuclear bombs in the 1950s. They like just shot them up 150 miles into the sky and then blew them up. They did it a bunch of times. Like you could have easily fucked up a UFO if they didn't know you were doing that. If they had no reason to believe and they just hover in there watching Earth and then also I'd boom. It's interesting to me because you remember when we had the balloon? What is this? What is this? These are CIA reports. I don't know how accurate they are, but it's a report nonetheless. Creation Day 2016, documentary release dates is 98. Read the first paragraph. I think if you can, it's hard to read, it's weird. Where should I read it from? The third line of weather, it'd be a problem. Hold on, it said something about whether rainstorms would be a problem in the southern area in three to five days. Some heavy equipment movement is anticipated in near term in Kuwait within one of three days. Iraq will launch missiles into Saudi Arabia areas. They keep going. Front line troops will not advance future potential strikes may occur in areas B where Iraq Army will have two special weapons. Some type of quote interference device that causes electronical mechanical mist, quote, freeze up. Some type of energetic beam type of device that may be located in the sand area. See figure one. Whoa. Preemptive action is not anticipated until February 91. Surprise attack may occur at any time from Kuwait. Whatever energetic beam under the sand, that's where I was. Huh. See like activity in the vicinity of Mecca. Just like this is a strange document pop up at the moment. Oh, it's a lot of time. Is this a legit document? Again. Yeah, who knows, right? Yeah. This is a FOIA document. So as it comes from the Stargate collection. Huh. So such an interest. Also, if I was, if I had a print in paper, some shit that's like super top secret that no one's supposed to know that we have, I would say Iraq has it. So we could use it on them. Yeah. Blame it and say, oh, yeah, Iraq had some beam weapon. Yeah. That was it. And it was destroyed. We destroyed it. Especially if you're putting in a paper where you know people could read it later on because the FOIA requests. Well, they probably didn't anticipate that, right? But but then on top of that, it's like, I mean, they overestimated the Iraq Army's capabilities as it is, right? Like that was one of the things about it. Like they were always like, like Hicks had a joke about it. It's the fourth largest army in the world. He's like, yeah, well, after the first two, there's a real big drop off. Yeah, for sure. Salvation Army's number three. Yeah. I loved him. Man. Well, that was a great joke about that because like that, that was a cakewalk that that first Iraq war. It was just they went in, fucked everything up. The war was over really quick. So imagine how disgusting a human being could have to be to invade another country, find secrets that changes the way human beings would view our history. Yeah. And the history of technology that has existed here, like completely remaps the entire landscape. We imagine driving the hide it. Yeah. Well, that's the whole Vatican library. Oh, yeah. Like what's in there? Right. What's in there? I want to know what's in there, dude. I've seen that Tibetan one. No. Oh, what's crazy? There's this ancient Tibetan library and there's this video that's got walking past these, fucking thousands of years old, these texts. And they're all in these bound books on these shelves and nobody's touching. See if you can find the video back in the box. Why is it going wrong? Why is it going wrong? What's in there? What about the library of Alexandria, which are all the secrets of Egypt were in there? All the probably depictions of how they built the pyramids, who did it when it happened? Racing our... Whether or not they found them already built, that's a real possibility. Claim of 10,000 year old Tibet library find not worth paper, it's written on. But there is some sort of a Tibet library. I'm not saying it's 10,000 years old, but I think it's 1,000 years old. It was just, there was a library of these ancient books. Like this. Is that real? That bullshit? That's bullshit. Oh, okay. That's not exactly the one that I saw, but it was just like that, but it wasn't... How it goes, I, A, I probably took that photo and animated. Now that's been going around a lot. Oh, no, no. Yeah, but this is a, like at least a year ago. What I had seen. But it might have been bullshit then. It might have been a different kind of bullshit. Not AI, AI bullshit's gonna make everything impossible. Have you ever heard that most wars are about erasing history? Like most of them? Like a lot of wars are about erasing our history, going in their destroying areas that have like a connection to the past. And that's a big part of World War II was just destroy all this old history, so nobody learns about it. And knock it all down and rebuild it. There is a video of 40,000 volumes. Okay. Scrippshers, but I don't know what they are. I think this is exactly the video that I saw. That is so crazy. Okay. So this is a Tibetan Buddhist library. And does it say all those things are pretty amazing though? But it's just kind of freaky to think that you're even reading a piece of paper that was handwritten by some of 1,000 years ago. You know, what's that joke? How long that thing goes? Oh, the Hannah's. Look at 10,000 books. I imagine if they decipher it and it's all porn. It's all just, and then she took on five guys. It's all just like 50 shades of gray, written over and over and over again. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. It's crazy out there, man. What's going on in the world right now? It's nuts. And it's just like, I think something, I think what's going on, God does it's crazy. I think it's props. The world right now is nuts and it's just like, I think something, I think what's going on, Gaza is crazy. I think it prophesies that. So I wanted to tell you about this. So I have about eight guys from high school that I'm on a text thread all the time. We talk all the time. It's kind of where I got my ability to kill hecklers because we just sh** talked each other forever. Like we stopped fighting at one age and we just started annihilating each other. So then it's just like natural to me. Like what's trauma as a kid sometimes becomes your strength as an adult? So I got really good. Every time I fly home, they just light me up. It feels so good, right? So I go to college. My friend Tony, he goes to L for he comes back against religion, right? And he is in every summer. I go home from college. He would sit down and we'd talk spirituality and he would always tell me things he learned. Well, one time like in the late 90s, they bring me out to their church is having a band, guys in the church are in the band. And had the God dude, they're singing songs about in the late 90s about two towers coming down. Had the guy, remember hearing that going, that's kind of crazy. And then 9-11 happens. I go, well, that's some prophecy. So Tony always tells build the world trades in our towers. It took a long time. But when did they build them? When would they officially opened? 60s. And dude, there's a great video. I have an Instagram that breaks down in all 9-11. It's this animation. It's so fucking good. So do you think that those planes were remote controlled? I would take it. I would take, they were missiles that look like planes over passenger planes. Yes. Because you saw the way that it was flying. Yeah, a blue, like a band turn, fly like that. If you talk to pilots, it's impossible to go at that speed in a passenger plane that low, that fast. It's just, and you talk to people who, you talk to pilots, they say they could never have done that. There is technology for them to take over the plane because it's supposed to stop a hijack. They can take over the plane and cockpit from the flight. That's definitely possible. But I think they were military missile planes if that's what hit the planes. If that's what hit. So what happens to the actual planes themselves under your theory? I mean, everything could be just a story laid down. I think the story of the 19 hijackers is just another layer of deceit. You know, that they set a foundation for this story. They want us to buy. Yeah, but Sam, the people did die and the planes did crash. I'm not saying they did. I mean, it doesn't make any sense because it looks like a plane. It flies like a plane. It leaves the exact airport. They track it. They know where it's going. It flies into the top. Studying the operation north, would they literally tell you what they're going to do? I know that. Which is what they fly to know. I know that operation north, woods. They had a drone plane and they were going to blow it up and blame the Cubans. I know that. So what that tells us is they had drone planes in 1963, which is kind of crazy. That is kind of crazy. And that was signed by a joint chief, staff, and vetoed by Canada. But why would you think it's a missile and not just a drone plane? A drone plane. It's possible to drone plane, but I think it's a flying like a plane. Like what makes more sense to me is that they took over a plane and remote control, whoever there is, whether it's the terrorists or whatever demonic entities, took over the remote control plane and flew that motherfucker into those towers. I don't necessarily know. I mean, yeah, that's definitely possible. That makes more sense. The thing that didn't make sense to me was like, the box cutter thing is weird. Because just a massive people, you're going to take a chance. There's not some big guys on the plane that are going to overwhelm you. You're going to get access to everything with box cutters. Maybe you would, maybe with the right plane, but with the wrong plane, I could see you're getting fucked up by a group of hard men. Yeah, you know, if you get a plane on the plane's now to the people acting crazy, all the guys jumping up and you can just catch the wrong fucking plane. Like the fact you would just take a chance like that that you're playing involved being able to control people with box cutters. There's only a few of you, right? How many guys were on each plane? Yeah. I mean, there's what four planes is 19 hijackers. I mean, break it up into four or five guys every plane. It's hard. And then like there's just numerology. Five guys with razors is harder. You're studying the numerology 911. It's all Elster Crowley, occult rituals, the plane numbers, how many floors, how many feet the pentagon is. You go deeper in the rabbit holes and I like to go. I like to go like three cores the way down and go, yeah, the sucks. And then I get out of there. Yeah, I know, but go all the way to the bottom, which I don't know is always accurate. But it's the world's ran by sorcerers. And once you start to realize that it everything's a rich man's trick. Listen, just because the guy who's the head of the world economic forum looks like a wizard. Just because he dresses like a wizard in a fucking hobbit movie doesn't mean he's into the dark. I mean, study Michael church. He dresses exactly what I would dress except for when he's at five was in the dark arts. Have you ever seen him at the beach? Yeah, no, you never seen, you're not going to believe. I know you're not, no, he's not. He's in a, he's in a bride long parade in the hat. No, yes, let me see. I do it looks exactly like, you're not going to believe it, but I totally think this is one of them images you found online because I think I've seen this one. And I said, oh, that's it. He's in a dick cage. I think he's walking in a dick cage. Come on, look at that. Tell me that's not him. That's not him. Do we hear that? We're, it's a fake photo. I thought what? What do you mean? How do you know? You just looked at it. Oh, right. Oh, right. Or says, okay, then if writer says because they have a photo, let me see the photo. That's it. Right there. That ain't him. But that's pixelated, dude. You find a good picture of him. It looks exactly like that. That guy is into the weird, you're the head of the WEF. You're into the weirdest shit. Yeah, but he's not going to go out. Come on, dude. Yeah, he looks like, I'm the looks like a younger guy. Look at that. You're telling me that guy. Go to the back, same guy. No, make a little bigger. No, it does. No, no, it does not look like them. The guy's a different chin draw structure. Go to the other guy. That's different. This guy has a lot more jowls. No, no, no, he has a lot more jowls. He looks a lot older. This guy looks like a, like a 60 year old freak and he looks like an 80 year old. But that Democrats keep you young. No, he's not young in these, any of these photos. But in that photo, that's a different guy. That's a different human. Someone's just being funny. Like that ain't in me there. Imagine you're doppelgangerous. That weird, that gay and there's just pictures of him doing weird shit on you. Yeah. One of my favorite characters in the Biden Chronicles was that one bald headed guy with lipstick that was stealing women's clothes. Oh, that guy was the best. I thought someone addresses like that. We'll be fucking weird. Not only steals the clothes, where's the clothes to like, giant events where people, one lady's like, that's my dress. Well, she's a designer. It was a one off. It was a one off dress. Like it had to be her dress. That was some deal. But imagine like seeing that guy and going, I think he's got a shit together. He should be running the government. But like, you know what? The, you know what? This security system needs trans. That's what we was in his job. Was that guy's job? I thought he had something to do with the FAA or something like that. That's, that's some crazy. That Rachel Levine. Oh, she was another one. Like what is this craziness? Well, that's what I always say. Like, you know, it's like everyone about Trump right now and all the stuff going on with them. I got a difference between Trump's cabinet and Kamala Harris's Trump's all closeted, neo cons and Kamala's would be BLM fat, fat, fat, feminist and trans. That would be the difference between who's standing behind them. Yeah. It's, it's, it's all the same shit. It's two wings of the same bird. Now I like Trump more than I like, come on, these people are just absolutely ridiculous thinking it would be anything different. It's a completely corrupted system at this point. 100% completely corrupted and no one in like six months, whatever Trump's been in by now or four years or even eight years is going to totally untangle it. No, it's so deep and it's at every single level. Every single level, dude. And that's what the internet did. Took our eyes off me. Took our eyes off. I bet it'd be a great pocket. I just go and that guy should be in the US government. I've been saying, that's what I've been saying. Take a plea deal. What's that? Department of Energy. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. That's what I want to run the power. Check out them win, Milson. Look at that, dude. We're lit thick. It's not fun. And then sending them to represent us at all these like international conferences. I wouldn't care if he was good at his job. It didn't steal women's clothes. I wouldn't care. Like if you want to show up for work. I don't wear a good job. Yeah, but I mean, yeah, I don't want either one of those things. But I mean, if you just show up and you work with hard, but you want to wear a dress like, okay, Mike likes wearing dresses. I don't care. Like why would I care? I'm wearing shorts. Yeah, it's kind of the same. It's not much different. There's a, oh, there's a little piece of cloth that tucks under your taint. Yep. It's so much different than a skirt. I would wear bajamas if people would let me. I'd love to do a good job. And you had a regular job and you wore bajamas. Like, what gives a fuck? Yeah, he's a weird one. Sam, where's bajamas that they stand up? In the way, they like to expect certain jobs, like to expect, if you wear a suit, you're going to behave differently. You know, more professional. I've got a suit on. I can't be bothered with normal talk. Right? Like if you just showed up with shorts and a t-shirt like Mike's not even serious. Look at him. He's dressed like a fucking idiot. Yeah. Like you dress a certain way. And they think of you as a different kind of person. Yeah, 100%. So I was watching this video the other day and it was about how actors way back in the day. Looks so much older. Oh, yeah. Like the guy from all in the family was 46. I know. And then actors say are 56. Looked like their kids. Yeah. And they were talking about it's because everyone smoked all the time and they all wore like, like suits and proper clothes that made them work out. No one worked out. Yeah. No one. So when you hit 46, it was like, yeah, we're, you know, as a nation, we're getting fatter and fatter, but there's also a segment that is getting more jacked and jacked. Did you jits who guys across fit guys to tie boxing dudes? They, you know, they're all getting more, more fucking shredded than ever. Yes, there are a lot fat people. But there's also, in my opinion, way more in shape people too, because they're just more people. I would agree there's more in shape people now than ever before. But I think the average person isn't worse shape the average. There's like outliers, people that work out all the time. And there's more of those than ever before. But we're getting fucking poisoned. We're getting our food is terrible. This is one of the more never the opportunity. Junior thing was one of the most important things of this administration. I thought, like, get in there and find out how do these companies have this grip on what they're putting in the American diet? At least companies have this grip on what medications they're making sure that you take every year. And how many, you know, and they're not responsible at all for the adverse effects like this is crazy. And like him getting in there and just trying to at least untangle some of that fucking evil octopus mess, just all the different tentacles of control. And the fact that they're telling you, oh, we know these dies cause cancer and you can't use them anywhere else in the world. But we have to use them here. It'll hurt our company. Yeah, that's crazy. And it's the same company that makes stuff that they send a candidate doesn't have the dies. It's nuts. It's crazy. Or how, you know, I saw Ian Carroll talking about this, how they have a drug that causes hair loss. And then the same company sells you stuff that will help your hair grow back. Yeah, well, this company's right now that are working on drugs that help people that have heart inflammation from myocarditis and issues with heart repair. There's a particular NBA legend named Cremo Du Jabar who, during the whole COVID stuff was like he was going after LeBron James really hard about not getting the shot. And now when I listen because I'm old, I still listen to sports talk radio. You know, um, he's doing commercials for heart problems. Like that's the craziest storyline I've ever seen in my life, the guy who was guilty and everybody. And this was the guy who was a civil rights leader who's doing commercials for heart problems in what way? Like what are the commercials? Heart, fibiotose, can you look up a Cremo Du Jabar heart, heart commercials? He's talking about how he's eight, eight fib? He is. Yes. But this was the guy who was who was full on in a civil rights movement who understands would have a great understanding of the black community's relationship with pharmaceutical companies and what, you know, that famous thing where they let everybody have syphilis forever. And then they sent like black nurses to convince them. Yeah, a fab. So he was a guy who was pushing everybody. Oh, dude, that's so crazy. It's with Pfizer too. And he was the guy who was pushing everybody to get, uh, to get the jab. He was like, he was like really going after LeBron James who didn't want to do it. And then I'm now he's doing these commercials, which is so crazy to me. But did he have that before he got jabbed? I never heard of that. It's possible. But I never heard of it, but it's crazy. They've done both sides of that. Yeah, it is kind of crazy, but a lot of older people got real scared. That's one of the things that happened. A lot of old people when COVID came around got real scared and they wanted to believe that the pharmaceutical drug companies had an answer. And they didn't want to hear any nonsense from the anti-vaxxers. Well, you saw they rolled it out, right? You're like, it started with China. And we saw these videos of people falling down. Yeah. Even though they'd never happened when everybody got COVID here until what they got the jab, right? And then we started seeing people, God, God, you know. So you watch how they were slow rolls these sigh ups out. The crazy thing is watching the compilation of all the newscastrous faint. How about when they see something and they freak out and then they fall down. That's the weirdest thing. When they all weird, dude, it's all weird. It's weird that we all watched it in real time. The Heather McDonald video, I mean, it's almost like the universe had a script, right? The Heather McDonald video in particular, she's like, I got all the jab. Boom. Black, I mean, it was nuts. It was like the perfect punch line at the right time. You know, if you want to have evidence of assimilation, like that seems fake. That's so crazy. It was called on camera. Crazy. And then she falls back and you know something going on because she doesn't try to brace herself at all. It was so bad. It's I feel for her. I like her. Well, that was a bad fall man. Scary, scary fall. But it's just crazy how it lined up that way and crazy how it brought to you by Pfizer. You see those commercial, I mean, those compilations, rather, of all the different newscasters falling over. It's like, wow. And no one, no one got suspicious other than these weirdos online. All the no news, cats, people, species, no media people got suspicious. New York times and gets suspicious. How many soccer players are dropping dead? What's going on? Healthy athletes having hard attacks. How many people are just having how to attacks when they're 18 years old? Was never happened before? What the fuck is going on? And no one wants to admit that they made a terrible mistake and that they got duped. So they continue to do the work of the people that duped them. They're like, they're vampire, they got bit by the vampire and they're trying to bite other people. It's weird. It's, yeah. Have you ever heard, okay, this is a really weird conspiracy. No, from you. No fucking ways. I don't believe you. The Chinese. The emulation. Have you ever looked into that? Oh, that the population's actually a lot lower than the side of it is. Yes. And that there's all this, all this data that kind of lines up like the amount of funeral homes have quadrupled. The China's lied about the amount, they made all these, they listed all these fake kids going school that aren't really going school. And the weird one is the amount of salt that they they've imported from China from Japan has gone down half. So all these people go to China. All these guys tours vloggers and they're like, there's nobody around. There's nobody, there's nobody here. Where is everybody? This is because if you go to India, right, we saw them, how many people they pack in there to see that that that a target graphic land on the moon. Look how many people are in there. But they, you see this over and over again when people go to China, they're like, there's nobody around here. Well, I think there's parts of it that are very unpopular, but you know what? I was always been the weirdest conspiracy for me with China is the great wall. All how we're faces. Yeah. The turrets where they shoot arrows from that's facing inward, inward, not outward, not like to guard people from coming over the wall that way. It's the other way. Yeah. Which is like, okay, who, who designed this? What were you doing? Yeah. You tried to accomplish. Why would you, why would you have a turn towards the China? Right. So they're like, like China. Yeah. That doesn't even make any sense. Yeah. It's kind of like when you look at like, I don't know, like a camp, right? And they have the, or a prison. They, the people they want to keep in, they, they put all the, the wire and stuff this way. So you can't crawl out. Yeah. So it's the same thing with that. Did you see how long it is to? It is pretty. Isn't it? What is the full length? I think it's 14,000 miles. Imagine 14,000 miles of stone wall built by hand over hundreds of years. And you, you have the openings for arrows pointed towards the people? Yeah. Have you ever seen old, old pictures of like it being built? No. People building it is our like, demons and shit like that. It's like very weird. Dude. What? Yeah. I was talking about, I've got all drawings. Yeah. I've drawings of the, the, the, the great wall of China being built and so much being built like by demons, you know, something about the, turrets or whatever. They're on either all sides or multiple sides, not just facing in. But sometimes they're just facing in. I don't know. Because this, this guy did a whole video on this whole stretch of the great wall where it faces in. What is the click on that? Let's see what it's like. It's like talking about youtubers sensationalizing stuff. Oh, okay. Mm. Well, the thing is it's also, again, 14,000 miles, right? Yeah. And so some of it probably towards change, right? Right. Right. Sometimes, you know, you, you see that? Cause like I, I'm our meaning. I'm from the village of Vaughn. I'm rushing our meaning. And at that time, it was in Turkey. Bro, look at this, 13,170 miles. That's so crazy. How long was it take for you to build that? Or ever, imagine if you live forever and like Sam, you can live forever, but you have to rebuild the great wall of China. Oh, but if you do, don't worry. You live forever. It's going to take you a long time. But once you're done, you'll be free. There's a sale long and two. Yeah. You do it. No, I don't want to live forever. You don't know. I don't think we're meant to live forever. I think we're meant to come here, finish a task, wrap it up. Yeah, I think so too. And I, you know, this whole thing about extending life forever sounds miserable to me. It is weird that all these techno people are about to grasp the ability to do something that has never been done before and is very strange. Like if you can change a human body and you can enter some sort of a chip into that person's brain that gives them entire access to the internet instantaneously telepathic language, you know, who knows what kind of ability to control electronic devices and all kinds of different things. And someone gets to decide whether or not that happens to the human race. Yeah. Because once it happens, you're not putting that cork back on the bottle. It's out. It's going to give an advantage to people. So everyone's going to want to do it. You don't want to be a regular meat ape when all these fucking geniuses are around here reading your pin number from your mind. They're doing that. They're doing that with babies now. They can test IQs already. They're doing genetic tests because these really rich people want super smart kids. So they're making sure that the IQ of the baby is at a super high level. It was also that thing in China they did where they altered the baby's genes to make them smarter. Yeah. We're going to have genetically modified human beings for sure in the next one. If they're now right here, but I mean, they're going to be like for everyone's going to look like for everyone is going to look like, you know, fill in the blank, whatever you're into too much gets an ass on the internet. It's going to be amazing. It's going to be such a good time. There's going to be no sixes. Yeah. It's just going to be initially it'll be adopted by the rich, but then it'll be just be like cell phones. In the beginning, you know, fucking Mike Douglas had that big aloe os fucking stupid thing on the beach in green. Now that's a joke, right? Now everybody has a phone. You go to the jungle people have phones. There's fat homeless people with iPhones. Everyone has phones. iPhone. That's why they're never going to have a revolution when you have fat homeless people with iPhones. Like, yeah, and they have no money. They live in a fast life. That's how comfortable it is. We're just comfortable enough not to get upset. Sam Triplett, I got to wrap this up. I love you to death. I don't agree with everything you said though. Come on, everybody. I'm always right. Last thing I want to tell you is that Gaza, Europe will go in and regulate it. And that is the prediction I want to give you. That that is your process regulate Gaza. That's prophesying. Yes. It's, it's, and then it's basically going to be into, it's been prophesied. There will be a war between the pagans and the lost tribes, the lost tribes. And you go through this whole someone go to research this further. Let me just tell you this. I'll give you the name of it. I got a P we got to wrap this up. This is tell me what it is. I just got to give it a hold of my P for five minutes. Okay. I appreciate you, dude. I'll give you the name right now. Here we go. You can go to the Living Church of God. It's YouTube at Tamarrel's world. It's all been prophesied. England, the United States and Israel versus the pagans. The pagans will be led like before the Assyrians who are now Germany. If it turns out to be true, I'll bring you back. Put the prediction. That will be my third prediction. I've gotten right. I love you so much. Thank you so much. I always love seeing my brother always doing it. All right. Bye, everybody.