The general gonna experience well the scare us because it's because it's yeah, you're feeling one movie Oh my god, that to me is the scary scary movie ever what's it moves terrifying Is it close encounters of the fourth kind that takes place in Alaska? Well, they they they combine the actual footage of the woman's real therapy sessions and stuff. I don't know Close encounters of the fourth kind. It's it's third or fourth kind which one's the original movie third kind So this one's fourth kind. I'm almost I'm almost heard probably wrong. I never heard of it It's a really good move. There's a woman up in I want to say I want to say Juneau or no no no What's the uh, no known? Alaska and back in the day she was She became famous because she claimed aliens were basically like showing up and abducting her and stuff right eventually Her kid got abducted by aliens or so that's the case and they accused her of like Killing the kid or whatever. Maybe it obviously nobody believes that this woman's son was abductor daughter was abducted by aliens It's not currently available in our country. It's a Watson Canada. I think it's showing up weird. You don't only get in Canada. I don't know It's strange Interesting but they have it's it's a movie about this case, but they splice in Real footage of her therapy session that she had to go to that she was going to while she was being abducted each night And they like they do this um, I don't really know how to describe it this deep meditative state They make you recall your dreams and she's like describing all the things that were happening to her these aliens She starts screaming she starts like Levitating up from the couch a little bit like it's like it's creepy as shit. It's a really good movie It's my favorite abduction movie I've ever seen and obviously nobody believes there she runs into the one person Oh, yeah, like the the that old footage is like the real footage. Wow So Here's my issue with the alien abduction thing other than there's not like any real solid evidence that you point to that's very convincing It always happens at night and it always happens during the periods where people sleep and when you're sleeping I'm not saying always okay. I'm sure there's some stories out there. I'm sorry But most of the stories I've ever heard are people in there bad. They can't move aliens abduct them or they're in a car the car stops they wake up Aliens adopted them When you go to sleep and you dream there are psychedelic chemicals that your brain makes and we don't know How much they're making we don't know what effect that's having on your dreams We don't know what is going on what is going on with dreams? What is going on with vivid dreams? What is going on with dreams that are They're indissernible from real life in sometimes in a strange way Like what is that is that a psychedelic state your brain goes into every night? Yeah, and if chemicals vary in human beings serotonin varies dopamine varies everything varies testosterone varies estrogen varies it varies We can just assume those psychedelic chemicals would vary and we wouldn't you just assume that sometimes maybe even people are in? very agitated anxiety written states high quarters all levels perhaps maybe Those chemicals are coming out in abundance to now if you're lying in bed and you're having an Insanely vivid and terrifying Interaction with aliens every night because your brain is just dumping psychedelics into you This is your big fears you're gonna get up to my aliens again, and then they are Leading over your bed for your constant paranoia And then here's the the the mind fuck of all mind fucks maybe psychedelics are a gateway to some other reality some other dimension that's accessible by these creatures like this and That when you are getting abducted you really are getting abducted like whatever your being is or your spirit or whatever is you is getting You're interacting with these things and it feels real because it is real and because we're thinking about The ability to come in contact with other life forms is being a physical thing It it might be that there's a chemical gateway in your mind that when breached you enter into a dimension Where physical bodies don't exist anymore and everything moves in this constant soup of geometric patterns and that Whatever your consciousness is whatever your soul is is decoupled from the body and thrown into this realm I imagine that's probably what happens at death. It probably is what happens with death. It's probably what what it's all I mean, that's probably why people think about it that way that you're gonna transcend into heaven You're gonna go into this new place. It might be true. It might be like a lot of the old depictions of like what happens when you Enter into a psychedelic state. I've heard this multiple times that it's like a well of souls that you're interacting with souls that are like completely Unattached to a physical presence. Yeah and Maybe that is maybe you're getting layers and layers of that depending upon how fucked up you are where you sleep and and Maybe some of those layers are boom aliens in the room with healed back Just aliens in the room with you and maybe they can do that. Maybe they can visit you while you're in those states Maybe that's what's happening too