One of the most frustrating parts of the  information overload that we live in now where things are constantly coming at us through  our phones is that we never get a resolution to some of the biggest stories of our time.  Something will just explode. It'll happen. Well, that's amazing. I can't believe that. And you'll  have about 4 hours to think about what happened and its implications. Then you're on to the  next thing. That's just the nature of having too much information. Now, whether that's by  design, whether we're being overloaded as part of some diabolical plan to keep us distracted, or  whether that's a natural byproduct of technology, unrestrained technology, it's not clear, and it  probably doesn't matter because that's the daily lived experience of most Americans. Something  huge will happen. You'll form an impression of it. It's not clear whether that's a correct  impression or not, and then we'll move on. And this is true even of really big events.  The biggest mass shooting in American history, took place a little less than nine years ago, 2017  in Las Vegas, and some guy apparently opened fire on a concert right below him. You remember this?  867 people were injured. 60 were killed by gunfire at least. And there was an FBI investigation and  the authorities stared into the camera. And so we're going to get to the bottom of this. And  the normal parasites showed up telling us that, you know, the lesson is we have too many guns in  this country. Guns are the problem. You shouldn't have a gun because a lunatic shot people in Las  Vegas or whatever. They took advantage of the tragedy to push their own agendas. And then  that's kind of last we heard of it. Who was this guy? Some guy. Steven Paddock. Some guy. What  was his motive? Unclear. Didn't leave a manifesto. So we don't really know. There seems to be some  evidence that the official story is false. Nah, it's fine. And then because we were so distracted  with all the other things that were taking place at the time, no one ever really followed  up in a satisfactory way. And so even now, the largest mass shooting in American history is  solved officially. But do we have a satisfactory answer that explains why it happened? No, we  don't. We're not even close to that. In fact, the answer that we do have may be completely different  from the actual answer we don't know and no one is actively trying to find out because again we're  on to the next thing and so on and so on and so on with almost every big news story over the past  I don't know 15 years more and there's kind of no way to change this because there's not enough  time in life to go back and reverse engineer what we thought we knew about the most significant  moments in American history but there are a few of them that are worth pressing on even though years  have passed. And one of them, one of the top ones after 9/11, which is the most important story of  our lives because it completely changed America, the structure of America. But after that, you'd  have to say that January 6th is near the top of the list. Why? Well, a bunch of reasons. Most  obviously, because January 6th produced the single largest federal criminal investigation in American  history. almost every single FBI field office was involved in tracking down the perpetrators of this  insurrection in which many policemen were murdered and so on and so forth. Well, almost every one  of those details turned out to be a lie. It was not actually an insurrection. No one was armed. No  one had a gun. There's no such thing as an unarmed insurrection. Can't insurrect if you're unarmed.  And no police officers were murdered that day. In fact, the only person shot to death that day  was a protester who was shot to death by a cop, a capital policeman called Michael Bird. Her name  was Ashley Babbett. You're familiar with the the rough outline of this. But the one fact that  is true is that this did produce the largest FBI investigation in American history. Something  5,000 agents were involved. And in the end, they arrested about 1,500 people on federal crimes.  And a bunch of those people went to jail. Now, not everybody who is involved that day on camera,  provably involved, including people who encouraged others to breach the capital, to go inside to  break an obvious law by going into a locked federal building. Not all of those people wound up  being charged or serving jail time. Nick Fentes, for example, was on camera encouraging people  to storm the capital. He wasn't punished for that apparently. Certainly didn't serve any jail  time over it. Ray Eps didn't serve any jail time over it. Same thing. What is that? Maybe just a  weird anomaly where the feds spent years in the again largest domestic criminal investigation  in American history, charged 1500 people with federal crimes, but just missed a couple who were  on camera encouraging others to break the law. You know, things happen. Bureaucracies are famously  inefficient. Maybe they just kind of forgot those guys or maybe something else was going on. We're  still arguing about that. But lost in all of this debate, and you'll remember there wasn't much  debate about January 6th at first. Everybody was appalled by it. It was an insurrection.  Republicans were appalled by it. When Ashley Bird was killed, there were Republican senators who  applauded the shooting of an unarmed woman, an Air Force veteran, by a cop with a record of reckless  behavior. Michael Bird. They were just happy she was dead because she was threatening them somehow.  She was like 5'2 and unarmed woman and she was shot to death for no justifiable reason. But  they were happy. Republicans were happy. And why were they happy? Well, because they're a lot  of them are basically authoritarian, of course, but because they felt threatened. They're such  physical cowards that Ashley Babbot her presence threatened them apparently. So almost nobody  really asked these questions at first and the few who did were strongly discouraged from asking  those questions. They were defending violence or vandalism or whatever insurrection. But over time  it became clear that the purpose of the exercise was to discredit Donald Trump who had just lost  the election. Remember this all took place on the day the vote was being certified. accuse him of  trying to overturn the results of that election, get him impeached and convicted, and thereby  prevent him from ever running for office again. The purpose of the whole exercise, at least the  aftermath, the propaganda, the lies that attached to the events subsequently, the purpose of that  was to solve the Trump problem once and for all. Like, he's gone. He will never darken our city  with a shadow again. We're not going to have to deal with that. all the uncomfortable questions  about our foreign policy or our economic policy like no more Trump and both parties could get  behind that. In fact, they strongly were both behind that. This is before they subverted Trump  and somehow brought him to their side. Who knows how that happened. We've addressed that in other  episodes. But the point is we now know with some clarity and certainty that January 6 was not in  fact an insurrection against the Congress. It was an insurrection by the Congress, by Permanent  Washington against the population and that's really really clear. But there was one part of  that story that was really never resolved at all one way or the other. And it was uh a widely  reported facet and then soon forgotten part of the story in which somebody planted pipe bombs like  uniomber type pipe bombs pipes with explosives outside the Republican National Committee and  the Democratic National Committee the morning of 9/11. And this is one of those stories again  that right away in the first hours after the fake insurrection happened. News outlets told you  about it and then they kind of stopped reporting on it. And then we learned maybe a year later that  Kla Harris was at the DNC when the pipe bomb was found, but somehow she never mentioned it and you  began to think it's not clear what happened there, but probably not what they told us. And by the  way, why haven't they answered the question, who did this? This is Capitol Hill. This  is Washington DC. This is one of the most surveiled places on planet Earth. There are very  few physical spots on Capitol Hill where you're not being monitored by cameras where there's no  CCTV recording your movements. And of course, now with advances in technology, facial recognition,  but others, it should be pretty easy to find out who planted bombs on Capitol Hill. especially if  you've got the largest domestic law enforcement investigation in American history trying to find  out. But instead, there was basically silence until a guy called Darren Bey, who ran at the time  a website called Revolver News, ran a piece that asked that question like, "Wait, why haven't they  solved this? And what was that? How would that be connected to the events of January 6th if this was  in fact an insurrection by Trump voters against the system itself against the United States  of America? This is like a modern Fort Sumpter preceding a civil war and that's literally what  they told us it was. They tried to overthrow the government. Okay. Now, how did that fit in? What  did that have to do with it? And the explanation that the Biden administration gave sort of to the  extent they talked about it was well this was an effort to distract people law enforcement from the  insurrection that was happening at the capital. They would set off these bombs outside the two  party headquarters. Law enforcement would rush there and the insurrectionists would continue to I  don't know what sit at Nancy Pelosy's desk wander aimlessly around the Senate which is what actually  happened. didn't didn't actually do anything, but whatever, except get shot. But that's kind  of where they left it. But this piece by Darren Bey raised the possibility that of course, and  once you thought about this was clearly true, of course, federal law enforcement know exactly who  planted bombs in front of the party headquarters. What made January 6th different from all other  widely publicized crimes in our lifetimes is that it was a crime committed not against private  citizens. It wasn't like shooting people at a country music concert in Las Vegas, injuring 867  of them. I mean, that's sad, of course, but what does that have to do with Washington? What does it  have to do with us? What does that have to people who run the country? Now, those are like whatever  country music fans probably voted for Trump. Like, it's sad. Sad. Maybe we can use her deaths  to advocate for disarming the population, but it's not really a threat to anyone's power.  Just the opposite, actually. January 6th was at least construed, and I think a lot of  the people who repeated the propaganda convinced themselves this was an actual threat  to bipartisan Washington, not just to Democrats, but to Republicans. Lindsey Graham was every bit  as upset as Chuck Schumer because it was a threat to the symbol of their power, the Congress, which  once upon a time was called the people's house and was called the people's house as a reminder that  actually the purpose of all of this is to serve the owners of the country, which is not members  of Congress, 535 stewards of the country. It's the people who vote for them, the citizens. They  own all of this. So they own by definition the Congress itself, the people's house. That's  not the prevailing attitude in Washington, which needless to say is we own all of this.  And you're here for some purpose, increasingly unclear. Labor has no value thanks to AI. So, it's  not like you're actually doing anything for us. You're kind of in the way. And the last thing we  want is for you to like pipe up and criticize us or get in the way of whatever our plans might be.  you're just kind of annoying hecklers spoiling the play that we're putting on for our own amusement.  And so shut up. And by the way, if you refuse to shut up and if you get really mouthy about it and  show up with bullhorns at our house, not yours, not the people's, our house, we're going to put  you in prison and we're going to deny you bail. And for the overwhelming majority of you who can't  afford competent counsel, we're going to give you public defenders who hate you, who ensure that  you're going to be stuck in some roachinfested hell hole. For example, DC City Jail. So that's  that's what happened. But the pipe bomb question hung in the air. How could they not know who did  that? They're highly motivated to track down the perpetrators, but somehow not that interested in  solving a crime, a attempted bombing of the two political headquarters didn't make any sense at  all. As Darren Bey bravely and correctly pointed out several years ago, but still the Washington  Post, the New York Times didn't seem to have a lot of interest in solving this crime or in pushing  federal law enforcement to solve the crime. like where what's the status of this? How many hours of  CCTV footage do you have? Have you looked at it? Have you run it against your facial recognition  software? Why can't you find the person who did this? You know you can. Why aren't you? And so  it really took, I don't know, four or five years until a reporter called Steve Baker, who at the  time worked for The Blaze, really set about trying to answer this question. And as you're about  to hear in our interview with Steve Baker, he went to some lengths to solve the riddle. And he  may or may not have solved it. I mean, we're not weighing in on that. And his conclusions are now  the subject of a pretty well publicized lawsuit. So, not only is it not our place to weigh in on  it, just want to make it clear we're not weighing in on it, but it certainly is an inspiration to  the rest of us that we should probably get to the bottom of this. So, Steve Baker spends quite  a long time trying to figure this out and he thinks he figures it out and he names somebody  wrongly or not. And within literally days, after years of not solving this crime, federal  authorities arrest a guy who they claim did it. And he is by all descriptions some apparently  autistic guy, black guy, and they spun this whole story and he confessed to the crime and  like we can rest easy now. He did it because who knows what? He's transgender. Who knows? I can't  even remember what the excuse was for why this guy did it. And a lot of people who know the guy  pretty well like yeah I know he didn't do that. Like [snorts] that's that's absurd. But you know  we're not going to weigh that cuz we don't know. What we do know is that after years of apparently  not doing anything to solve this crime which is primopaciacia a serious crime. Bombing the party  headquarters on Capitol Hill. Yeah that's serious. the Department of Justice like just solved  it in about 10 minutes after Steve Baker throws out another hypothesis as to who did it.  A federal employee. That's his theory. So, we're not quite sure what to make of this other than a  reminder that no US citizen has an obligation to take the word of anyone in an official capacity  in authority and particularly not in federal law enforcement as gospel. Just because they say it  does not mean it's true. Obviously, just because anybody says anything doesn't mean it's true.  People lie. Not always. Hopefully, not often, but they do sometimes. We know that. and people  in authority have motive to lie, particularly when they're covering up something that they did in the  first place. And that may be the macro lesson of this. There has been no effort really and no  pressure to provoke an effort really to find out who is behind these supposed pipe bombings. In  part because everyone in Washington is potentially implicated in this. If it turned out that January  6 was not an entirely organic, maybe partly organic, but not an entirely organic event. If it  turned out that it was to some extent, maybe not wholly, but in part staged or encouraged by people  with a completely different agenda, an agenda that included sabotaging Trump's political career going  forward, then the perpetrators wouldn't just be the Democratic party, they would be the majority  of Republican leadership. It would be a bipartisan effort. And that may be the real takeaway here.  What we're looking at on January 6, what we're looking at in the Iran war, what we're looking at  in the total mismanagement of the US economy for most of our lives is not a partisan question.  It's not like one party took control, got both houses of Congress and the White House, packed  the Supreme Court, and went crazy. It's that the leaders of both parties, not their voters, but the  leaders of both parties in Washington had a very similar vision for what they wanted, how it might  benefit them, and they did it. not in opposition to each other but in consensus in agreement with  each other. That is the unavoidable conclusion. If you look at the past, say 40 years of American  history, not that the parties are bitterly at odds, but that they are secretly in collusion.  How could you reach another conclusion if you look at the outcome? You probably couldn't. But  this specific story, well, not related to economic reform policy, is a kind of window into the wall  of resistance that you bump up against when you start asking questions about, hey, what is going  on here? America's 250th anniversary is here, and it presents a great opportunity to consider why  our national culture matters. Being an American is not something to be ashamed of. We should all  be proud to live here. And the same goes for being a Christian. This July 4th, the Hallow app, which  is the best prayer app ever, is launching the American Heroes Challenge. It's a 13-day journey,  and it takes listeners through the lives of the people who shaped this country, but whose stories  are not in history textbooks, because they just don't fit. These stories are amazing. Tales of  Native Americans, the Declaration of Independence, World War [music] I, even 9/11. These stories tie  together history and faith that will affirm your faith. It's not a feel-good history lesson. It's  a July 4th invitation to look at people who lived with courage and to encourage us to strive to do  the same. Download Hallow free for 3 months at hallow.com/tucker and do this challenge. We  loved it. You will love it. With that, here is Steve Baker. And just once again, we're not  endorsing his claims because of course we don't know if they're true, but we wanted to air them  when almost nobody else was willing to because we think it's worth letting viewers decide, does  that make sense? Can't know if it's true. Can't know really if most things are true. But you can  assess the evidence that we can confirm and come to your own conclusions about what it means. and  you should because in this case it matters. With that, here's Steve Baker. Steve Baker, thank  you very much for doing this. Thank you. Um, now we have some distance between uh right now  and January 6th. I think you know as much or more about it than anybody. Can you just describe it  in general? What was January 6th in retrospect? Uh, I like to couch it in this preface is I saw  a lot of people doing bad things that day. Yes. I saw a lot of people doing good things. You were  there. I was there. Yeah. I've been prosecuted for being there. Yep. Uh, I saw a lot of otherwise  good people doing some stupid things that day, but that's true on both sides of the police line.  Yep. Now, you were one of the first people to have access to the treasure trove of that alleged  41,000 hours worth of video. I think that was back in gosh that was back in February of 23, something  like that. Something like that. And um in fact, in fact, uh you had a couple of your producers  called me to ask me what they needed to be looking at. And uh you took the um the Lieutenant Tar  Johnson story, uh that you did on your second week or second day of that. Uh that was my  suggestion. And the truth of the matter is is that it was a setup what happened at the capital.  It was manipulated. It was engineered. And there is incredible amount of disinformation on  both sides of the line. It doesn't matter whether you're on the left. It doesn't matter  if you're on the right. whether you're MAGA, whether you're um on the sedition hunters side  of the ledger, doesn't matter. Tremendous amount of wrong information on both sides. And one of the  things that I've endeavored to do because I've had more access to the video than any other journalist  in the world. I've I've spent more time in there, not only myself, but teams of other journalists  working with me that we've gone in there with focused um intentions and knowing what we were  looking for. and then obviously surprised by many things. Like for instance, one of the biggest  pieces of misinformation on the right is that the doors were thrown open by the capital police  and people were waved into the capital. That's not true. All seven of the doors that were breached  at the capital were breached from the inside by the protesters who first went through the broken  windows on that northwest Senate wing door that we've famously seen. Now, after that, in an effort  to deescalate, once the the building was overrun, Capitol police did hold doors open for people. And  you that was one of your first videos was showing the um uh the shaman being led to the Senate  Yes. chamber and the cop opened the door for him. And that was a brilliant reveal. They did  do those kinds of things, but not until later, not until after the capital was breached. And  that's one of the mistakes that again the right makes. The biggest mistake that the left makes is  they are convinced by the narrow presentation of video that they saw because they'll tell you, I  mean my critics will tell from the left will say, "You can't gaslight me. I saw it with my own eyes.  I was watching it live. I know what happened." No, you don't. You saw a very narrow narrowly focused  battle scene. There were only like between 80 and 100 people who did any violence that day at all.  Out of the hundreds of thousands of people that went to the Capitol that day, only 80 Tucker. But  if you show the same battle scene from this angle, that angle, this angle, this camera, that camera,  and you show it over and over and over and over again relentlessly for 5 years, then they believe  that they know what they've seen. But they don't. Not until you've seen all of the other footage,  which we have endeavored to do. I don't think anybody can see 40,000 hours worth of video, but  we've seen the most important parts of it. And that's why I can honestly sit before anybody  again on the right or the left and go, "No, that's not correct." And the right has a lot wrong  as well. What they do have right is that it was a fedsurrection, but I don't think it was set up  by the FBI. I believe, and I've talked about this before, so this isn't a big revelation. I'll give  you a couple of those later. But this this is and was a s a setup that was designed and manipulated  by elements of the department of defense, capital police, and the CIA to take down. It was  a furtherance of the CIA and the intelligence community operation to take Trump out from ever  being in politics ever again. And so the idea was to provoke something so awful that he he he would  be stain well maybe legally prohibited by right uh conviction on an impeachment trial but otherwise  so stained that he could never run again. That's exactly what the intent and the purpose was and it  was uh manipulated from the very beginning. I mean look you've you've done stories and all of us want  to avoid defamation lawsuits but I'm kind of past that point now. [laughter] Uh but you know if if  we started from the very beginning and revisited every aspect of January 6, this would have to be a  you know 20 part series today and we're not going to do that. Well, give us some indication of why  you've concluded it was a setup. The the first thing that happened and I I was there that day. I  captured my own video and as I was driving home on the 7th from DC to um uh Raleigh, North Carolina  where I live, we started hearing about the arrests that were already being made and the drag net  was already thrown the next day. We're hearing about on the radio television on the drive home.  So I didn't go home. I actually called a friend of mine, special operator, United States Army, and  said, "Hey, I need a place to crash for a few days because before I get arrested, thinking that for  sure, because I went inside the capital building that that would happen, even though I went in  with a camera and in the intent of following the story where the story went as a journalist,  not as a rioter and I never did any rioting, the or any violence or anything of uh uh of that  type, but because of the types of people that for being arrested. I thought, "Okay, well, I need to  go hide out somewhere. I need to write my story. I need to publish my videos, go through them all,  and then when I get my story out, [snorts] they can come get me." So, the first thing I did is I  started going through frame by frame analyzing my own video. And so I'm staying with a tier one  special operator and he's, you know, standing over my shoulder looking at the videos that I  have and he's pointing to the screen and going, "Okay, now watch him. This is his job. Watch  watch what he does here." And and I'm like, "What are you what are you talking about?" He's  got a sandwich in one hand and a cup of coffee in the other hand. He goes, "Yeah, watch watch what  happens right here. Watch." He does that. Now he disappears into the crowd. Now watch her. This is  what she does. No, this is her job. And and I'm seeing this through another set of eyes. And what  are you talking about? He goes, "Well, this is what we do overseas. This is how we incite color  revolution overseas. We're trained to do that." And so while I'm in the my fiveday process  of going through all of my stuff and writing my first story about January 6, which which  was 9,500 words, what I saw that day, what I experienced that day. Um, one of these times he's  leaning over my shoulder. He says, "Oh, you know, we were there that day." And again, I'm like,  "What?" He said, "Yeah, we had boots on the ground that day." Meaning the National Guard waiting down  the street? No. Meaning special operators from the US Army in plain clothes. In plain clothes.  And so my second article, which came out about 6 weeks afterwards, I actually revealed for the  first time that elements of our special forces were in the crowd. Now, I didn't portray them as  being uh, you know, there for nefarious reasons or doing anything wrong. In fact, I even said it  very well could be that they were there, you know, to take care of business in case things did get  out of hand, but they weren't there in their capacity as private citizens and Trump voters.  That's correct. Now, there were there were mil we know that for a fact. I mean, there were enlisted  people, retired military. Um, Babbot was a former Air Force enlisted. Uh, there were FBI agents  there as private. There were ATF agents there, private capacity. There were Trump supporters  from all of the bureaus and agencies and this that and the other thing within the federal government  that were there in private capacities and many of them were arrested and charged. Some of them did  time in prison. And and so uh in this particular situation though, I learned through my own work  and through my access to that community is that uh we had elements there of a very very uh  elite nature from our special operators and I just published that they were there. Now nobody  believed me. Nobody wanted to believe me. I got highly criticized for that. They've been ordered  to be there. Yes. Yes. And then exactly one year later, a writer for Newsweek, gentleman by the  name of William Arkin on the first anniversary of January 6, published an article. The headline  was secret commandos with shoot tokill orders at January 6. That's the headline, the Newsweek  story. It's still online. You can look it up. It took me over two years before Arkin would  even respond to me because I wanted, you know, look, I wanted to maybe pick his brain. He could  pick mine. He could share with me what he knew, what I know, and he wouldn't talk to me. When he  finally responded, he was very hostile toward me, very antagonistic. He says, "I feel like you've  been trying to set me up." Like, I'm not trying to set you up. I'm just I want to colleague  to colleague share what we know about that very thing. And he actually I have it I have the  screenshot from the the DM communication with him where he denied that it ever even happened. Yeah.  He goes he goes that was uh it never happened. Well, you wrote about it. It's still online. If it  never happened, how come it's not been retracted? Yeah. It just never happened. He disavowed his  own story. That's correct. Cost of living is already making it hard to live here and it's not  getting any better. Unfortunately, it's likely to get worse. And a lot of Americans fill the gap  with credit cards, not just for fancy dinners, but to cover things like groceries and bills. That  is a disaster. It's understandable, but don't go down that road because there is a tax in effect a  survival tax of 20% interest [music] or more. Why would you do that? Why would you hand money to the  big banks when you could keep it for your family? Our friends at American Financing have a better  way. If you're looking to buy your first home or refinance your current one, they're helping  Americans achieve the dream of home ownership with monthly mortgage rates currently in the fives.  American Financing saves its customers an average of 800 bucks per month. That's nearly 10 grand  every [music] year back to you. This isn't just a loan. It's a total financial reset. So, debt  is tough, but there's a smart way to do it and a reckless, self-destructive way to do it. credit  cards. And so we recommend American Financing. They're salary based, not commissionbased,  which means they actually work for you, not the banks. They're called America's Home  for Home Loans for a reason. Call 8006855696. 800685-55696 or visit americananfinancing.net/tucker. Has uh  the Pentagon ever admitted that this took place? No. uh because the Pentagon won't even admit that  this particular unit exists. Now, you've had a member of your that unit sitting at your table  here recently. H uh they don't exist. Um that was one of the things that made this very difficult  was first of all, you know, when when you write a story, you have to call and you know how it is.  You have to call get spokesperson on the record. Yeah. Disavowing or saying something or commenting  about whatever, whether it's the FBI, CIA, DoD. Well, when you call the DoD and you ask them  about this particular unit out of Fort Belvoir, just outside of DC, we don't know what you're  talking about. There's no such unit. Well, there is such a unit. And the special operators  community is well aware of who they are. And they don't have a name, not a real name. They have  a variety of names that they go by. They're typically uh universally referred to within their  community as TFO or Task Force Orange. There's been books written about them. Um, uh, they have  variously been called the unit, the activity, and other things throughout the years. But they do,  what's their job? They operate domestically. They have a couple of jobs. Uh, they are, uh, they're  not supposed to operate domestically. Not at all, as none [clears throat] of the United States, you  know, armed forces are except for National Guard. And so um there's the signal intelligence group  that's uh mostly if I and and and they'll believe me they'll correct me when I get little minor  details wrong but the signal intelligence part of them they're most of them are out of Fort me and  these are the guys I mean look these are these are the most elite of the elite of the elite now they  don't look like Navy Seals they don't look like Delta Force guys they're typically smaller they  use their brains uh their training is much more uh in the way of uh surviving through isolation  and They're they become deep inserts into uh uh jurisdictions around the world where we're not  supposed to exist. We're not supposed to operate, that sort of thing. And they they typically are on  the front edge. They leave before Delta Force and SEALs are ever deployed. These guys, the unit, the  activity TFO have been there already for a long time. Uh and they have to survive that without  contact. And they're all all of them are polygots. uh one of my closest friends and deepest  sources uh within that community. He he speaks eight languages, five of them native  as he says, and they're all highly trained, all have specialization. They're all smart. IQ  is off the charts. So, they're not the you know, right, uh the meaty kind,000 push-ups. That's not  them. But they run marathons and everything about them is is is they're trained for endurance and  isolation. H is their greatest skill. What was their job on January 6th? I don't know. I still  haven't found that out. But you found out early that there were current members on duty members  of the US military in the crowd. Yes. Dressed in civilian clothes. What's the CIA's connection to  the events of that day? I I believe that Well, look, you go back to the 51 intel Yes. leaders  who signed intel officers who denied that Hunter Biden's laptop was Hunter Biden's etc etc.  Yes, this is all part of that same operation downstream from Mark Millie. Yep. Trump's,  you know, chairman joint chiefs of staff. Y um the I believe that um certain very high ranking  elements in the capital police were obviously in on this. We know that now from our video. We've  we've discovered this from the video review, Tucker. I don't I don't have to pull this out of  my ass. It's in the videos. And we've released a lot of it. And a lot more of it is coming.  But we know that the Capitol police were ground soldiers that day. Not all of them. The frontline  officers, they were doing their job. Yep. In fact, I I one of my very first stories and I and I I  got this from my own camera was that the Capitol police were I called them sacrificial lambs that  day or pawns. I I use the word pond, sacrificial ponds. And the reason why I said that is when I  was on the front line with my camera and had my camera in these young officers faces that had just  been called to the front line of this battle that was just breaking out on the west lower west  terrace there at the capital. They had fear in their eyes and they had no protection. They had no  body armor. They had no goggles. They had no face, you know, gas masks. They had no helmets. That's  another story right there. Their helmets had been collected two weeks before were taken up. They  were ordered to turn their helmets in. Yes, that's a whole other story that we've done  work on. That's why I said we could do a 20- part series on this. This is so complex. But  my thought about these young frontline capital police officers real quick, you can go, you can  be a capital police officer for 30 years, and I'm not being critical. I know they're accused of  being uh, you know, glorified mall cops, that sort of thing, tour guides. But you can go 30 years at  the Capitol Police and basically never do anything other than Yes, ma'am. The restrooms this way.  Yes. Um, unlike Metropolitan Police Department who the city of Washington, right, DC police, that  police force knocks heads every day for sure. They have to deal with most of the riots. And so I saw  these young kids being called to the front line facing actual real violence because there was  real violence that day. And my next thought was what they're seeing coming at them over  my shoulder. And for instance, the the uh uh Capitol Police Lieutenant Tar Johnson who you  interviewed. Yes. um he called his wife and said, "Tell the kids I love them. I'm not coming home  today. This is, you know, we're we're dying here today." And that's what they thought because all  of the sudden there's this handful of just a few dozen people violently attacking the front line of  officers, but they see tens of thousands of people over my shoulder coming at them, not [clears  throat] knowing what their intentions were. They were scared. They were scared to death.  Yeah. And some of them overreacted. So, I have a lot of I have a lot of sympathy for  these frontline officers because they were not um they didn't get briefings that morning. Uh  they were under under manned, understaffed on purpose. Uh January 6 every four years is  supposed to be an all boots on the ground day for the capital police. They're supposed  to work double shifts. As a matter of fact, that's policy. That's department policy for  first amendment protest days. The Capitol police themselves had issued and signed off on  six permits for protest on the property that day and they did not inform their officers that  they had issued permits that day. Jeez. How many uh federal agents in plane clothes were in  the crowd that day? Do we know? Unknown. Um, you have to separate that. You know, we heard the  reports a few months ago about the 247 that Patel, this is one of the actual truths that Cash Patel  is told about that day is that there were 24ome uh FBI agents that were called in for crowd  control. But Tucker, they didn't arrive till after 4:00. Those orders were issued late. These were  not the undercovers. These were not the ones that that's reported were doing nefarious activities.  These were people with no crowd control training whatsoever. The FBI is not trained for that. A  special agent in the FBI is not trained for crowd control. Yeah. They're not bouncers. And they  showed up with their FBI jackets on, their FBI ball caps, their vests. Uh some of them had put on  their uh ballistic vests, that kind of thing. But it all was emlazing with FBI. These were not the  plane. Okay. All FBI are playing clothes except for the, you know, the uh SWAT teams. all of them.  And so when [clears throat] you say that they were plain clothes, that doesn't mean undercover,  but they showed up with their FBI, you know, big yellow letters all over their their gear. And  I was there. I I videoed them as they arrived, but I also videoed the SWAT team that was already  there early on. It was it was FBI SWAT team that were um trying to save Ashley Babbot's life down  in the lower level of the capital. Yeah. walked right past her body. You did? Yes. I got her on  I got her. I have I'm the one that published the video of her being extracted out the Yes. south  door. That's my video. Christians ought to be safe in the Holy Land of all places. But they are  not. Keep in mind, these are the descendants of the first converts, the first people who followed  Jesus, people whose families have worshiped in the land Jesus walked for centuries, for thousands  of years. And these same people are now facing enormous pressure to leave, fleeing their homes  amid war and anti-Christian terrorism. Untold numbers of innocents are lost and without hope,  fellow Christians. But how do you support them? There are groups out there who claim to support  them whose real agenda is to move them out of their actual homeland. We think that's wrong. We  think that's evil, in fact. And so we've looked far and wide to find a group that is actually  supporting Christians in the Middle [music] East. And we found one. It's called the Vulnerable  People Project, VPP. It's one of the very few groups consistently helping vulnerable Christians  throughout the Holy Land. They deliver food and water to Christian communities trapped in Gaza for  example. They help rescue civilians. They provide emergency aid to families who have nowhere else  to turn. Today they are helping Christian churches and families safely remain in the communities  where their ancestors worshiped Jesus. There should be a lot of groups doing this and trust  us we have looked for over a year now and there aren't. But the Vulnerable People Project is  doing exactly that and their work makes an amazing difference in people's lives. A gift of  just $33 helps provide a day of protection and support for the vulnerable Christians in the West  Bank. Who's looking out for them? Nobody. Well, they are. A monthly gift of $83 helps sustain that  protection throughout the month. So visit save westbankchristians.com and stand with Christians  in the land where Christianity began. That's save westbankchristians.com. We are proud to partner  with them. Thank you. Um so we don't know. So the 240 FBI agents number is not relevant to  the question of to what extent was this a setup that 247 are absolutely irrelevant and that's  another thing that the right gets wrong if I can car if I have to characterize the two narratives  about January 6. That's one that they get wrong. But but the the relevant question is how many  people in the crowd pretending to be protesters were actually working for the federal government.  Correct. And we don't have that answer. We don't have that number. The FBI could tell us  that number. They know that number. First of all, we know that there was 20some CHS's that they  have told us about confidential human sources actively working with CIA hand I mean I'm sorry  FBI handlers as they were embedded in the various organizations whether the Proud Boys or the  Oathkeepers or 3enters or whatever. We know that uh we don't I believe there was a much higher  number than that that they've not revealed. And then of course there were the oper operatives.  The other thing, and I'm not trying I'm not trying to give FBI any grace in this, but the truth of  the matter is is if you've got a crowd size of my estimate was that the total crowd size was between  400,000 600,000 people at the capital that day. Damn. actual Capitol police officers who testified  in the crowd said that as they looked out over the sea of people, it was, this is a quote from the  trials, it was a crowd as large as any inaugural event I have ever attended. That means it's big,  really big. And so, um, now the press still says that there were only 30,000 people in in DC  that day. They they've held to that number. Um, and that's incorrect. Then you've got people that  exaggerate and say there were two million people, but there weren't. So you have this situation  where in a sit in a crowd of that size anytime, you're going to have elements of all of the  federal law enforcement agencies and departments and bureaus are going to be there. They're going  to have counter surveillance teams in the crowd and we want them there. They're sniffing for  bombs. They're they're looking for nerd elves. They they know the signs. They're trained for that  very thing. And we want them there just as we want them in Time Square, you know, on New Year's Eve,  just as we want them in any large event. Sure. Cuz they're there to protect the public. What  you don't want is plain closed federal agents or confidential human sources stirring up mayhem,  provoking violence or actual trained provocators. Provocators in the crowd. Were there? Absolutely.  Was Ray Eps one of them? I believe he was. I mean that look the circumstantial evidence is there.  I mean, look, you know the story intimately about Ray Eps. Um, he kept threatening to sue  me, but never did. Yeah. Well, he he probably doesn't want to go through discovery. I would  I suspect that's true. Absolutely. But I mean, look, we we don't need to relive his case, but  the obvious is the obvious. He was number 16 on the FBI's January 6 most wanted list. And then  suddenly he wasn't and suddenly disappeared. And suddenly the New York Times comes out Alan  Foyer and does a puff piece article on him and gosh when did that come out? Summer of 22. And  they made him the sympathetic character. I never forget it. Yeah. It's incredible. How does how  does the guy that is the most open most person calling people to go into the capital, how does  he become the sympathetic character of the left and never get charged? You know, eventually  eventually, right? But but with minor charges. He never even had to come into never got charged  with anything. No, which is kind of crazy since Nick Fuentes was calling people to rush the  capital. What is that? a lot of people there a lot there's there's characters that are on video  and there's a there's a tremendous amount of video beyond the Capitol police CCTV which by the way  that video has no you know CCTV as you know has no audio but the body cam footage the news camera  footages the insane amount of iPhone footage that have been collected for discovery in all these  trials so we hear tons and tons of characters that are calling for violence calling for people  to attack law enforcement, to storm the capital, this that and the other thing. And so many of  those have never been arrested. Is that true? Absolutely. Meanwhile, you were and I was correct.  And what were you charged with? [laughter] So when when the FBI first interviewed me in October  of 21, a month later, the uh US attorney, assistant US attorney who had my case, notified  my attorney in Raleigh, that his client was going to be charged within the week. This was the week  before Thanksgiving of 21. And they listed the charges. They were going to charge me with, I kid  you not, interstate racketeering. To my knowledge, I was the only one of everybody in the whole  January uh 6 drag net prosecutions weaponization of our government against all of us that was going  to be charged with racketeering. And basically the case that they were going to make is that because  I as an independent journalist blogger had made money from the licensing of my videos, HBO uh  licensed my videos. Uh New York Times licensed my videos for their documentary. Uh others all  over the world licensed some of my videos. And you know, you don't give much [clears throat] money  for, you know, it's like uh the the the standard rate is $1,000 per minute. Well, so when they when  they use six seconds of your video, you're not getting a lot of money. No. So So uh uh that was  the only thing that we could conclude. And then so what we did is we did a major press offensive. So  this was the week before Thanksgiving. On Monday of Thanksgiving week, we sent out about 200 press  releases to all manner of media and saying that, you know, journalist is being prosecuted for his  journalism on January 6th being me. And the DOJ backed off and we didn't hear from them again for  even though they said I was going to be arrested Thanksgiving week. We have this in writing by  the way, still do. They said I was going to be arrested the week of Thanksgiving of 21. We didn't  hear from them again till 20 months later when I got a grand jury subpoena. 20 months. 20 months.  They went dead silent. Would not even respond to my attorneys. That's so wrong. That is not a  free country when they act like that. Left me in the lurch like that for that long. And then  it was until uh after the grand jury subpoena, it was another 8 months before they did actually  arrest me. And I Where did they arrest you? I uh I was working for the Blaze at the time and I  was in Dallas where the Blaze headquarters was. That was kind of pre-planned when they when they  told us what the what the date of my uh voluntary submission to the FBI. We chose to do that in  Dallas so that we could get it all on camera. And uh I submitted myself to the FBI field office  in Dallas. And then they uh processed me there, handcuffed me. That's where they captured my  perk walk per burp walk on camera. And then they took me down to the federal courthouse in Dallas.  You charged with a felony? Nope, I wasn't. I was charged with four misdemeanors. Ultimately, that's  they charged me with the basic four. You know, parading um [clears throat] what I call glorified  trespassing, disorderly conduct. Well, they do that, but there wasn't any. In fact, that was the  other advantage that we had. Even before my arrest through the blaze, we released all 37 minutes  of me in the capital behaving like a journalist, stopping, taking notes, camera, this that. I mean,  my entire 37 minutes are on YouTube. You're going to go watch it right now. And so, what happened?  Um, ultimately, I uh had a trial date set that was exactly one week after the 204 election.  I had Are you serious? Yeah. So, I have um my pre-trial hearing was the day after the election  and Judge Christopher Cooper, which by the way, the same judge who just made uh made them tank  take Trump's name off of the Kennedy Center, uh same judge, he um [clears throat] he hated me.  He really wanted to put me in jail for what? Um uh my journalism walking in a building you owned  to commit journalism. Wait till you hear what he said in my hearing. So the day after the election,  he was obviously in a bad mood because Trump won and he shot down every one of our motions. I  mean, it would not allow allow me to present a selective prosecution defense. And that was going  to be our primary defense is because we were going to force the government to explain why the other  80s something journalists that came in from the outside into the inside of the capital that day  and followed the story where the story went, why weren't they prosecuted? All the people that work  for the New York Times, Washington Post, LA Times, etc., etc., they were not arrested. Correct. Not  arrested, not charged with anything. Why were they not? And yet I was. So that was going to be our  argument. And the judge totally said, "You're not you're not going to do a selective prosecution  and you cannot present a First Amendment case in this courtroom. [laughter] You can't appeal to the  Constitution of your own country." That's correct. So, uh, as soon as we got off of the pre-trial  hearing, it was a Zoom call. I got on another Zoom call with my attorneys, four of them, and  immediately two of my attorneys who are former federal prosecutors themselves said, "Look,  you understand that this trial is going to be nothing but a shaming exercise against you." And I  said, "Yeah, I've been covering the trials. I know exactly what they're going to do. I'm not doing  it." Informed the court, informed the DOJ that I'm pleading guilty to all four misdemeanor  charges. And what was the penalty? Well, so this was now a So my pre-trial hearing was  the day after the election. My beginning of my court date was supposed to be the very next week,  exactly one week after the election. The next day, we got a message from Charlie Kirk because he was  on the transition team and he said directly to me, "Your pardon is a done deal. Don't  worry about it. It's all taken care of." So, I had that knowledge and that information  going into my trial date and um I rolled the dice. That's why I plead guilty to all four rather than  going through the humiliation exercise. And so, we were in the hearing and at the end  of that pleading guilty to all four, the judge asked the clerk, "When is Mr. Baker's um  um sentencing hearing and she typed in, she goes, "Mr. Baker, sentencing hearing will be March  6th." He goes, "Okay." He said, "Mr. Baker, your sentencing hearing is going to be  on March 6th of uh next year." He said, "But since I probably will not see you in March,"  he knew the he knew the pardons were coming as well. All of the all of those judges did. They  all knew it that the pardons were coming. He said, 'Since I won't see you in March, he said, and I'm  and I quote, "I'm going to hazard to deliver to you the remarks that I would normally give at your  sentencing hearing." And then he dressed me down for the next seven or eight minutes. I have the  transcript for my journal. He never mentioned one thing I was charged with. Never mentioned anything  that I did or said at the capital. The only thing he did was my post January 6 um uh or talked about  was my post January 6 journalism in which I had referred to the weaponization of the Department  of Justice and the bias of this court and he spent seven or eight minutes defending the court against  my journalism. Not one word about my This is nuts charges. Nuts. We have I have it all. It's all  have I have the transcripts. Wow. So, you never went to jail? No. Uh, I I did not get a pardon. I  got a case dismissal with prejudice because in the federal system, until you are um sentenced, you're  not convicted, right? Because that's when the paperwork basically is filed. And uh so I was uh  it's for me it's like it never happened. I mean, it did. I went through three years of hell with  that, but yeah. And the cost I can't even imagine. Um, wow. I don't think that got enough attention  at the time. I was one of the high-profile cases. I actually had a bevy of mainstream  media journalists from the Washington Post, AP and uh, W USA 9 and everything were there in  my in my hearing. They were there. And in fact, in the press conference afterwards outside the  courthouse, I actually looked at the the guy from the Washington Post, Spencer Hugh, and I  said, "You were in there. You heard what the judge said. He criticized me for my journalism,  not for what I did on January." What did Spencer Hugh of the Washington Post say? He went, "Yeah,  yeah, you're right." And then his article that came out later that day was incredibly fair.  Good. Yeah. So it was I don't know but it was months many months after uh January 6th that  I first became aware of the mystery of the two pipe bombs left on Capitol Hill that morning. It  was a piece I think by Darren Bey and Revolver. Mhm. Um and so that was at least four years ago  and I don't think we're any closer to or I'm not any closer to understanding what that was. Can you  describe the story like what was publicly conveyed about those pipe bombs and then tell the story  about what you think actually happened? Yeah. What what the public believes happened was that a  nefarious individual planted uh these uh devices, these weapons of mass destruction at both the  Republican National Committee headquarters and the Democratic National Committee headquarters.  And that uh a lot of people believe that those were to be used in case uh we couldn't stop the  uh you know we you know the uh the people who stormed the capital that day insurrectionist right  the insurrectionist which I was accused of being uh couldn't stop the vote that day or the the  confirmation of the electoral college vote that they were going to blow blow the bombs. That was  the initial thought and that was of course the the way the press breathlessly presented this,  right? Um that's not at all what happened. Let's just start with the very beginning. So this  is but here's what we know or we read that day or the next day. Two bombs, two explosive  devices were found outside in front of the RNC and the DNC on Capitol Hill on January 6th.  Correct. Correct. Okay. Yes. Now everything starts breaking down from there. First of all, we  now know in hindsight from actual FBI agents who were tasked to that investigation that they were  told by leadership that the devices were inert. individuals that are familiar with bomb  making and bomb training from all of the federal agencies have said looking at  the photographs and looking at the FBI's uh forensic report which came out a week  later. I have I have the entire report said that these were typical training devices. H  they were not bombs. They were not bombs. One of the FBI whistleblowers famously said they  would have been bombs if they had been bombs. And and so we now know that despite what the  FBI continues to say about the devices being dangerous, being the having the potential to do  great harm and bodily, in fact, they've charged the guy that they've arrested with weapons of  mass destruction and terrorism. But I mean, when it was first reported, it was reported as as  an act of terrorism. Yes. But you're saying the FBI knew right away or Absolutely. They knew they  were not bombs. Yeah. They they knew on the day of that they were not bombs. Why would they lie about  that? Um I don't think that the FBI was brought into the lie until the investigation began and  then that's when the blob informed the blob that we must protect the blob. Yes. And that's where  we are today. Well, that's how things actually work. That's how it's not partisan. No, it's not  one agency. It's not a rogue agency or a rogue politician. It is the system protecting itself.  And by the way, I I stole the blob analogy from Mike Benz who actually did the work for Darren  Bey back on the pipeline. I did and I should have said that. I should have said that. And so  the uh the first that was the first breakdown. The second breakdown is is then in the timing. So  the discovery of the devices, the first one was discovered 25 minutes before the bicameal meeting  of Congress and the gavl dropped by Vice President Pence at 1:00. So the first bomb was discovered  25 minutes before that. All right. Um then the second device was discovered 5 minutes after 1:00.  Well, chief police son or a c chief of police, capital police son who you've interviewed a couple  of times, uh he absolutely says that those were diversionary devices. Those were meant to divert  resources from the capital already, as I mentioned earlier, extremely depleted. There's on January  6, there were 2,000 unifor uniformed officers with the capital police. less than 250 were on duty  that day despite the fact there were all these six or something registered protests. Despite  the fact that the assistant chief of police, Yogan the Pitman had signed off on six legally  permitted protest events on the capital grounds. Yogan Pitman who went on to get rewarded by Nancy  Pelosi with a job at the Berkeley University of California at Berkeley. Yeah. Um tells you so  much. Uh okay. So, but these bombs were or these devices were found right around the time of the  vote. Correct. And the rest of us thought that it was like it was almost like the anthrax attacks  before 9/11. Like we knew, right, or after 911. We knew something terrible was going on, but there  were never any details. Yeah. Well, here's another interesting aspect of the timing. So, not only  did the gavvel drop at one o'clock, those six permits all began at one o'clock. Now, Trump had  messed up the schedule because he arrived at the stage at the Ellipse an hour late. So, he was  supposed to take the stage and begin his speech, his hourlong speech at 11:00 a.m. He did not take  the stage until 11:57. All right. Then, he went over his time. He did not leave the stage till  1:16 p.m. By then, the first breaches had already happened. The first battle lines had already been  established and the first launching of less than lethals into the crowd were already taking place  before the president ever left the stage. all those early people, including Ray Eps, including  about um 50 former Marines that were on that front line, had already breached the barricades, had  already started taunting and attacking police. And um and now you have two calls over the police  radio, which we have. We have an entire uh uh all day of the police radio and the calls go  out. They need reinforcements at the RNC and the DNC because that's within both of those buildings  or within the capital police jurisdiction. So they had to divert this already depleted um force and  that's why we know that they were diversionary devices and that was the point was to pull law  enforcement away. So at the same time that capital police are going to the other locations. Now you  have the arrival of metropolitan police are now showing up at the capital. They're streaming in.  They're coming in to kick butt. The fighting gets worse and worse and worse. And as I said, good  people on both sides of the line, bad people on both sides of the line. And the uh the next thing  that we know, and this is what's really important is in the aftermath of the devices, is what we  learned from video. And this is the single most important thing that we learned from video. First  of all, is we saw the reaction to the discovery of the device at the DNC. Now, we did not see the  reaction because the Capitol police has never showed us or the FBI has never showed us any video  in the alleyway behind the RNC. No, the device was actually behind the Capitol Hill Club, you know,  Republican hangout kind of next door and attached to the RNC. Um, there's allegedly no camera there,  but there is. I'll get to that here in a minute. But at the DNC, we see a um Thomas Massie likes  to call him uh the the two counter surveillance officers that work for the capital police.  Undercover, plain clothes, counter surveillance officers, capital police, and they work for the  intel department of the capital police. One of them Massie calls man bun guy cuz he wearing a man  bun and the other one he calls backpack guy. Well, back guy went to the two SUVs that were guarding  the parking deck entrance of the DNC. Why were they there? Because then Vice President-elect  Kla Harris was inside the DNC, not where she was supposed to be, by the way. She's supposed to  be over at the capital, which is another very, very strange aspect of this entire story is she's  being coronated over at the capital and she's a voting senator and she's not there. H at 1:00  she's inside the DNC. So, the Secret Service have swept that building already. Human assets, dogs,  they've swept that entire side. We found on video at 8:30 in the morning 8 9 10 Secret Service  walking right past where the bomb allegedly was found. That bomb was in the wide open. It  could not have not been seen. It could not have uh not been found by bomb dogs. It could not have  not been found by not to mention the pedestrians that were walking by it all day long. It's wide  open right there. It wasn't hidden behind a bush. At 105, backpack guy, counter surveillance  officer with the C capital police goes over to the SUVs. He informs the Secret  Service agent sitting inside the two SUVs, um, we just found a, you know,  bomb, sus suspicious device. The reaction of the Secret Service agents is the  most suspicious thing that makes made all of our mind. Uh Darren Bey, uh Mike Benz, anybody else  who's done any work on the on the pipe bomb knows that when you're informed that there's a bomb  sitting 10 ft from you, you don't sit in the SUV and finish your sandwich for two and a half  minutes. [laughter] No. No. And then when they get out, they casually walk around. They don't stop  traffic. Now, there's protocol. Okay, these guys are trained. Every one of these agencies, bureaus  are all trained on what to do when suspicious devices are found. They have to set up um uh  perimeters cord on off certain amount depending upon the the type of device they think it is. It  could be 700 ft. It could be 2,000 ft. Yeah. It's a bomb. It's a bomb. So within a matter of feet,  they don't have any concern for their own safety whatsoever. They're allowing families to continue  walking 10 ft past the bomb down the sidewalk. Man, and we know for a fact that they were told it  was a bomb. Absolutely. Okay. Well, then I don't believe that they were told that, though. This  is what this is what we've been told. I believed, and I've said this from the very beginning, the  only thing that explains their reaction or lack of reaction thereof was the fact that they were  told by the capital police guys, hey, look, uh, we're in the middle of a training exercise. So,  we've got these, you know, devices over here. Um, we're going to have to start the dog and pony  show here a little bit. The bomb squad's going to come out. We're going to have the robot and all  that. Oh, no. No. Go ahead and finish your lunch. That's the only thing that explains the reaction.  And it's why that Kla Harris, despite being there at the time and talking about January 6  constantly, like it was Pearl Harbor plus 911, never publicly said a word about the fact she was  there. Now, you would think Kla Harris would be bragging, I survived January, I survived a bombing  attempt from the radical right white right-wing supremacists or whatever. Instead, it took a  year before Newsweek uh not Newsweek, um Politico revealed that she was even in the building.  Right. That's right. Entire year. So, I think we can say based on everything that you said pretty  confidently, these were not bombs. These were not bombs. Right. How'd they get there? This is where  we have a real struggle because we have the videos of this dark figure, this gray, you know, hoodied  figure walking through that area around the RNC and DNC on the night of the 5th. Both. What's  that? Both on both sides. Same same individual caught on camera. multiple multiple cameras all  you know they're caught on ring cams caught on the DNC cameras caught on capital CCTV cameras um  this this figure comes out of nowhere at 7:34 p.m. Plants both devices and then disappears through  a secret gate by the way at 8:18 p.m. Um through a secret gate. Mhm. What is that? in the alleyway  behind the RNC and there's residences be in that alleyway. Yeah. Um uh and businesses and there the  the actual alley is called Rumsy Court and at the opposite end of the long alleyway from where the  RNC and the Capitol Hill Club are is a Catholic church and there's a garden on on the other side  of a fence. Well, if you don't know where the gate is, because it's a hidden latch and the the gate,  it completely and perfectly blends in with the fence. So, if you're not a resident, you don't  know that that gate exists and there's no path, there's no footprints or whatever. The first time  I went through it, there was snow on the ground that I went out and checked it out myself. So,  I only reason I found it is because I could see the snow prints where local residents use that as  a shortcut. The second time I went out there and videoed, there's no evidence whatsoever. And I I  had my camera and you can't see a latch. You can't see a gate of any kind. I happen to know where it  was cuz I'd been through it before. And so this young bomber, which we'll get into, I'm sure,  here in a moment. this uh young black autistic uh individual who um allegedly confessed to the  crime told FBI that he mapped out his route for planting the devices by using Google Maps. There's  two things that aren't on Google Maps though. That secret gate, nor are the blind spots in Capitol  Police CCTV cameras. Hm. And the person who left these devices was clearly aware of where the blind  spots were. And now we know more by video. Now, the FBI has only ever released about 30 seconds of  video of the bomber and put out a $500,000 reward asking for tips from the public. If you recognize  the way this person walks or the way you recognize anything about it, you know, call this 1-800  number. And um the interesting thing is is that the FBI themselves told the Congress congressional  committee, this was loudermil and mass report that they had 30,000 video files of the bomber. That's  their that's their number, not mine. 30,000 video files. They have only released about 30 seconds  of video. Because of our access to Capital CCTV, we have about 21 minutes of the hoodie bomber  walking around. It's never been shown to the public. Where'd you get that? Of Capital CCTV.  How do you get access to Capital CCTV? Well, um, if you remember, you guys were first granted  access by McCarthy. Um, and then they used a small handful of us as guinea pigs to eventually  give universal access. So, House investigators had it. House Investigators have it. They have they  have the the the hard drives. Yep. Uh and then they gave us access. Uh myself, uh Julie Kelly,  um John Solomon, uh uh Joe Haniman, uh who was with Epic Times at the time, now my partner in  this project. Um they um and myself. And so with this access that we got, we harvested, literally  harvested this amount of footage of the bomber walking around. And this is where it really comes  home to the capital police is on the evening that the gray hooded figure was planting the devices.  This individual only sat down in two places during the stroll during that 7:34 to 8:18 period. The  first place that the hooded bomber sat down at was the DNC bench then but did not place the bomb the  first time that this individual sat down. got up, left, went around the block, and went to the  Congressional Black Caucus Institute and sat down at a bush outside the Congressional  Black Caucus, reached into the backpack, pulled out a device, and slid it under the bush,  then changed their mind, reached, grabbed it back, and put it back into the pouch or the backpack.  stood up, went down a back alleyway back to the DNC, and then planted the bomb at the DNC. You can  see the hooded figure on camera reach in, pull the device out of the bag, and then lay it over behind  the bench and the mulch there. One problem with that scene right there is the FBI says that  Brian Cole Jr., who they arrested for being the bomber said that that was when he set the  timer on, you know, the egg timer, kitchen timer, except on video he doesn't set the timer. One hand  in, one hand out, never stops to set the timer and sets it down. FBI is clearly wrong. And if the  kid really gave that in his confession, he was clearly lying in his confession or delusional or  delusional or the fact that autistic individuals give the highest percentage of false confessions  to law enforcement of any other demographic. So he wasn't charged, however, when you  first started looking into the story, Brian Cole. No. And this is this is where the the  problem comes in. Let me go back to the sitting down at the two locations. So the next day on the  6th, the first device is found at the RNC alerted by a lady uh by the name of Carlin Younger. And  the first device is found at 25 minutes before 1:00. And then the Capitol police send out over  their radio. They deploy their own counter and surveillance teams, three of them, two men  each, to go out and look for other devices. this one counter surveillance team where man  bun guy and backpack guy they we find their car. My team, my guys on my investigative team  find their car. We follow their car through the city and it arrives at the Metro South parking  lot right across the street from the RNC. They get out of their car, put their backpacks and  their jackets on. They walk and they beat. Now they're deployed to look for devices, right? This  is their job. Our job is to look for devices. They spend their entire stroll from Metro South over  to not the DNC. They go to Congressional Black Caucus Institute and walk right up to the bush,  do this, look under the bush. 2 minutes later, they then find find the bomb at the DNC. The  only two places that the hoodied individuals sat down the night before is the only two places  they actually looked in their stroll while they were looking for devices. They didn't look under  garbage cans, under cars. They didn't look under other bushes. They looked nowhere else. Tucker,  this was a capital police operation. Do we know the identities of man bun and backpack? Yes, they  have been interviewed by the committee. Uh in fact uh uh Representative Massie actually interviewed a  man bun guy himself. Uh they have been interviewed and the congressional investigators say that it's  the most um pre-planned and rehearsed interview they've ever witnessed in their life. And by the  way, they could only get permission to interview them if they were not under oath and they had to  be interviewed together, which you never do in an investigation. They were not under oath. Nope.  They were not under oath and it was not a Why would a law enforcement officer refuse to testify  under oath? Because this was capital police. Capital police is different. Why? Why would house  investigators settle for that? How about because uh Johnson and Jordan uh restricted the committee  from investigating the capital police. Now, why would they do that? [clears throat] The  Ptorian Guard. Yeah. So if you're the C, just to be clear, I mean, and if you doubt this,  you can go back into the clips and look at every sex scandal or dewise scandal on Capitol Hill.  It's always the capital police who are involved in it. And tons of people on the hill have  drinking or drug problems. There's a lot of crazy [clears throat] sexreated behavior and other  things. And the capital police know all that. Yes, they am I being a conspiracy nut here  or is this No. No. As a matter of fact, the first time I ever met Tar Johnson, it's one  one of the reason why I gave your your team his story. Y was he looked at me the very first time  I met with him was in uh 22 sometime and he said, "Steve, you have no idea how powerful the  capital police are." That's true. And I'm thinking Keystone cops, glorified mall cops, of  course. No way. you know, dignitary protection detail and the intel department are not  the keystone cops. Yeah, this is the CIA. And as a result of that cooperation with the  agency, they know where all the bodies are buried. They know where the skeletons in the  closets are. everything that you just talked about a moment ago. This is what they have  privileged knowledge to and this is how they affect legislation on Capitol Hill. This is  how they affect who the leadership is going to be. That's how the leadership disappoints us  so gravely every time we get our guy in and he suddenly is no longer our guy. So you think that  the capital police are like a vector of control? Absolutely. Yeah. I I would not be surprised  by that at all. um at all. And of course, they're controlled by the speaker of the house.  Yes. So, it's an inherently political operation. So, Laddermilk um Congressman Laddermilk, who was  chairman of the last two January 6th investigative committees. The first one, his subcommittee  was under House Administration. The new one is a subcommittee under um Judiciary Committee  chaired by Jordan. Loudermilk is the chairman of the subcommittee. In order for him to even  get this committee, and how do I know this is because he told me himself to my face. The only  way he was able to continue his investigation into matters related to January 6 is he had to agree  not to investigate the capital police. To which my response was, you can't investigate January  6 without investigating the capital police. Why would you ever allow I mean any investigation that  begins with parameters like that it's like Jeffrey Ebstein search warrants that's like designed to  obscure rather than illuminate the truth. Right. Right. They thought they thought that they would  eventually have the ability to circumvent some of that. And they did get the interview with the  two counter surveillance. I know their names. I've never released their names publicly but  I I know who do you think? Uh yes. In fact, uh, backpack guy is now the, you're not going to  believe this. He's now the capital police liaison to the FBI. Well, that doesn't surprise me at  all. I kid you not. Doesn't surprise me at all. If you look into the work histories of people  with big jobs in DC, it's very very common to c come across something like that. You know, I mean,  he'll probably be the director of the FBI someday, right? Um, so there's two things that we know.  We know that the bomber had intimate knowledge that only Capitol police could know. The hidden  gate, the um uh under se several reasons why the knowledge of where the blind spots were in the  cameras is very important to this story. Not the least of which is that the bomber only carried  one bomb at a time and reloaded the backpack in a blind spot over at Fulier Park knowing that  there was no and that's where the bomber either parked their car or their accomplice was waiting  for them there who would have access to the blind spots only some only the capital police right only  we know that there was when the bomber entered the m there's a famous there's a famous video of the  bomber apparently waving at a cop car and right in front of the uh Capitol Hill Club as as a as  a um uh uh marked Capitol Police car comes by. The the bomber apparently waves at the car, then  walks around the corner, two Capitol Police cars pull up with their headlights on and create a  blind they they blitz out the cameras that are faced down the street. It completely obscures.  And it was at that moment that the bomber ducked down into Ramsey Court was when the two secret  blinded those cameras. So, who was that person? We want to go there. Yeah. I mean,  you're being sued for saying this, so I just want to be completely clear. I have  no clue. I'm not endorsing your position at all. you're being sued by one of the, you know,  one of the worst lawyer, in my opinion, the worst lawyer I've ever dealt with in my  life. So, which I hope we can get into. Um, so, you know, I I have no idea if what you're  saying is true. I'm not imputing the character of anybody. I I'm sure there's another side to  it, but I'm interested in the story, and this will presumably come out in trial if your case  goes to trial. So, um, [laughter] well, just tell us about your reporting. like how did you go about  figuring out who this person was? Exactly. Look, in in our reporting about January 6, I I've not  just obsessed for 5 and a half years over the pipe bomb, right? I've been on the pipe bomb and then  been off the pipe bomb. And it is in some ways the most interesting story cuz like the US government  tells us there was a simultaneous bombing of the two party headquarters and it was like super  dangerous and it was an act of terror and then they never mention it again or release any  relevant information. So I mean for 4 years I've been wondering and that's why we're having this  conversation. So I'm just interested how did you go about trying to ascertain the identity of this  person? So so this is what was happen happening at the time is that going back to the initial part of  our conversation where I learned that there were elements of our department of defense department  of war now in the crowd not knowing what their reasons for being in the crowd were. I have no  idea. But I was very curious why in a very small area of the capital on the west side three people  died of heart attacks. So you had two gentlemen early on, one before the first less lethal was  ever fired. One that a lot of people have claimed were murdered by Capitol police and was hit.  They say he was hit by a less than lethal. No, he wasn't. We've seen the video from every angle.  He was never struck by a less than lethal device or launcher. And then the third one was Roseanne  Boland right near the uh the tunnel. Three people dying of heart attacks within 50 yards of each  other at any event ever in the history of the world has never happened. So I'm very curious  about this. I know that that particular element or unit of our armed forces has a weapon. It's  called an [clears throat] agitation weapon. It is a directed energy weapon. Backpack size. We  just learned a lot about that from the invasion down in Venezuela, the discombobulator that the  uh president uh called it, the discombobulator weapon. So I started investigating the source,  the use, who in our government has the agitation weapon and what its uses were. I learned that one  of its uses was it can make people go nuts in a crowd in a color revolution. going in what way?  Um, a three-star general retired from SOCOM that I interviewed Special Operations Command, correct?  Told me, yes, that weapon exists, and I quote, "With it, we can stop your heart. We can make  you [ __ ] your pants." But I wouldn't need that weapon to start January 6. I would just need  four or five of my best men. That's exact quote. I interviewed members of that unit  about the weapon. I have interviewed former Secretary of the Army about the  weapon. All have verified its existence and its quote unquote prolific use within  our SP special operators community. And I started looking for backpacks in the crab.  [snorts] I know what the shape is. I know what the design is. I've interviewed two people that have  participated in the design of that weapon. One of them's a doctor. The one is a special operator  who essentially assisted DARPA in the design of the the how to how to make it field worthy out in  the in in the field. And um so I started looking for it in the crowd. Me and my team, we're  we're looking at backpacks everywhere. Well, one of the most interesting backpacks that day was  worn by a small handful of Capitol police officers that were up on the upper terrace that early  early early on before the crowd had gotten violent started launching less lethals into the crowd. and  they were wearing so they've got they've got their um their black uniforms on but they've got  military colored backpacks on. So we start zooming in on them in the cameras and we got  totally distracted about the looking for dis uh a directed energy weapon because what we found  was is that this team of less lethal officers were illegally firing into the crowd. They were firing  their weapons against policy, against the law, against their own training. In fact, some of  them were training officers in in the use of less lethal and they were using them in what's called  a criminally negligent manner, shooting people in the head, in the crowd, in the face. They were  shooting their own officers in the back of their helmets on the front line. You could see the you  could see the pepper pellets go explode off the back of their helmets. So, we decided to do a  story on the use of less lethal, got distracted from the the directed energy weapon story and  because we now we found all this fresh video, you know, and so we needed to identify these officers.  So, we're going down the line, we identify one, two, three, four, and then there was one officer  we couldn't identify. To be honest with you, we didn't know if it was a male or a female, but  this officer was firing the pepper ball gun that was hitting people in the head. It's a point blank  range, by the way. Very close on. These were not misfires. And I have a source. One of my earliest  sources at the capital police on January 6th investigation was a CDU officer, civil disturbance  unit of the Capitol Police. And the less lethal team is part of CDU. So I called my source and  I then sent him a photograph still shot of this officer and he immediately went, "Oh yeah, that's  uh Shaunie Kirkoff." I said, "Well, who's Shawnie Kirkoff?" He said, "Oh, she great cop. Uh he said  it was kind her she was uh you know uh always a good hang. She was fun to be around. Um she was  a good friend, but it was kind of weird." He said when she left um she left the Capitol police about  6 months after January 6th and when she left she wiped her social media out. She changed her phone  numbers and her email and we we all lost contact with her. We were friends. We lost contact with  her. And he said we heard that she might have went to one of the three-letter agencies or you said  maybe it was defense intelligence or something. But anyway, that's that's what we heard. And I  went, "Oh, okay. So now I have a name, right?" And so I start looking for this name. Turns out  Miss Kirkoff was the first person to ever testify in the very first January 6th trial, the trial of  Guy Refett in the summer of 22. She's the first person to testify in the very first trial. And she  testifies as a less lethal officer who fired at this individual that was being that was on trial  at that time. And this is what she said and this is what happened in the transcripts. The first  thing before she faced direct examination from the government is the judge went to a sidebar  and told the uh both of the attorneys said now you know that there's some under seal aspects  about this first witness. Yes, your honor. Yes. Be careful when you're questioning. Oh, I thought  okay. I thought that was interesting. And so then direct examination starts and the prosecution  asks her her name, spell your name, go through the whole process that they typically do. And one  of his first questions was, of course, you know, where are you employed now? And she said, I still  work for the government. He goes, oh, you're no longer with Capital Police. She said, no, I left  Capital Police about 6 months after January 6. He said, did you leave under good circumstances?  Oh, yes. Uh, very good circumstances. In fact, I had already applied for my current position in  the government uh before January 6. Okay, that's interesting. Then it's time for cross-examination.  The judge hits the button again, calls another sidebar, and he says to the defense attorney,  "Don't you go waving Miss Kirkoff's 302s around this courtroom." That's the FBI investigation  forms. That's what a FBI 302 is. And now I'm like, my radar is pinging off off the charts. So, I have  to know who this person is. So, I have sources at OD and that's how this whole element of the story  comes into it is that I took the information that I had and I received assistance from OD and that  helped me identify her as a current CIA employee. What does she do at CIA? What I was told by OD  and I is that she was on their uh the equivalent of a dignitary protection type detail where she  could possibly be accompanying Director Ratcliffe and other dignitaries around armed and um she  protects John Ratcliffe, the director of the CIA. I'm just telling you that her job description as  it was relayed to me by OD and I was that she was on that detail and she could be one of the people  that protect Ratcliffe. That's crazy. That's what I learned. John Ratcliffe being the former  congressman and current CIA director. Correct. All right. So, now we're full into this and I'm doing  everything I can. You know, now we find videos of her college career as a world class, you know,  all-American athlete, soccer player. And I learned that she had a careerending injury. Well, not  career, it was it was her college career ending in injury in her fourth year, fourth season. Uh, she  broke her tibia in half on her right leg and a in a game. And um [clears throat] and then we found  videos after recovery and therapy. She played a year of minor league ball for the Columbus  Eagles. And I see her walking across the field and she's dragging her right  leg in a manner that would be um typical for somebody with that exact injury  with a what they call a circumduction move where the dragging the right foot yep it comes  around in front of the left left foot and I've seen more of the pipe bopper video than  anybody and And I've seen it over and over and over and over [clears throat] again.  I've watched my that 20 minutes of video. I've spent dozens and dozens of hours watching  it. And I went, "You've got to be kidding me." And so then I took So you hadn't had that in mind?  You hadn't thought? No. I was investigating the illegal, improper use of less lethal weapons  used against the January 6th crowd. And you find out that one of the people you believe was  using these weapons illegally winds up at CIA to which she had applied before January 6, but now  she's at CIA in some protective role potentially protecting the director of central intelligence,  John Rackcliff. Potentially. Yeah. I mean, I you know, it's hard even know to know what to say  about all of those connections. Um, and then as you're watching video of this person, you say to  yourself, "Oh my gosh, I recognize that gate, that distinctive gate produced by an injury." Yeah.  No more complicated than that. No, that's I'm glad I asked you the question. I have no I have no  malice against Shaunie Kirkoff. As I said before, I think that she believed she was in involved in a  training exercise, right? And it sounds like um I mean it sounds like you you didn't go into this  imagining you would conclude that. No. And then what we did because of this evidence, we started  looking at her as a Capitol police officer. And we found two and a half hoursish of video of  Miss Kirkoff as a Capitol police officer from the Capitol CCTV video archives from January 5th  and January 6th. We we have her running all over the capital on both days, the fifth and the sixth  as a police officer. So we have tons of video of her and she has that gate. So is there any way to  I mean I you know there's all kinds of biometric software. Is there a way to you know bring science  to bear on this question? Well that's what we did. So, I took it to a source of mine within  the intelligence community who I've not named and will not name ever. Um, this source can come  forward if they desire to at any point in this uh defamation trial if they choose to come forward,  but I will not out them. And this in this source uh is a let's just say 30-year career in the  community, an expert in gate recognition and also an engineer in the technology. And this person ran  the gate recognition for me. Came back to me with a 94% hit. So, I turned over as much video of the  hoodied January 5th pipe bomber and Miss Kirkoff's footage, both as a soccer player and as a Capitol  police officer. The the the software came back with a 94% hit, but the expert analysis, human  analysis was 98% match. So when I'm asked how sure am I that she's the bomber, I'm 94 to 98%.  So um pardon my ignorance. Is gate recognition software commonly used by intel or investig or  law enforcement agencies? As a matter of fact, FBI used gate recognition technology to um  disclude a January 6 pipe bomber. They had as one of their uh persons of interest a gym owner  over in Virginia across the river who had, believe it or not, an odd gate, but more importantly had  a receipt for having purchased the identical type of rare Nike collectible shoe that the bomber was  wearing that night. Nike Air Max Speed Turf 2018 edition is what the bomber was wearing in a very  specific color scheme. gray, gold, and black. And um he had a receipt for having purchased this. So  they ran gate recognition on him and eliminated him as a suspect. They ran gate recognition  on the Guthrie case just recently. You know, Savannah Guthri's mother. Uh they use  gate rec recognition on that suspect. Um gate recognition in courts have been used for  hundreds of years, hundreds of years. I mean, you can it's in many cases it's more accurate than  a facial recognition or a fingerprint because you can get it from a distance. And that's what's so  valuable about gate recognition. So, are you the I mean, the FBI was doing or claiming to do an  investigation into these pipe bombings for a long time, right? Did they ever talk to her? Was she  ever did she ever come up as a suspect in this? So, uh, when I discovered all of this, I took  this information to my sources at ODNI and all hell broke loose. So, following the law, following  procedure, um, Tulsi had a special group called the DIG, the Director's Initiative Group, which  was shut down and dissolved because of this story. Yep. By by CIA. by CIA. Of course, the people that  worked in the dig that assisted in this story um and looked at the evidence were demanded by CIA to  come in to Langley for 4-hour sitdown interviews and polygraphs and they told him, you know, bite  me. It's like you forget that OD and I we oversee you. It's not the other way around. And they did.  The point of dig, one of the things that Dig was doing is looking into mysteries in which the,  you know, federal government had the documents, necessary documents to show what actually happened  in a bunch of different stories, right? Yeah. I, you know, I had taken I because I believed it  was a a possible public corruption issue. Nobody in the intelligence community trusts the FBI and  I'm sorry I'm I'm I'm sorry to all the that is I can verify that from supporters out there but they  don't trust Cash Patel's at all FBI any more than they trusted and in fact knowledgeable people in  the government will always tell you that the FBI kind of gets a pass CIA gets a lot of attention  for being evil and killing people and all this stuff but like in real life you're afraid of the  FBI. Yeah. Because they're the ones that can harm you domestically. That's right. Yeah. People are  afraid of the FBI. That's absolutely true. Right. So, u that's why I took it to OD and I FBI would  have been the the natural people to go to with this, but I've been through this. I've taken  a public corruption office of the director of national intelligence. Correct. Right. Right. So,  that'd be Tulsi Gabbert until recently and I took it directly to the dig, the director's initiative  group within the FBI and I took this name of this person. actually they they uh are as I said they  were the ones that discovered that what her job was at CIA and then they drafted a memo. Now  this was just a draft memo. It had never been complete. Still had the yellow you know markings  on the memo had not been approved for distribution but the deputy director of ODNI I call it a leak.  It's not it's it's it's uh you know it was a pass along to the deputy director Ellis of CIA before  the draft memo was complete. This was done before our story about Miss Kirkoff was published on  November 8th of last year. So this draft memo was being circulated. It was uh given from the  deputy director, Tulsi's deputy director to deputy director of CIA who gave it to FBI, who gave it  to the White House and leaked it to the press. The White House had it the day before our story  came out, two days before our story came out, Miss Kirkoff's partner gets a call from the FBI and  said, "Oh, we're going to raid your house tomorrow morning." No, they got a 12-h hour advanced notice  that their house was going to be raided. That's not standard operating procedure, by the way. So,  on the morning, Friday morning, November 7th, FBI shows up and they're there all day. Now, I have no  idea that the FBI is raiding Miss Kirkoff's house, but what I learned was from one of my Capitol  police sources. It was about uh one or two o'clock in the afternoon. Hey, your girl's  her her house is being raided right now. And um so we sent our um uh I was still with Ablaze at  the time and so our acting editor-in chief at the time Chris Bedford um lived in um Alexandria where  Kirkoff lives and so on his way home he drove past the house and sure enough they're all out there  got uniformed and plain clothes individuals local cops FBI are all milling around that house. This  is the day before our story came out that night. Miss Kirkoff at 8:00 PM by a very high ranking FBI  um individual who I still don't know who it is, but our attorneys know who it is through  discovery that I've not seen yet. Um told her that we need you to come in for a polygraph.  And that and what they told her was that look, it's gonna you're gonna spend more  time in the drive downtown, you know, to FBI headquarters and the drive back than you're  going to, you know, spend being interviewed. Well, that wasn't true. She ended up being interviewed  and polygraphed for 4 hours. Didn't get back home till after midnight. But what we then learned  months later was that she failed that polygraph. Not only did she fail the polygraph, she  was admonished by the poligrapher, the the uh examiner, admonished for her rehearsed answers  to the questions and the questions pertain to the pipe bombings directly. The questions were are  did you plan? How do you know that she failed the polygraph? Uh it uh so in the Brian Cole Jr. case.  Now, you you asked earlier, how did Brian how did this investigation suddenly get ignited again? 5  days after I named U Miss Kirkoff as the potential bomber based on forensic science gate recognition  technology. Um, suddenly outside of Brian Cole Jr.'s house in Woodbridge, Virginia is a FBI  surveillance team. 5 days after after 5 years, nothing. 5 days after there's a surveillance team  on his house. He was then arrested a month later, charged with the crime on Dan Bonino's birthday.  They did the dog dog and pony show, you know, uh press conference where, you know, Bondi  and um Janine Piro and Cash Patel and Dan Bonino all made their statements and their  speeches about this Brian Cole Jr. about this Brian Cole Jr., who is he? He is  a um uh autistic black man. [laughter] He was 25 years old on January 5th and 6th of  2021. He's 30 years old now. And um he famously because of his autism and his extreme OCD, he  famously walked his dog two or three times a day around the neighborhood. His neighbors, including  an FBI whistleblower, still an employee of the FBI, says it ain't him. He walks nothing like the  bomber. He has a very interesting gate. Uh I I can go through the forensics with you uh till the cows  come home. Tucker, just just very very briefly and then I'm going to give you the blockbuster. All  right. It just you when I'm sorry to say this, but when uh Cord Meyer's wife, Mary Penchon Meyer,  who had had an affair with uh President Kennedy, was murdered on the Topath in Georgetown right  near where I grew up um by by CIA was obvious. It's very clear what happened now. But then at  the time, uh and she was a well-known person in Georgetown in 1962 or whatever. Uh they  arrested an autistic black guy, [laughter] put him on laughing. It's just like horrible. Yeah.  And they put him on trial. He was acquitted by a DC jury. But um it's the same. It's the same.  It's I mean that's I'm not you know whatever. No, I know. Just like I've heard this story before.  Here's here's let's find the autistic black guy. Right. [laughter] So bad. Here here's a really  interesting side note to this story is so you had the evening of the arrest the the press  conference from all the mucky mucks Mhm. DOJ and FBI. That was 6 months ago. You know who has never  mentioned it. Yet during the campaign it was a top three priority of this administration. President.  The president never patted Cash and Dan on the ass and said add a boy. He's never mentioned it.  Nobody in the White House has ever commented on it. And our sources in the White House is  nobody in the White House buys this arrest. Well, I can confirm that which is why I'm talking to  you. Yeah, of come on now. Um, but I also don't, you know, I don't know. I mean, just be, you  know, I don't know. I don't know anything. Uh, which is why I'm grateful you're here. So, okay.  So, you write a piece saying that it looks like this Kirchoff woman could be the person her  date her gate is basically identical. Yes. Um, she meanwhile works in a protective  capacity at CA possibly for the director himself. Crazy crazy town. Um, what is her  response to it? She denies it. Well, you know, one of one of the things that I've been criticized  greatly over in me and my my team and my writing partner Joe Hanaman is that we never reached out  for comment to Miss Kirkoff. That's not true. Try reaching out to somebody who's an employee  of the CIA. Yeah, I have. Her background her background [laughter] is her background has been  scrubbed. Now I did find her address. We found that I could have knocked on her door. I didn't do  it. Shame on me. Okay. So I should have gotten I should have should have could have knocked on her  door. Um we contacted everybody else at 9:00 the next morning. So our our our story comes out on a  Saturday morning. nine o'clock on Sunday morning, November 9th. At 9:00 am, I'm in a hotel in DC and  I get a call from the freaking CIA. It's the chief um public affairs officer at the CIA calls me at  9:00 a.m. from home with a crying baby in her arm. I can hear the baby crying. She's going, "Excuse  me, excuse." She goes, "Look, I'm just calling you to let you know that you got one aspect of your  story wrong." I went, "Okay, great. What What one aspect did I get wrong?" She said, "You've got uh  Miss Kirkoff's job description wrong." Now, the job description that I published, I didn't make  up. That was what OD and I, who has access to the entire intelligence community database, read off  to me and told me what her job was. But instead, she said, "No, she's just a security officer at  Langley on the campus. That's all she is. Security officer Langley." And so, we corrected the story.  I mean, we didn't correct it. We just made, you know, but she didn't say our employees was  not the pipe bomber. No, nothing like that. She just And she actually even said, she said, "I  just don't I don't want that one little thing, you know, to take away from the veracity of  your story." She said that and um thank you. So, I notified my editors. They made the note,  you know, to the to the story and uh and then everything continued to blow up. Now, fast forward  6 months later, and I have sat down with for many, many hours a current existing CIA employee who has  al also become a whistleblower, but he still has his job. And he has held Miss Kirkoff's files in  his hands. And he said, "That Sunday morning call that you got saying that she was a campus security  officer at CIA, that's a lie." And he goes, "You know, that's what we do for a living, right?  We lie." Yeah. I said, "Yeah, I understand." Um, so what did FBI say about this? Did you  call Dan Bonino or Cash Patel to ask their view? Well, you know, I I have reached out to Bonino  on many occasions, and this is part of the story is is that in my reporting about the new FBI, I've  been very critical of them, especially after their abandonment of the whistleblowers because that  was one of Patel's promises was that they were going to make the whistleblowers whole. That was  one of Bonino's promises. They were going to make the whistleblowers. And we're talking about the  whistleblowers that had whistleblown about the COVID regime, about the mandates related to that,  about January 6, the the, you know, the guys that were told to go out and swat raid grandma's, you  know, for misdemeanor offenses, something the FBI had never done in its 100red-year career,  you know, history of the of the agency, the bureau. And and so, um, I had become  very critical. And five times that I know of, and I only know this because the executives at the  Blaze relay it to me. Five times individuals from the seventh floor of the FBI, the Hoover building,  called my bosses to try to get me fired at the place. What? Yes. Who do you know who called from  FBI? And Bonino called twice. He was the first one that I was try to get you fired. Yeah. To Well,  first of all, to complain, then it escalated from there. Did he call you? No, didn't. No, Bonino.  Uh, and I Bino gets my DMs because he told my bosses that he reads my DMs. That's why I know he  gets them. And he's famously blocks people on his, you know, exac account. He's never blocked me, but  he's criticized me. He's the one who told Thomas Massie that he would personally write the check  for the defamation lawsuit from Shnie Kirkoff. How did Dan go so quickly from a critic of the deep  state to its most aggressive defender? What what happened to Dan, do you think? I you know, I don't  know, but I can tell you that in February of 24 that and it's still on uh Dan's X page. You  can go there. February 24, he is singing my praises. He goes, "That Baker guy at the blaze,  he is just knocking it out of the park about the pipe bomb." Because we were releasing  videos back then that nobody had ever seen, like, you know, the the destruction of the  bomb by the robot. People the the fact that that investigative cameras had been turned away  from the site, we we we not only found that the cameras had been turned away, we found the act  of them being turned away from the investigation scene. And we were releasing all these videos  back then and he's singing my praises. Well, he's complete opposite now. I don't know. You  know, look, I I can speculate as as much as anybody. He it feels like looks like he had a  breakdown of some sort. He's terrified. That's obvious. Um I don't know why. I don't know any  more than that. I know having had a lot of contact with Dam Bonino. It he turned on a dime. You know,  something happened to him at FBI that just broke him as a man, destroyed his life, and certainly  destroyed his career. And I feel sorry for him. I I just find it interesting that he was  your like greatest opponent. You're you're just trying to find out what happened. Yeah.  He tried to get he tried to call me off of my reporting on the whistleblower situation and  then uh as we were getting closer to this story, he called So the first person he called was the  president of the Blaze and that was in the summer um before I even knew who Kirkoff was. And then  later he called u my editor-inchief. And then Ben Williamson, the assistant u personal uh I think uh  personal affairs officer uh in the seventh floor of the FBI. He called my editor-inchief. Both  Bino and Williamson agreed that Bonino would sit down with me and let me show him the evidence  we had developed on the pipeline, which he never did. No. And I sent him many messages trying  to execute that that opportunity, that sitdown. never happened. And then why wouldn't he want to  see that? I wonder. I don't know. He, you know, he famously criticized Massie, you know, in this  tirade. He went on like a, you know, 4-day tirade against Massie. And one of the things he was  criticizing Massie for is that Massie wouldn't accept his invitation to come down to the Hoover  building and see their evidence against Brian. No, no. Dan is working to cover up, right, you know,  the activities of of the permanent government. It's just I I just I've never seen anyone change  that much or be that afraid. I mean, he looked like he was going to have a heart attack. He  was so afraid. And I I'm not saying that to attack him, but I just wish I knew what happened  to him. You haven't heard? No, I know specifics, but what I what I do know is that uh he made two  calls to my bosses. Ben Williamson made one call. Um, Marshall Yates, who was the congressional  liaison to the FBI, formerly general counsel staffer for Thomas Massie before he went to FBI,  he called my bosses. He definitely was trying to get me fired. Uh, Marshall called the White House.  He I mean, he he he called Congress members. Uh, he did media sources, everything they could to  try. And what was your crime again? My crime was reporting on Kirkoff. And I allegedly was  the person that received leaks of both files and technologies from Joe Kent, the director of  national counterterrorism. Did you? No, not I mean not in in fact in fact before before um I left  the blaze the week before I got a call from Daily Wire reporter Daily Wire 9:30 at night at home and  he said hey I'm calling to comment from you on a story that I've got. I said okay hit me. He said I  have three different sources from the intelligence community who say you were the recipient of leaks  from Joe Kent. And I just busted out laughing in his face. I said, 'Well, first of all, who are the  three sources? I can't tell you that. I said, 'You have three people from the IC telling you that I  received technology and leaks from Joe Kent. Yes, that's what I have. 15 minutes, I just went off  on him. And he finally went, "Okay, okay, okay, okay. I believe you. I believe you." And then they  didn't publish the story. Yeah. But everybody else did. Reuters did, you know, New York Times,  everybody else published stories about it. So, what was Kirkoff's response to your piece? Uh,  was through attorneys. I mean, she has never uh spoken herself until guess what she got? She got  the Ray Eps treatment from the New York Times and they did the full puff piece on her. They made her  into the sympathetic figure that I had defamed and falsely accused of being the bomber. And um that  reporter called me and I did an hour and a half, the first session and 30 minutes of follow-up with  that reporter. I went through everything. That reporter had no idea that she had flunked, you  know, the the polygraph. I went through tons of evidence and information that we have. And so what  was her what's I I read somewhere that she said there's video of me with my dog or my puppy during  the hours in question when the planted. Again, we have three sources from the FBI who called CBS  and told CBS News that they had uh an alibi video of Miss Kirkoff on the evening of January 5th  while the bomber is running around at RNC and DNC is that she is home and I quote playing with  her puppies. Okay. The same three sources from the FBI who allegedly leaked that to CBS would also  have known at the same time the same day that she flunked the polygraph and they conveniently left  that out of the story. Have you seen this video? No, it doesn't exist as far as we know because it  has been under they have they have uh request the the attorneys for Brian Cole Jr. have requested  it under discovery and it's never been turned over. [laughter] But Clare Lock has changed the  story twice now. Clare lock is the most uh feared defamation law firm in the world probably. Um  they famously represented uh uh the voting machine company against Fox and many other high-profile  cases. Not only did they change the story about the puppy videos twice now because the CBS version  of the story was that she was home playing with her puppies. three FBI sources. Right. Then I  received the Blaze received and my partner Joe Haniman received the demand and preservation  letter from Clare Lock prior to the lawsuit being filed. And in the preservation letter, they  changed the story to that the video shows her at home caring for her dog singular. Now, that may  not seem like a significant change except for one big reason. Immediately after the story came  out that she was home playing with her puppies, what they didn't know is that we had done a dark  web scrape of we found her old social media stuff and in that we found where she and her partner  had adopted an adult greyhound down in Florida and brought it home one month before January  6th. And we also found the uh five-star review that Miss Kirkoff had given her dog sitter dog  walker. Um and again references only the one dog, the one adult dog by name. And they didn't know  that we had been able to find these things. And so as soon as that came out, even though I was under  a gag order now from the blaze and I couldn't publish anything about Miss Kirkoff directly, uh I  released those photos from proxies who put it out on the web. So suddenly they were embarrassed that  it wasn't puppies and three FBI sources, right? These are not people that are going to get the are  going to get wrong between puppies and a dog. So it goes from she was playing with her puppies  to caring for her dog. And then the lawsuit comes out and the lawsuit says, "Well, okay,  it wasn't either one of those things. There's a video of the dog sleeping on the couch and you  can hear her voice in the background off camera. And we've only ever seen a screenshot of  the dog on the couch, but nobody has seen the video. Meanwhile, uh you know, there a bunch  of news stories attacking you for impuging her character when there's video evidence proving her  innocence, but it turns out to be a little bit more complicated than that. I guess it's much more  complicated than that. I mean, f first of all, um Brian Cole is not the bomber. Brian Cole cannot  be the bomber. Uh we have a we we there's a we've made famous by his uh his pseudonym. His name is  Armmitus and he is uh a um also an individual on the spectrum, highly motivated on the pipe bomb  story. He and I met a couple of years ago through this story and then he began working with our team  on the video examination and he's obsessed with this. And one of the things that he has been able  to discover, and I love his quote, is he says that he says that Brian Cole Jr.'s body is his alibi.  We know because I've been on my hands and knees inside Rumsy Court, measured the bricks in the  alleyway behind the the RNC. We have a clear shot of the shoe, the foot that the hoodie bomber is  wearing. The heel is on the line of a brick. That shoe crosses the first brick, the second brick,  and less than half of the third brick. That's a nine to a 9 and a half at the most of that  particular shoe. Now, why do I know that? It's because I purchased three pairs of that Nike Air  Max speed turf shoe. I purchased a 9 and a half, 10 and a half, and a 12. Why did I purchase a 12?  Because Brian Cole Jr. wears a 12. Brian Cole Jr. by his mother's own statement could not I showed  his mother the nine and a half of that shoe. She goes, "Brian ain't squeezing his big fat foot  in that shoe. I have held Brian Cole's shoes in my hands. He wears all of his shoes are  size 12." So why did he he confessed though? As I as I mentioned earlier, the the the  demographic known for giving the highest rate of false confessions to law enforcement are autistic  individuals. They had him in an interrogation for 2 hours with no attorney present. An autistic  they've just scooped him off the street. He was walking his dog or he was he was walking to  the 7-Eleven. Not Not the dog had just recently passed away. He was walking to the 7-Eleven down  the front of his neighborhood. The FBI scooped him up off the street, uh, arrested him, took him in,  put him under interrogation. Now, this is a highly OCD kid with I mean, he's 5 minutes to Wapner.  That's who he is. Okay. Very smart, very bright, but very much a creature of habit and routine.  Does Does he have some political motive? Like, what are they saying moved him to do this? Well,  what they're saying is is that is in conf in his confession that he um had taken his cues from the  Irish troubles. I'm sorry. I that's reaction. Yes. The Irish troubles was where he was motivated. And  he says or they say that he said in the confession that he hated both the left and the right. he  hated the both parties and that that's why he planted the devices at the RNC and the DNC.  There's one problem with that is that there were two other potential drop sites because we  know from the video evidence that one of those sites was the Congressional Black Caucus Institute  and the bomber changed their mind. Another site was an actual housing unit that houses uh Congress  members and Congress staff members. Those were the two other locations where the bomber stopped and  chose not to and then eventually settled on the DNC and the RNC. Um, as I said, there's so many  details and they're all running through my mind, but I want I want to give you something that  we've never released before and I got permission from the attorneys to give this to you. This was  something that Armatas, our video examiner, found is after thousands of hours of watching these  videos of the bomber walking through Rumsy Court for the first time because this this kid he our  guy he watches you know the first time he watches a pixel set then the next time he watches another  pixel set and then he's just he's that obsessed with the videos but that that um obsession led him  to finally see a smartwatch flash on the bomber's wrist after years of watching the same video  over and over and over again and never noticed it all of a sudden the smartwatch flashes.  This is the January 5th hooded pipe bomber. It flashes again. He tells us about it. So me and  now my whole team, we go all all of us go all in back to the videos again. And suddenly, what we  thought were arm stretches and, you know, other motions that the bomber was just making during  the stroll, the bomber's talking into their wrist at least five times that we can count.  It's one problem with that is Brian Cole Jr. has never owned a watch, never worn  a watch, much less acquired a smartwatch and learned to talk into it on the night  of the distribution of the pipe bombs. We know that for a fact. Is he pleading  guilty in this case? Uh, no. Oh, no. In fact, uh, just three or four weeks ago, there was a  superseding indictment where they jacked it up, trying to force them into a plea deal. They jacked  it up. Uh, they charged him with terrorism and planting weapons of mass destruction. Basically,  charges that would get him life in prison if he was convicted, thinking that they would scare him,  the family into a plea deal. Because that's even though they weren't bombs. even though they  weren't bombs. And it doesn't seem like he did it. And he could not he could not physically  have been the person that did it. He's the wrong shoe size. He's the wrong body shape. Um he  can gate recognition tell a man from a woman. Absolutely. Well, it No, it it it can tell the  gate and then you can surmise. But you know, most people that have viewed the videos for  years have thought that it was a female that that's what I thought looking at it. But what do I  know? But his, you talk about a guy who we've got video of him walking his gate could not be more  antithetical to the bombers's gate. It's highly, he walks almost like a duckw walk. Yeah. With  his butt out and you know he walks which is typical of an autistic person, you know, placing  heel first. Yeah. Right. and or toe first and you know and with but but with the feet out like this  whereas the bomber walks like this with a pigeon toed right foot circumduction planting it in front  of the left foot. That's the way the bomber walks. That's the way Shnie Kirkoff walks. So what is the  Okay, so now you're being sued. Okay, I'm sorry. I don't want to get ahead. So uh Bryan Jr. had. Now,  there's a super superseding indictment threatening him with life in prison trying to get him to plea.  Is he going to plea? No. As a matter of fact, at that exact hearing, status hearing, uh the  defense attorneys demanded a trial date. Is he in jail? He's in jail. He's been held in pre-trial  detention. He's in the general population. I thought for sure that they would have him in  uh isolation for his own benefit. I don't think I don't think his own benefit plays a role in  their calculations. But but he he actually has a cellmate. Um he is granted access several hours a  day to a tablet. So he is able to communicate with his family through the tablet. Uh he calls all  of his family members twice a day on, you know, in a in a rigid schedule. Um uh it's just bonkers  that there have to be I know the people I've spoken to in the federal government believe that  he's falsely charged. Yeah. And these are sober, you know, these are real people. um this is not  on Twitter, this is real life and they think he's falsely charged. But it's there have to be people  in federal law enforcement who agree with that and yet they're going along with it anyway. Well,  they're not. As a matter of fact, the there was a new whistleblower that came forward as direct  result of this case, an FBI whistleblower that I mentioned earlier. This whistleblower FBI agent  lives just down the street from the Cole family. This whistleblower has lived in the neighborhood  for 10 years. Has seen Brian Cole Jr. walking his dog twice a day, three times a day, him and his  wife, hundreds, thousands of times over 10 years. He and he came forward because of this case.  I've interviewed the whistleblower. He told me, and I quote, he said, "Nobody in my shop is buying  this arrest." What are they suing you for? Uh, well, defamation, right? But what what are the  damages? The No, there's been no stated number yet uh at all. I mean, to be honest with you, the  127 page lawsuit, I got through 30 pages with my highlighter and I had to stop. I I mean, I just  gave up. It's one lie, falsehood after the other. In fact, they are making stuff up. I mean, making  stuff up that don't that doesn't exist. And see, I haven't we haven't gotten to the part  part yet where I get to see discovery, where we get to subpoena information. We  haven't got there yet. It's all brand new. Um, but the law firm that represents coal is now  representing me. So, they have the coal discovery. I still can't see it, but what they have informed  me is is that we have nothing to worry about. I want to ask you one last question. Um, it  came to my attention several months ago when I was hearing this story from someone in the from  a couple people in the US government who are very upset about it. Uh, not because they're partisans  one way or the other, but because they're human beings who are decent people and believe in  justice and like not hurting the innocent. um that there there were people in the government  who believed, career people including who believed that this was totally crazy, that you were right,  that you're you're the one being defamed and um that Brian Cole has been falsely charged and  one of them worked for the Department of Homeland Security and is now dead. Uh this is a story  that I heard from a couple of different people who were very upset about it. I don't think this  has ever been written about in public. No. Are you familiar with what I'm talking about? And if so,  tell me what you know about this. Uh, we've are deeply involved in the investigation. We have not  written about it yet because we don't have final um conclusions, but this we don't use names and  you can just I I won't I won't mention his name. Um, so you may not know this, but I had acute  heart failure the Sunday before Christmas the Friday. No, I didn't know that. The Friday. So,  this was the Sunday before Christmas. On Friday, that night, I was in Rumsy Court on my hands and  knees with a tape measure measuring those bricks, the very bricks that the hooded bomber stepped  on. I'm measuring that uh the bricks. Saturday morning, I'm over at the DNC measuring the  sidewalk and the pavement there to compare so we could establish an exact or as close to an  exact shoe size as we could of the hooded bomber. At lunchtime on Friday, before I did that, I got  a call from a member of the intelligence community decades. He said, "We have to meet. We have to  meet now." Okay. So, we met. He picked a place and I met him there. First thing he did is he took  my phone away and threw it in his briefcase, which is a Faraday cage briefcase. And then he slid a  card across the table. He said, "Do you know who that is?" And I looked at the name on the card. I  said, "Yeah, of course." And he grabbed the card back and he said, "Um, he was found dead the day  before Thanksgiving." Now, my last conversation with the name on that card was October 29th. And  when I took this case to ODNI, as we said before, because OD and I and the members of the dig who  were going to look into this had determined that they didn't trust the FBI either on this case,  especially this case. And so they were going to take it to HSI, Homeland Security Investigations.  The relationships that they had is they had a liaison partnership with all of the intellig  That's what the dig is. The dig had reached out to all of the 18 federal intelligence agency.  Yeah. And and got one of the good guys or two of the good guys from each, you know, agency to come  in and work with them. Not deep stator vetted in that manner. This is an individual who was vetted  to not be a deep stater. 19 years career with HSI, senior agent over there. They called him in. They  briefed him on the entire case. Introduced me to him. Then in late October, early November, he  sat down with a team again of individuals that I will not name. I know who they were and I knew  who was I know who was at the conference table and he briefed them on how he was going to pursue  this case, what technologies he was going to use, um the [clears throat] other personnel that he was  going to bring into this to pursue this case. And as I said, my last conversation with him was on  the [clears throat] um 29th of October. One of these people that I know of had their last confir  conversation with him on November 10th. And then his girlfriend found him dead in his condo on the  26th of November, the day before Thanksgiving. And this longtime IC um [clears throat] operative  had tears streaming down his face as he's talking about this and explaining to me what they've  heard. And he said, "Of course, the rumor is obviously that he committed suicide." And he  said, "None of us believe it. None of us that knew him and were close to him, were friends  with him, believe that this was a suicide." And uh what did the medical examiner say? Still  no report from the medical examiner. We actually on our team was over six 7 months ago. Yeah, we we  have a we have a um uh a member of my you know my team who is a uh retired 25-y year FBI vet and a  veteran and he uh uh now private investigator who we retained and he actually went to the Fairfax  County Police Department and spoke to the lead detective on this case and in that situation the  detective didn't give up anything any information whatsoever except that there still was no report  from the medical examiner And uh that was back in February. And then more recently, just in the last  few days, we have it confirmed. There's still no report. We have foyed that information. It they've  ignored it. Fairfax County Police Department has completely ignored us on that foyer. Um are they  allowed to do that? Technically, no, but you know, they do it all the time. Law enforcement agencies  around DC. [clears throat] They're famous for that. That's why like Judicial Watch has to sue  them. And then you get you get the body cams like you know Tom Fitton just got the body cams from  uh January 6 5 years five and a half years later but he had to wait you know 3 years or two years  of lawsuits to get certain of these body cams released. And that's just the way they are. They  they stonewall you until you have to beat them in court. And so, um, here's what we also know about  this because we have done a tremendous amount of investigation ourselves into this HSI, uh, agent's  death. Uh, in January, I'm only 3 weeks after my acute heart failure, and I call up my cardiologist  and say, "I got to go to DC." He's like, "I don't want you traveling yet." He said, "You're  not flying there?" I said, "No, I'm on the drive." He said, 'All right, be careful. Take it easy,  whatever. I beline it straight to the condo where this individual was found dead. As I get there,  I'm pretending like I'm a real estate buyer. I'm pretending like I'm interested in purchasing  this condo. As I get there and going through the sherrod of being, you know, somebody in the  market for a house, I walk up on the guy that's moving into the condo where this agent had died.  They they've sold it. The house has been the condo has been sold. So, the guy's move he's carrying  boxes in. And I said, "Oh, you're moving into unit blah blah blah." And he said, "Yeah." He goes, "I  just closed on it last week." I said, "Oh, darn it." You know, I was looking at that. I was here  a couple weeks ago. And uh he he said, "Yeah." So he said, "There's a unit below me, you know."  He said, "So he took me down there. He showed me another one that was on the market right there."  And he said, "I think it's the same agent." Said, "Thank you." So we shook hands. And then as we're  going, he's going back to the parking lot to get another uh load of boxes. And I'm going to my  car. I pulled the Columbbo on him and I went, "Oh, oh, by the way, I got one more question for  you." And I walked over to him again and I said, 'I heard when I was here a couple of weeks ago  that there was something weird that happened in that unit. He goes, "Yeah." He said, 'I was  told that the previous owner was murdered. I was told he was murdered. And that's an exact  quote. I was not expecting to hear that. And he caught me off guard. I mean, I was I was like, I  that answer took me off my game. And so I didn't ask the obvious follow-up question was, "Who told  you that?" Now, I would imagine it was a neighbor. Obviously, there's a death in there, suspicious  death. They're going to tape off the scene. These condos are very close and tightly wrapped,  you know, around each other. Uh they would have interviewed all of the neighbors for, you know,  to see who they heard anything, saw anything. All of that would have happened. So, I can only  imagine and surmise that one of the neighbors probably was told by a young cop doing the, you  know, surveillance that this guy's over here was killed or murdered or whatever. Um, we know, we  have learned since then that it was a gunshot to the head and um, it was his girlfriend that  found the body. There's been no publicity. There's never been anything on the police about this. The  family did not issue an obituary. The only thing that I have in my possession of evidence, solid  evidence of his death or two things actually, is that the his body was cremated on December 19th, 3  weeks later before the medical examiner's report, before cause of death is issued. And so there's a  cremation report. We found that. And then we also found the or I was given the internal memo that  HSI put out to all of their employees, you know, talking about the, you know, their colleague who  had passed away suddenly and that there were going to be a memorial, you know, get together at a bar  for, you know, celebration of life memorial. And um then since then, I have also uh through my  other sources in the IC have had questions asked within the Fairfax County Department. They've  all been stonewalled. they've all been, you know, stiff armed away from this discussion. Nobody will  talk to them about it. And um we don't know. So the reason why we've not gone forward with a story  about this is there's just way too many things to, you know, there elements missing from this to  make a conclusion. But the bottom line is is the guy within the community with the power and  the investigative authority and the tools and the personnel to investigate this case is dead.  That's the facts. What a story. I appreciate you taking all this time to tell it. I think it's  important to get it on tape. We needed to. Yep. It's like a dead man switch if you know what I  mean. Yeah, I do. Steve Baker, thank you very much and Godspeed. Thank you, Tucker. Thanks  for joining us tonight. See you next Wednesday.