Hello freak bitches. Why do these patterns repeat themselves? What is it about human beings? Well, we like things simple. We like things simple. So, you often like simple explanation is a good explanation unless it's too simple but distinguishing between simple and too simple is no easy matter. We like to know who's our friend and who's our enemy and we like the feeling of unearned moral superiority. And then there's more or less a very odd thing. Why you're in it, man? Especially when there's no such thing as earning anyways. So, and then, I mean, there's deeper and darker things that are underneath that. It's like the human proclivity to pull down those who have more than you. It's like these kids on the campuses who are claiming identity with the oppressed. You know what? Somewhere like Yale. It's like how in the world you can speak of oppression if you happen to be at Yale is beyond me. I mean, first of all, you're North American, which puts you in the top 1%. And then of North Americans, you're in the top 1%. You're in the top 1% of 1%. But yet you want that. You want to have all the power that goes along with that. And you want to have the moral superiority that comes from being a representative of the oppressed. So, that's exactly what you want. You want all the power and you want all the victimization at the same time. Yale is a great example because Yale was one of what happened with the Halloween costume debacle at Yale was one of the first videos that was released that made people horrified, where they couldn't believe how students were communicating with professors. Yeah, well, though, a student who screamed up a storm about that male professor, who was the husband of the woman who wrote the pro-Halloween costume letter, it turned out she was on the Bloody Hiring Committee that hired him. One of the things she screamed was, who hired you? It was like, well, it turned out it was you because you were on the committee just a few years before. I know, and they took it like, yeah, that was absolutely important. That's a problem. That's a problem. That's a problem that don't know what the hell we're talking about. Well, explain this debacle because it really was about questionable Halloween costumes. Well, it was about questioning Halloween costumes. Halloween costumes are part of the whole point of Halloween is to have questionable costumes. You play with death, for example, in decay and horror. It's a time when the norms with regards to the expression of things that are outside of our normal behavior are suspended so that everybody can have a little celebration as it turns out. Well, campuses have got all upset about things like cultural appropriation at Queen's University in Canada just the other week. They were going after students who were dressing up as Viet Cong, for example, or Mexicans. It's like, I just don't see what they hell's racist about dressing up like a Mexican. Mexicans have a traditional, traditional clothing. There's nothing wrong with Mexicans. So why is it wrong to dress up? Like that. If you want to be punch over for Halloween, what's wrong with that? Well, you can regard that as an homage as just as much as a denigration. So why is that such a problem? But anyways, it doesn't matter because nothing's too trivial to be a problem to a social justice warrior. And because they don't like to deal with real problems. And Yale went after Halloween costumes. So this woman wrote a letter saying maybe we should just relax about this stuff and you know, not don't put restrictions on what people wear for Halloween, but let people decide what is and is inoffensive. Yes. And well, many Halloween costumes are offensive. That's the point. But her letter was in really reasonable. Yeah, it was perfectly reasonable. It was like an adult wrote it. Yes. Yeah. And you know, all hell broke loose. All hell. And she ended up, she ended up quitting. And I think he did, you know, I don't think I don't think he left. I don't think he left, but she did. Seeing him bow down to this woman screaming at him, swearing in his face was so disturbing. It was so humiliating. I felt so humiliated for him because she was screaming, this is our home. What the fuck are you doing? You're not making this. It's not a heavy home. The university is not a home. Right. It's not a safe space. It's not a secure space. None of that. And if that winning a university isn't a home, that's not what it is. It's a place to be confronted by. I would say often horrible ideas. You want to learn about history. You think that's going to be safe. Do you know what human history is like? It's an endless bloodbath with, you know, with a certain amount of hopeful progress underlying it. It's a horror show. And great literature is like that. And biology is terrifying. And physics is terrifying. And you want to be safe. It's stay home. Stay home with your mom. Stay home with your dad. Don't come to university if you want to be safe because you don't go outside. No. I don't know if you, if you're going, if the university is going to make you safe, then it ceased to be a university. So one of the things I try to do in my class, I have this class called Maps of Meaning, which concentrates on atrocity, basically, on Soviet atrocity and and Nazi atrocity mostly. And what I try to do in the class is to teach my students that had they been in Nazi Germany in the 1930s, they would have been Nazis. And had they been offered the opportunity to be an Auschwitz camp guard, then maybe they would have leapt at it. And maybe they would have been in the sadistic, in the more sadistic proportion of the Auschwitz camp guard population. You think that makes you feel safe? It doesn't make you feel safe to know that Nazis were humans and you happen to be one of them. And so I think that educators that tell students that they're offering them a safe space are doing them a profound disservice. And you I'm a clinical psychologist and here's one of the things you do to make people less afraid. You don't make the world safer. What you do is you people tell you what they're afraid of and then you break it into little bits so that they can go confront them. You know, so maybe they're afraid of going to a party and you break that down and you say, well, do you know how to introduce yourself? And they say, well, I don't really even know how to shake someone's hand. And so then you practice having them shake their hand and introduce themselves because maybe they weren't taught by that by their half-witted parents when they were young because they were ignored. And so then you say, well, maybe you can go to a party for half an hour and all you have to do is introduce yourself to two people and we'll call that success and you build up their confidence and their confidence one step at a time. And what happens, the clinical literature indicates quite clearly is you don't make people less anxious by doing that. You make them braver. It's not the same thing. You don't make the world and it's horror is smaller. You make the person and their capacity to deal with horror larger. You encourage them. You strengthen them. That's what you do at a university. You arm people with arguments. You hone their intellect. You help them learn to write so they can marshal their arguments. You help them learn how to engage an intellectual combat because that's better than engaging in real combat. You make them hard and strong. You don't mauly coddle them and make them safe unless you're there enemy unless you're trying to devour their spirit. And that's what we have in the universities. We have the reign of the Edipo mother who's answered everything is, oh, just come a little closer dear and all protective from the world. It's just like Hansel and Gretel's, the witch in the Hansel Gretel story. Well, my house is made of gingerbread. Just come in here and everything will be fine while she feeds you, can he, to fat new up so she can eat you. That's the archetype of a modern university.