Go Roman, Roman. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe, Roman, get podcasts by night. All day. Oh, hello, good to see him, my man. Thank you so much for having me on. Oh, my pleasure. The moment I saw that documentary, I was like, wow, let me just be honest off the bat. I loved your first documentary, but when someone says there's a documentary about a crashed UFO and it happened in Brazil, I'm always like, man, people tell stories. You know? I'm like, maybe it was one of those. Like I didn't think too much of it. When I hear stories, even Roswell, I always go, man, I don't know. I don't know. It's so hard to know. 1947, you know, I think some shenanigans are going on, but what was it really and how much of this is just people tell stories and those stories grow and change over the years. And, you know, almost like the story becomes their real memory after a while because they've been doing it for, you know, so many years. But then this one, this one just right away, the way you captured all the information and the evidence and the eyewitness accounts, the photographs that people got, the depictions of the actual being, the fact that there was live beings. This is a, and everyone that didn't even know each other having these like really similar stories about what they saw and when people got a hold of the wreckage, like when you first started making this documentary, did you have any apprehension? Like, oh, this one, how do I sell a documentary on a crashed UFO? Like, what's the best way to put this together? Because that's part of the art of what you do, right? You were skeptical. Let me tell you how skeptical I was. Okay. So I was making my second documentary on UFOs in the late 90s. I just finished a documentary called UFOs 50 years from the original show, and I started on my second film. It was 1999. And I partnered up with a couple of guys. Boris Zuboff has been a partner. I'm still working with him today. And this guy, Tim Coleman, who's a British reporter. And we like mapping out the film concept, like, hey, we should cover this case. We should do that. And he's like, hey, mate, we gotta do this amazing UFO crash in Brazil with these aliens. We're walking around the town and I looked at the guy and I thought, I think I picked the wrong partner. Guys, fuck him, bad shit crazy. And literally I dismissed it on the spot. And I refused to even read one word about it. I said, there's no way in hell that that happened. And the whole world doesn't know about it. Right. So I have to remind your audience, I was making my second documentary on UFOs. On UFOs. And I dismissed it. Like this, like how fast can you say how to do the? It just always seems like if someone's telling you about something like that, you would have heard about it. Absolutely. I can't tell you Joe how quickly I dismissed it. And I didn't look into it until 2011. So here's what happened. I'm going to, I get invited by this guy, AJ Javard, to a place called Better Weebee in Brazil. And I'm speaking at a conference. But a film I did called, I know what I saw. And this guy calls me, Jeff's a Gansky. He was very high up on the food chain in the entertainment industry. It's been kind of like my mentor and opening doors for me over the years. And I've asked him over a period of time, like why are you so kind of either very wealthy guy in New York? And he goes, you know, Jackie Gleason told me one time that these things were real. Don't, don't listen to anybody else. I know for a fact. And so when I saw you as an independent, struggling young filmmaker, I always wanted to lend a helping hand. And by the way, you're going to Brazil. You got to look into that far genie case. And I thought, oh, God, not this again. Right. So I was like, well, I had a lot of respect for Jeff's Gansky. I mean, you can look him up. The guy's very famous. I mean, very big time. And I said, oh, yeah, sure, Jeff. I'll look into that for you while I'm in Brazil. And just to be nice, right? But in the back of my mind, I was like, I'm not wasting one second on that stupid case. Seriously. I'm telling you, honestly, got truth. And it was 2011. So I go to Brazil with no intention of looking into it. Zero. OK? There wasn't even asked one question. And it just so happens that nuclear physicists and UFO researchers, Stanton Friedman, rest in peace. And he is there at the conference. And somehow, the case gets brought up. It wasn't about that case, but it gets brought up. And he's like, oh, yeah, I was in Brazil when I went down. And he's one of the smarter guys. Stanton Friedman? Yeah. He is not an idiot. I mean, he's one of the reasons why him and Don Schmidt and Kevin Rand, or one of the reasons why we were even talking about Roswell. And he's like, oh, yeah, I was here when that happened. I met some of the witnesses. So then that kind of piqued my interest. I was like, oh, OK, well, God's Stanton, I can't completely dismiss, come from Stanton. Then I met a couple of people at the conference. So I thought, OK, well, I piqued my interest. I got to be honest with you. And that's how it all started. And that was like in 2011. And I was going to include a segment of it in the phenomenon. The other view, it's Stanton is that did you get that? I got that in 2013 in Brazil. Because he died when he died like a couple years ago. He died in the airport. You're not told me? He's like, James, I'm retiring. I can't do this anymore. I live in Canada in this rural spot. There are no direct flights. And I'm always running in the airports trying to get my connecting flight. And I just, I can't do it anymore. And then he retired for like a year or so. And then he had to get back at it. And he died in the airport running for a connecting flight. Oh, he had a heart attack. He had a heart attack. Oh, no. It's exactly what he predicted. God damn it. I know, right? And I just like, he was a fascinating guy because he was an outspoken critic of Lazar. And I always wanted to get the two of them together. I was like, I wanted to see because one of the things that the critics of Lazar always bring up is his education at MIT. I can explain that to you off air in the way that he explained it to me. And it might make sense. But I think that it's hard to dismiss that he worked at that lab. Los Alamos Labs had him on their list of people that worked there. Like he was on the whatever that thing is that they have with all the list of employees. He was in it. He worked there. He knew all the people that worked there. He knew how it was set up. When they took him there, he knew the security guys. He knew the machines that they used to, they had some sort of a scanner that measured the length of your digits exactly. So you put your hand on this thing. And he talked about it. And everybody's like, what? That doesn't even exist. And then years later, people got photographs of this thing. George Knapp said he went through those Elmos laboratory like, psh, just right through. Let me tell you, this is something that just came in yesterday that I can, for the first time ever, talk about. In full detail, I've talked about, I did a couple of podcasts where I gave. I don't know, in 1993, 1994, I was working on my first film. I talked about it earlier. It's called UFOs. It's so 90s, but whatever. UFOs 50 years at denial. It's like 80 years of denial now. And I was interviewing this guy out of area 50. He was like, lived on the outskirts of the base in a place called, nearly the little alien in Rachel, Nevada. And Chuck, this guy's name is Chuck Clark. And he had found all these, and the relevance of what I'm telling you, will come to light in a second here. He'd found all these vantage points on the mountain tops that he could spy on the base down below with high-powered telescopes, with cameras. And he was taking photographs of exotic airplanes coming out of the hangers and stuff like that. He wrote a book called, like UFO Area 51 Handbook and Guide or something. He was a amateur astronomer. He was, and he had a couple of really cool sightings out at Area 51 that were really like he'd saw these, he'd seen my movie, saw these lights doing things that they shouldn't be doing, right? Like traversing and then stopping and then taking off really fast. So anyway, so I'm covering his story, because I was intrigued. I mean, in the early 90s, the bottle is our thing was everywhere. I was making a dock on UFOs. I was kind of looking into it. I wouldn't just like category could believe it, but I'll look into it. So I was looking into it. And I'm going back and forth out there for many times, and then one day I get a phone call from Chuck Clark and I'm back at home in Northern California. And this is kind of a long way away. And he goes, James, I got something you need to see. I said, okay, well, what is it? I can't tell you. But if your jaw's gonna hit the floor when you see it, I was like, that good, he goes, oh yeah, that good. I said, I'm canceling all my plans, jump to my car, and I drove straight through to Rachel Nevada. I get to his house. This must have been, I'm gonna guesstimate 95, 94, 95. Get to his house and he's got a double wide right near the little alien. And he pops in this VHS tape. And I was like, and it was like two guys. On the quintessential road trip, just to area, if you do, you know, the surrounding areas, Rachel and the extraterrestrial, lonely highway, and they're goofing off the alien, taking videos of each other, just the typical road trip out to Area 51, right? Blair Witch Project, totally. And then the goofing off next to the photographs of the alien in the crash desk, and then they're inside the little alien, and I'm like, okay, where's this going? Then all of a sudden, and I saw this with my own eyes, all of a sudden, the car's parked, and it's parked out by the black mailbox and the desert, and it's dusk. The camera is on the armrest between the two seats, and it's slightly cocked, like it's like it's not level. And it's filming the dashboard and the screen, the windscreen windshield, and there's two guys in there, sounding like, you can't see them, sounding like they're trying to crawl under the seats. I mean, they're freaking out. And then one of them goes, it's over the top of us. I'm like, damn, what is this video? Like, what am I, you know, then all of a sudden, the car lights up on the inside, but the source of light is above it, like if you can imagine, never seen anything like this, if you could put a pendulum with a light source above a vehicle, like above the car, like this, but very slow and fluid motion, like rocking back and forth, the shadows and the lights on the inside of the car are doing this really early. You've never seen anything like it. I'm looking like, my God, what is going on? And they're very scared. And one kid who's the younger of the two, is like, I'm getting out, I'm getting out of the car, I'm getting out of the car, it's over the top of the stand, I'm fucking car. He goes, now I'm getting out and he gets out, and he videotapes a disk that was so low, you could have hit it with a rock. And I'm looking at this thing, and I'm like, that's what all the witnesses have tried to describe. That's like, if you could imagine the skin on the craft, glowing like phosphorus on a beach, that's what it looked like. Like the skin was alive. And it had like a yellowy orange color to it, but you could clearly see it was a disk. I mean, it was not an orb, it was a disk, but the metal lit up, like it was alive. I'd never seen anything like it. And it just wobbled. Like it was unstable, like doing this. And the camera guy goes, oh my God. And then something about the batteries, and boom, it shuts off. I looked over at Chuck Clark, I said, this is the video everyone's been waiting for. Unbelievable. How do you know this is real? Because every, it's not real. All my BS meters are going for it now. All right, man. Fair enough. I get it, fair enough. I saw this video with my own eyes. Of course, it's a video though. You get a video, for sure, no question about it. No, they make fake videos. Absolutely, it was 1995, and they could have. But why would it, 1995, it's harder. Yeah, but why? It's never been released to the public. Why would you create a fake video? What year did you see it? I saw it like 95. And so it's out there somewhere. No, it's not. Chuck Clark's got a copy of it. The story continues. No, but I mean, someone has it. Oh yeah, oh, absolutely. I mean, in fact, if those two boys that shot it are out there, please come forward. Like, please, how come no one's acquired this? So, so I said to Chuck, oh my God, this is great. I can use this in my movie. Right, great. He goes, oh no, no, no, they're terrified. I said, well, look, just put me in touch with the guys. You don't have to like, give, well, wait a minute, they're terrified, but they give it to a guy who lives in a trailer. Hey, I'm just telling you. Do you know what I'm saying? I'm so, I'm really terrified. I don't want this getting out, but I'm going to give it to you. I get it. Guy who lives in a trailer, I get it. What does this guy do for a living? He was a former military guy and he's retired, but just a retired military guy. This guy's a fed. So, that doesn't even live there. But he probably put on some fucking overalls to hang out with you. The story is his name, Ray Epps. Oh, I know, Joe. I believe me, I get it, but the story gets better. Okay, okay. Okay. Because I went on a couple of podcasts and I said, the screw it, I don't care anymore. I saw this video, I'm going to start talking about it. Chuck Clark said, if you ask me again, after like, 10 years or 12 years, I'm never talking to you again. So I was like, I of course asked him again. I said, I'll give you 30 grand for the video and he's not talking to me. So, I went on like concrete podcast and I went on this guy, Julian Doreen's podcast and I went on a bunch of other podcasts and I gave the whole story. Let's, let somebody else pick up the ball and run with it. I'm just telling you what I saw, okay? I get contacted a couple of years ago by a guy who goes, I saw that video too. Then another guy contacts me and he goes, he goes, I got, I'm a private investigator. I find people. I said, well, the name is Chuck Clark. Go, go to it. So he finds him. Right at that time, I'm going on the impulsive podcast with Logan Paul and I tell Logan Paul the story and he has exactly the same response you have and I don't blame you, okay? I'm not here to convince anybody of anything. I'm just telling you what I saw. It was very impressive what I saw. Very impressive. If it was a fake, my God that was well done. I mean, should be making movies with Spielberg. So anyway, what is this challenge name who has this? Chuck Clark. Chuck, what are you doing? Look, well, let me finish. So Logan Paul, he's like, I wanna go to this guy's house. I said, I got the guy, he's got the information. Logan's like, this is all behind the scenes. So Logan Paul takes, I put him in touch with this guy and this guy lives in the middle of nowhere. I mean, it was like, Logan Paul takes him or say he's with a bunch of guys and $100,000 in cash, a big break and he goes out to this guy's house in the middle of the desert. Logan calls me in the middle of nowhere and he's like, you sure you're context legit, dude. My phone doesn't work out in the middle of nowhere. I got 100K cash in my pocket. I can't find this guy. I said, no, I'm sure he's good, you know? And so Logan goes in there and meets Chuck Clark and Chuck Clark's like, yeah, I got the tape right here. And so he says, I'll give you 100 grand for it. And the guy says, no way. And so Logan Paul was gonna reveal this for the first time. Logan Paul has got a button camera on his, dress on his clothes. So Logan Paul's like, all right, well, this guy doesn't wanna, you know, he's gonna die with it. So let's get this thing on camera. So Logan's like, well, let me see it at least. So Logan looks at it with this thing. And oh, could you show it to me again? Gets another angle, gets another angle, and then he leaves. So Logan's like, I don't know if I wanna go public. I mean, I don't really own the video. I don't know. It seems like a bit of a gray zone. So I said, look, you know, this is a story that might be of interest to Bob Lazar because maybe Bob Lazar could see this video and he could make a determination. I'm just saying, or maybe George Knapp or Jeremy Corbel might be interested. This is not my domain. I'm not a Bob Lazar big guy. I don't know him enough about Bob Lazar in the early 90s and he told me I came up to him at a conference and I said, hey, thank you for coming forward. And he said, I didn't have a choice. That was my own, I don't know anything about the case. I know, you know, way more than I do about the case. But I'm just saying, I'm just putting this out there. How do I know more about the case, new? Well, I do. You literally make documentaries. I do. I do, but I, I mean, you got one person's account and it's fascinating. And I believe that Lazar believes what he's saying. But I've talked to George Knapp about this and George said the same thing. I said, maybe, I mean, just maybe. And I'm not out here attacking Lazar or nobody else. I'm just saying, maybe he was used as a disinformation plant that seeds some real information and some bogus information just to kind of test the waters and the reaction to the public. I don't know. Most certainly that's possible. Yeah. I really, certainly that's possible. Not my domain. It's all, I also, I would imagine if you're gonna give people access to classified information like that, you'd be very careful. And you would probably add in some stuff that's not true. So it doesn't matter whether or not, as long as they have a bunch of stuff that's absolutely provable nonsense. Yes. On top of this stuff that's probably real, then they get discredited. Yes. Which, you know, I mean, look, there's a lot of weird stuff about the Bob Lazar story. A lot of weird stuff about it. And the one that sticks in my mind, and I know this probably shouldn't because it's possible to do is that it's been consistent. His story's been absolutely consistent since the late 1980s. Now that's possible to develop a narrative and if you're disciplined, it is obviously very intelligent. You could just like craft the longest con, the world has ever known, and make no money from it, and turn your life upside down, and have the feds search your property, which they did on a lot of videos. It doesn't make a lot of sense. If they thought that he really was in possession of element 115, and that there really is a stable version of this element that we discovered in a particle collider, or we accurately, they predicted it and then proved it to be real in a particle collider. But that wasn't until like the 2000s. When I was like, when they, I wanna say, was it like 2011 when they officially discovered particle 115, or element 115? But this element he said was stable, wherever these beings are from, and they use it to propel their craft through a means of bypassing normal propulsion systems, with some insanely sophisticated method, where they can pick points in space, and they essentially just instantaneously traverse these points in space. I brought a photograph with me, of course I left it in the other room, but I'll bring it out at some point. And it was a guy named James Kibble. He's Australian, and it's about, it's April 1966, and the reason why I'm bringing this up is because I did a segment on a landing case that happened at Westall in 1966, which is a suburb, Westall Primary School, which is a suburb of Melbourne. Shane Ryan did a film on it, I just covered a section of it in the phenomenon. And during my time in Australia, I'd heard about this guy, Jim Kibble, James Kibble, that shot a Polaroid of a disc, a couple of kilometers away, two days prior to the landing at the school. A lot of times when you have sightings, mass sightings like that, they're in and around the area for several days. So it's very likely that those two are connected. My point is this, according to James Kibble, when he's in the film, he said the disc was, kind of coming down like this over his garden, and he had his Polaroid camera, he was gonna take pictures of, who you're doing the same wobbling kind of motion. He said this kind of hand. Tell you what he told me, yeah. I'm glad you said it was kind of wobbling down like a leaf kind of. And then he was like, holy shit, and he grabbed his Polaroid camera, and he said he did it so quickly, he smashed it in his face, and he split his nose open, but he snapped one shot and said what it did was, is it went like this, which I had the photograph that I have shows it sideways. And I'll show it to you, I've got a eye scandered from the original Polaroid, and then it shot off at an unbelievable rate of speed, according to him. Exactly how those are describes how these things were. That's exactly my point. And when I interviewed all the children now adults that watched this thing land at this West All Primary School in 1966, they said the same thing. It was sitting on the ground, the got up to, I think, around 10 feet away from it, which is pretty remarkable when you talked to witnesses, especially that many witnesses. I mean, there were roughly 300 kids, I didn't meet all 300 of them in the playground when this happened, and including the science teacher, this guy Greenwood, which I got a more camera for the first time in history and the phenomenon. And they said it got off the ground, and then it went like this, it turned like this. Turn sideways again. And then it shot off at a high risk. It's in the mood. And there were all the tests and were the same thing. Yes, and I got a photograph of it like this on the show sound. And no sound. A slight humming or buzzing sound. This is 1966. So, and I'm going to get to this later, we can go back to moment of contact, but I'm going to make the argument that some, and I cannot emphasize how many times we need to underline the word some. UFOs, UAP, originate from a non-human intelligence. And I'll start off in 45, and I'll take us up to modern day. It's a handful of cases that I am, I have personally investigated. I have personally met the witnesses gone to their houses dating back to 45, 47, 52, 57, 55, 60, 64. Like all these cases, okay? So basically what I'm going to do is we all know, we know that the vast majority of these cases can be explained in conventional terms. All this noise about Chinese balloons and weather balloons and that's all noise. It's obfuscation and noise. Yeah, we know that all stuff exists. But what about the core five or 10% of cases? And I'm going to give you some samples today that truly, after extensive and exhaustive investigation, not because of a lack of data that defy a conventional explanation and those are the cases that I'll share with you today. When we're ready, I'm going back to moment of contact. Don't give you one. Let's go right in there. Are you ready to do it? All right. So let's do it. Let's do it. Here it is. Oh, you got it. That's the photo. That's the photo. I got a much better copy outside. But see the way it turns out is now, let me tell you, if you ever see a photograph of a UFO and I've talked to NASA analysis about this, and it has a clearly defined edge, it's probably a fake. They somehow, they have something to do with, it's blurred around the edges. They don't get, they can't get a crisp photograph of a photograph. They think it has something to do with the propulsion, but again, that's not me saying this. That makes sense. Yeah. If there's some sort of a field around it, I have a much better copy outside. But yeah, this is a good, do an example. You have a much better copy than this. I do, I scanned it from the original to my bag. Go get the badge. Shall I go get it? Go get the badge. Go get it right now. Sorry. Take the bag, man. Oh, it's right there. Exciting. Sorry about that. Keep that up on the screen. Please, Jamie. Can I see the full, how it's... Okay, here it is. Look at that. It's oddly centered. This is perfect. Sent to me, this is sent to me by the guy who shot the Polaroid. Okay. There was his handwriting that came from Australia. Boom. Here it is. Check it out. Can you see the white sideways like that? Yeah. Man-glass. Side out, right? I got mine too. And we can get into, we can get into my argument that I'm going to put forth, as if I'm presenting a case to a jury. See, my number one problem always with these things is that I want it to be true so bad that I worry that my rational, logical mind ignores all possibilities of it being bullshit. Don't look at anyone particular case. What you have to do... I mean, I'm looking at it like this. This falls down. That's pretty good. Let's just say one. This is the same photo. So, you got to look at it like that. You can do it again. Yeah. It feels similar, bro. It's a bell. It's a school bell. Times up, it's just... That's what it tells. It tells us. It tells us humans. Which, you can't base this stuff or any one. Oh, James, you can do that. It's over. You can't base up. James, on the case. Hey, all I could say is that you talk to the witnesses. I think you've picked it up as a hamburger underneath it. That's what I think. It's like a fancy restaurant hamburger. It's real. It's real, sir. It's just white fries. It's thin. You know, the kind of way they don't put the bun together. You got to do it together yourself. The burgers are sitting there. But you can't... You look at the preponderance of eyewitness testimony from around the world, right? You don't look at anyone particular case. You look at one particular case. You think, guys, see some cracks in that case. I get it. I get it when them lids. Someone them food lids. That's what I'm talking about. That's what it is. It's 100%. We cracked the case. Yeah. It's a food lid. The burgers aren't anything. You can see the top thing. Well, Jamie, that's the propulsion system. You fool. Don't you understand UFO physics? I don't know which way it's going in the photo. That's the way it's going. I don't know which way it's going. You could pull up McMinnville, Oregon, 1950. Evelyn and Paul Trent. Pretty good photographs of disks. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they're pretty good. What is it again? I'm going to see the Oregon, 1950. Evelyn and her husband, Paul Trent. Snap, I think three, two or three photographs of a disk in broad day. No, I know Barney Hill's granddaughter. That's incredible. Yeah. She looks like a fight. Yeah, that's bad ass. What about that? Angela Hill. She was on the podcast. And she told me about that after we got off the air. I was wondering, I should have brought her right back in. Look at that. There's a better one. Hold on. It's hubcap. Nope. It's lifted. It's definitely hubcap. That's pretty good. That one down over there's a hubcap. I've got that extremely high resolution. But you've got two eyewitnesses never made a dime out of the story. It's been analyzed to death. Show me that hubcap one. Oh, that one's that's 19. That's that's that's that's that's that's Rex Halfland. No, look at that's Rex Halfland, Santa Ana, California. Mm-hmm. And there are several Polaroids from Rex Halfland. You can look up Rex Halfland. It's pretty damn good case. All jokes aside. The how many of these do you think are fake? Well, I'm showing you the ones that I that have been scrutinized to death. And no one has made any serious claims of being a hoax on the cases that I'm giving you. So that image right there? Good to bring me that again, Jamie. That image right there. It's like I feel like someone could fake what you got to listen. You got to listen to the testimony of Evelyn Trent and her husband Paul. And you got to listen to the analysis that Conan committee did on this. And blue photograph. Yeah. What did they say about the photograph? Well, here's the thing. Everybody's like, okay, I witness testimony is not good enough. No, it's not saying that. No, no, I think, listen, if you had a unique experience, if you were out in the desert and you're driving to Nevada, and all of a sudden your engine lights went off, closed accounts of the third kind style, and you got out and there was a fucking disk, and it hovered over you for a second, and it took off at an insane rate of speed, and you just left there alone with this memory. Yeah. I sympathize with those people because in the vast universe that we exist in, it's entirely possible that something like that has the power to get here. It's entirely possible. Also, people are full of shit. There's a lot of people that are full of shit. No questions. That's part of my problem. My problem is not that I don't believe. My problem is I don't believe people that much. And I do believe some people, and there's some sincere people, and that's one of my problems with Bob Bazaar, I believe Bob Bazaar. I talked to that guy. I like what you say, I believe he believes what he's saying, and there's something to that. But I also think, God, if you wanted to get someone, that you could easily discredit, if you had a propulsion system that was baffling you, and you had some wizard who likes to make hydrogen-powered corvettes, and you put a rocket engine in the back of a Honda. Did you ever see that? I did. He's a psycho. So he's a guy who understands propulsion systems, he's clearly brilliant. He listed the guy talking off the charts and television. All right. We'll see you next time. Enjoy. Did you ever see that I did yeah psycho like so he's a guy who understands propulsion systems he's clearly brilliant he listed the guy talk is off the charts intelligent yeah and he would say it was pretty fucking psycho over here let's let's have that guy go down there this guy's out there in the fucking desert shooting a k-47s and she's a wild man right so you bring that guy and you tell him hey tell us what this is go to work and he's walking around there is like what the fuck is this like that's the kind of guy you if you're at the end of your rope yeah you if you know if especially if you're a brilliant person if you're a brilliant person and you happen to be a general or happen to be someone who's in charge over there and you're thinking like we gotta look outside the box like we gotta do something we gotta bring in other perspectives and you gotta bring in someone that's not gonna be able to communicate with other scientists this is part of the problem you can't share data they can't they can't peer review with other scientists over the world because top secret shit so everything has to stay within the small group very small group of people none of them are cracking it all of them they bring in their fucking stunned in baffles you keep funnel in new people and they do experiments something blows up some people die they like okay it's try some more what else you got I'm a little salmos loud but fucking rocket engines the back some fondas and he's a propulsion's expertise kind of nuts but maybe bring in yeah so I'll get back to my domain because I this is the stuff that I know and I know primarily because I went and interviewed the way this is one off of the time we don't know it's all good I'm gonna I'm gonna bobble's are okay I just don't know the case well enough to comment on it I mean more than that the reason why I shared that that video stories not because I'm sitting there telling you that's definitive piece of evidence that the world's been waiting for the waiting for but it's very compelling it's never been released and I'm giving you guys a lead on that this is guy has it Logan Paul so Logan Paul just put it out on your rock that he might do that so yeah I mean if I sues you the money that you'd make from having that releasing you probably way worth it you know and I hope if if if the two guys that shot it one was 19 the other guy was close to 30 so those guys are still alive they lived in Los Angeles and they're definitely still alive yeah they still those guys are still alive let's put Content well I'd like to see the original tape because it's gonna be a lot better condition than old VHS tape tell you gentlemen I'll get you on the podcast come on so tell the story contact me at James C Fox oh don't put your email What are you crazy? No, it wasn't I was that was my Twitter. Oh, yeah, just my Twitter Good Lord sir no I made a mistake and do it at one time on Larry King Live. Oh no How many dick pics did you get any I? Was so inundated I could not believe I was like what was I thinking yeah, this probably like millions of Lord who's crazy anyway the people about when it comes to UFOs people that's very passionate Absolutely so let me get back to my argument because from 1945 forward yeah, let's go And I'm correct and this is one of the things that I've always heard is that after the bombs were dropped yes That's when the UFO starts well that's when the activity certainly heightened and Yeah, so is there any indication that They were directly connected other than the fact that they just show up was there was there ever any so I'll tell you I'll tell you how it organically came upon my attention. I was working with this guy Lance Manji I was one of the editors that was working on the phenomenon with me and We were doing this archive from a guy this guy named David Marlow has got this incredible archive of UFO material dating right back to the 40s Loyed to modern day newspaper headlines audio recordings statements Broadcast unbelievable the biggest archive you can spend the rest of your life in there so he gave me a bunch of stuff that was Archive interviews of primarily people at white sands hallow in air force base different areas in Texas and I was just putting it in it's kind of like a little montage in the piece of just giving the Illustration that these things are going on kind of all over and my buddy goes hey man Let's put a map on the wall and put pins in the map for all these different locations So I was like oh, okay sure let's do that So we put a map on the wall in the edit room when we're doing the phenomenon And we were putting pins in and we looked at each other after like a day or two We were like look at proximity to Trinity side Wow Even saccoro white sands this place in Texas like that's kind of unusual We're kind of scratching our heads. Do you think there's a correlation? So anyway, we didn't really take it much further than that, but we definitely took notice And then I met with senator Harry Reid. Thank you george now for helping make that happen Former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid started the A tip program and during the interview Didn't think about asking them this but at the end and he had like I'll be I'll have 47 minutes with you And then I got a go and he's got all the security guards and big guys with thin earpieces looking at me I said well, sir, would you mind if we could um Do quick walk and talk he goes yeah, I'll give you 45 seconds. I figured well while I'm walking with senator Reid I'm gonna ask him what was one of the more astonishing aspects of the phenomenon that they uncovered during this Pentagon UFO program And right away without hesitation he goes The fact that there are incursions over our nuclear missile facilities Nuclear armed facilities That is of grave concern. Not just that was a shocking aspect of the phenomenon I thought back to that map that we'd done in the editor room So I was like I gotta I gotta go back to the drawing board. So I spent a year I contacted this guy named Robert Hastings who's the the guy who wrote the book on the connection between UFOs and nukes What is the book? Uh, his name is Robert Hastings. Um, UFOs and nukes. I think But in any case I contacted him And he's like oh, I've I'm not doing too well. I got this heart condition I tell you what you can have all my archives all the videos that I shot So I went through all of it and I put together just like a five or ten minute segment in the phenomenon that connection And you got all these like missile control launch officers and people at Malstrom Air Force Base Mind on Air Force Base talking about these incredible incursions and keep in mind You're talking about people that we entrusted with the secure like securement and and and deployment of nuclear weapons, okay? So if these guys are lying That's a problem and if these guys are hallucinating When they've got nuclear weapons at their disposal. That's terrifying And it's happening all over. I mean, there's I don't I've got at least 15 or 20 Of these guys testifying and Robert Hastings got a bunch more and point is there is it there does seem to be a connection I interviewed this guy Robert Salas Robert Salas was a lieutenant Robert Salas launch control officer United States Air Force has this incredible encounter in Malstrom and his people too and UFO cited a disk and then his nukes start shutting down He said to me I'll never forget this and this is like 2002 this is part of out of the blue he goes Well James very calm. I could see why he was a lost control officer very measured everything that came out of his mouth was calm and measured He goes well James the way I see it Kind of like taking matches out of the hands of a baby Whoa Yeah, whoa right. Well that makes sense So there's a preponderance of testimony from these guys and they're testifying right now to Arrow Sean Kirkpatrick, but we can get back to zero stand for Look it up. It's an acronym. It's it's the new uap task force There's there was uh There was a staff and it went to at hip then it went to uap task force then it went to I know they keep changing the name It's like a re like a rebranding or something Do you know it's that all domain anomaly resolution office? Did you see the the the photo that I posted on the instagram of the story of the guy from space force. Yeah it says we may be facing Threats outside this world. Yeah, I don't fuck does that mean I just don't even want to spend any time space force boss acknowledges the u.s. Will begin facing threats outside of earth What the hell are you saying? What are you saying man? What does that mean? Can I can I read a statement that can I ask you one question? Absolutely because we're on still on the subject of the nuclear base This is this is the exactly this is relevant to this how many of them were there how many different sightings were at these missile bases and in areas where they're Testing new there are a lot of cases. I think cases in just about all the installations in the United States. I mean Robert hastens can I mean I have every installation United States has cases I Can't say that definitively right a lot of them a lot of them. I put 15 20 25. Let me give you another example joint base Reynolds and forest December 1980 It's a joint British U.S. base It's called the Reynolds Reynolds and forest incident There was a landing December 1980 You've got Jim peniston John Burrows and this guy Ed Cabantzag thinking that like something crashed in the forest or something They went out to investigate and there's an object sitting on the forest floor. It's a it's a Kind of like a triangular shaped object and it's dark It's warm to the touch and they sat with it on the ground Cabantzag acted acted like as a relay between the base and where this object is set on the ground Jim peniston took photographs of it. He had his log book He wrote down the symbols that were on the craft which are crazy and And then the deputy base commander Colonel Charles halt. I interviewed him He had because sightings can happen over a period Of a week or more a lot of times when you get these mass sightings And even the deputy base commander Colonel Charles halt became a witness. He was skeptical and then he too became a witness And he said that these objects There's a recording of him while it's happening Out there in the in the ether There were shooting beams of light down in the weapon storage area. That was December 1980 Phenomenal case the Reynolds from forest incident. These are like the cases. What did this object look like? It was a triangular shaped Object not that big. I don't know maybe six feet high and it was black and he said it was warmed the touch And it did make any sound very little sound and then it lifted off the the force floor Manuver it up through the trees and shot off at a high rate of speed Now these are people that are responsible for the security of our nuclear weapons saying this the deputy base commander Colonel Charles halt saying this Gordon Williams the general of the entire base. I interviewed him as well He talks about how the fact that this got out It was a memo that was written by deputy base commander Colonel Charles halt that leaked and the whole story got out But those are the cases that I'm talking about that represent that five or ten percent core That that cannot be explained away in conventional terms defy after exhausted research I mean Nick Pope talks about it at the mo d he investigate it because it took place in England He said there were radiation readings at the landing site disease The crafts that happened at the base. Do they have photograph of these things? Well Jim penison says that he took photographs and then they said the photographs didn't come out It's what they told him So he took photographs to get developed. Yeah, and when they developed them they said that's what they said to him Yes, yeah, so most likely they just said so then and then One of the things that Colonel Charles halt said that the deputy base commander is that a plane came in and there was someone known government USA to say I know you guys probably thinking I'm crazy now, but don't take it from me I'm just telling you what they told me okay That that they came in and kind of sanitize the whole the whole case But that's a very good case and it's one of the the top Cases that is extremely it's been investigated in England. It's been investigated in the United States And all a lot of the witnesses have come forward on the record So it's quite possible that somewhere and some archive this photo exists or some photos exist. Okay, so but here's the question If the government keeps coming out and telling us that you know we may begin to face threats from outside of this world If they're telling us that you know like when they're discussing these things They behave in a way that we can't describe and no propulsion systems that we know of they're telling us all this Why wouldn't they release all that other stuff too? Why would when they release those photographs? What's in it for them? Well, what's in it for them to tell us about it in the first place? Well, they're not What I mean just the way they're addressing it now people think That there was a sudden epiphany with the US government That they wanted to be more transparent and they wanted the general public to know more about this phenomenon Right that is not what happened what happened is a couple of insiders in December of of 2017 Walked some evidence out of a tip found a loophole and put it on the front page of the New York Times So was leakers and hell yeah was leakers did that. Yeah. It was Christopher melon. Okay I actually got a phone call when the film was coming out and I got a phone call from Leslie King She goes Christopher melon told you that he was the one that walked the footage out of the Pentagon I said yeah on camera. Well, Chris. She goes melon. He goes. I can't believe that he didn't even want that the New York Times like how you know I said I don't know he just he just said it and that's what happened. It wasn't like suddenly the government had this epiphany So now they can't put the genie back in the bottle now. You got the David Frevers, right? David Frevers and cameras phenomenal. Yeah, I'll come on. Yeah, I mean it's got photographic evidence That tick-tack. I was investigating a landing case in Sequor, New Mexico It was April 24th 1964 So I spent five years on this case. It was the case that turned around Dr. Jalen Heineck Dr. Jalen Heineck investigated UFO reports for the United States Air Force as a scientific advisor for from 47 to 69 He's the one that coined all the term close encounter the first kind close encounter the second time the second kind the Close encounter the third kind okay Close encounter of the first kind of when you see a UFO at close range close encounter the second time You see a UFO and somehow it interacts with the environment whether like Richard Drive his face got burnt or leaves marks on the ground or burns Trees whatever the propulsion affects something close encounter with the third kind and this is coming out of Air Force project blue books Own files. This is not me saying this Close encounter of the third kind is when beans are reported by the witnesses So beans are associated with the craft are reported One of the best most well documented cases in US history took place at Sequor, New Mexico April 24th 1964 at five o'clock with the police officer that was on duty by the name of Lonn is Amora the best case in US history the best documented case the first military officer To arrive on the scene got there the the bushes were still smoking. I mean the imprints in the ground of the craft the footprints they got diagrams of this stuff and I spent five years going back and forth to Sequor New Mexico. I got to know the wife Mary I got to know the daughter Diane the son Michael his co-workers I went to the National Archives with Ray Stanford. He wrote the book on it. It's Coro saucer in a Pentagon pantry phenomenal case and what I learned was that the um The Air Force according to his own family Lonn is Amora's family told his daughter this I have this on camera the Air Force wanted him desperately not to talk about the beans that Do they discourage him to talk about the beans and I tell you why it's one thing when you see an object unknown object like David Frevers saw up in the sky exhibiting a technology that seems to defy conventional propulsion And it's another thing altogether when you've got beans on the ground The Air Force didn't want him talking about that and that was one thing that his daughter and his wife told me clearly in his wife said Lonnie was never the same after that that case but so what did Lonnie see Lonnie saw two beans the base of a of an egg shaped craft that was landed in an arroyo in Sequor New Mexico in broad daylight Lonnie looked out the window of his patrol car he saw something that caught his eye and then this object landed he drove he was actually in hot pursuit of the time he gave up pursuit to go invest what was going on and he sees this object on the on the in the arroyo in the desert on the ground It's such a well documented case and He rolls down his car window and he's looking out and he's going to Am I looking at like an overturned car with the hell am I looking at and then He sees two little figures He said they were childlike at the base of the craft and one of them locked eyes with him and His wife said he was never the same after that but um How did he describe them with them said they were child that they were small childlike It's small and had white coveralls type coveralls This is a close encounter the third kind what they said their faces look like I He didn't give a lot of detail. I've got the only so I went to Lonnie's house I got to know his his wife quite well Lonnie had passed a couple years prior to that and I Don't know how far down in the rabbit hole you want to go in this case because we could talk on this case for three hours But whatever I could tell you that I got access to he had this black duffel bag And it was with his wife's permission He had kept all the original newsprints From like the articles that had come out and that's where I got the details And he also talked about it in some recordings that I got from his family and other researchers It's in the movie the phenomenon and Um, that's where I got the primary description because it was Richard T. Holder was the first military officer on the scene The FBI got involved later and and and uh How long was that was that thing sitting out there for the object was sitting on the ground not for very long just a few minutes Lonnie saw the beans and He went like around to get a closer look I mean he was like with the hell am I looking at and he drove his car around to get a closer look and he lost contact with for a second While he drove around to get a closer look now he's within 50 feet of this egg thing sitting on the ground Then he gets out of the patrol car it starts It starts making some weird noise and it has a blue Flame that comes out and he said it was it was not like a like a rocket flame where it would hit the ground and dust everything up But it pierced the ground like a knife through warm butter And then when it got about 20 feet off the ground it went completely silent with no flame No nothing you can hear a pin drop. There was a symbol on the side of the craft It was in yellow and it was about three feet tall and it was a like a V like this two lines at a line on top and Let's get a photo of that symbol that he recreated. Yeah, you'll see you'll see you'll see fake symbols because Richard T. Holder asked him to draw a different symbol. I actually have the original symbol On a document from Dr. Harwood I did someone ask him to draw a fake symbol because he said that if if anybody else claimed to see the same craft with that symbol They would immediately be able to identify a hostor. Oh So which was the real one? The real one is that one right there with the two lines in that upside down beat right there That's the real one. That's the real one. I've got the document and Dr. Jalen Heinex own handwriting Raised Stanford and I went to the National Archives and found it. It was a huge find so they did that on purpose Just in case some copycat people started coming off. He did Richard T. Holder and I met Richard T. Holder's two kids and talked to them about it Talk to his wife about it and they said yeah, he was he was told that's not the genuine That's the one right there right there that you're looking at mmm. That's the real one no question So anyway my point is he drew is that his handwritten note over there it shows it. Yeah, that's yeah That's definitely I've actually had I actually found the original one of those there is that's it That's the document that with I found with Ray Stanford of the National Archives in 2013 This is in Dr. Heinex own handwriting In close suggest any resemblance to the any draws the symbol of Socorro maybe we've yeah, I mean It's the funniest move quite honestly So this was the case that turned jl and honor so yeah, so what happened was Jacques Folay was it right? That's what it looked like similar so similar to a tick-tack Yeah, that's what it looked like but when it got when it got to about 20 feet off the ground and went completely silent No blue flame nothing The landing gear was retracted. It was just an egg And it floated off in the distance and actually Lonnie I've got a I've got an interview with Lonnie where he says that one of the officers who arrived on the scene Um, actually saw it fly off off in the distance and it was witnessed by other people in the town that saw the thing flying didn't the Tiktack the people who saw the Tiktack and Clooney commander favor didn't he say that they some sort of Thing that almost looked like landing year. No, there's something that they're protruded out in the front of it or something I don't know yeah, but but apparently the video I think it was according to favor the video is The one that's been out is a lot the resolution is a lot worse than then what other people had seen at the time I remember I think your David favor said that to me but Yeah, so I just I just recently went I'm filming a new doc And I went to Washington DC for a month to get kind of caught up on what's been happening is a lot's been happening while I'm doing moment of contact there's an unprecedented effort in Washington DC to push for further government transparency Marco Rubio Senator Gillibrand Andre Carson representative Andre Carson who got the congressional hearings it happened last year Gaiago represent a Gaiago and Gallagher all been involved in others and so I got introduced some intelligence folks in the inside and They wanted me to read this to your audience. Okay, and this is about evidence. Okay so and this was in pretty much a reaction to the latest Hearing that happened with Gillibrand just a couple of days ago or last week. I will remain anonymous But I've been monitoring the UFO and I met this guy. I know this guy this guy's legit The UFO UAP activity and the authorities response to them. I can assure you there's a lot more evidence behind the curtain that hasn't been released First our military are and have been seen remarkable things in the sky in the oceans and on the land for years of Those reported where does all this information get stored? Authorities would have you believe that this data is destroyed, but unique data is stored somewhere to be reviewed later and As someone that is seeing the classified holdings I am very disappointed in the fact that Dr. Kirkpatrick showed some of the most mundane videos to the public I do understand that there are security factors to be considered So I'm hoping that Senator Gillibrand saw something much more interesting in her closed-door hearing with Kirkpatrick And why did only two senators show up for the hearing have they lost faith in Kirkpatrick already? I applaud Senator Gillibrand's efforts to find the truth, but I am more sure than ever that Kirkpatrick is not the one Hmm interesting so he's withholding some information. Yeah, these people went on camera for me It's gonna be released when the time is right, but I've got yeah, again It's one of those things conveniently like Lucy pulling the ball away from Charlie Brown. It's right So it's so Frustrating I can only imagine so frustrating Krista for Melon said that there's very high resolution photograph so he now has a he just he just met with me in DC and he's now Told me that there is satellite data and the only reason why he talked about it It's because Radcliffe mentioned it so there's a more Radcliffe mentioned it so all mentioned the fact that Radcliffe mentioned it It's satellite data and I was like how how good are the photographs? I want to know so bad You know me like I've been looking at this for 30 years. Yeah, how good are the photographs? You go James 4k just think about as good as you can imagine of craft and Did know that and I spoke to five other people that are part of the program or or had the top single The clearances to access this and they all confirmed And it's like they're just on the other side of that curtain Could like could somebody just get those out of here, please Please do you think we're closer than ever to those things being leaked? I think that if we keep the pressure on I think it's very important one of the things that concerns me a little bit is that Sometimes they could leak something That looks amazing right and then you put your fingerprints all over it and you send it out of the ether and then it's Approving to get the bunk right so you got to be kind of careful if you don't know providence and so I would imagine they would do stuff like that on purpose. Oh, these guys are so they're like five steps ahead of us You know so but you know, I know what I know not because I read it out of a book But we are actually waiting to the field. I mean I travel I'm not trying to to my own horn But I was interviewing generals and cosmonauts in Russia back in the late 90s. I went to China. I went to Australia I went to Africa. I went to Russia as I was just saying all across Europe. I Really want to know like I'm so curious and I like to go to location. I like to like to give an example I found out in China just a couple years ago There's a case that happened in 1994 the same time as Rua Called mung jao gua on the black forest of China and these guys in the middle of nowhere Related to the same telepathic message that the children received in Rua Zimbabwe It's in 1994 at Ariel school and by the way I did include a piece of that in the film that I did with the with the girls that I was only like 10 minutes long quite fascinating That's a damn good case. That's in one of the 10% cases that I talk about But there's a film out now. I think it's called Ariel phenomenon and it's all just about that case but Those are the should we get back to like To 45 and work my way up or she want to talk a little bit about moment of contact We can get over to contact is the case That could settle this debate once and for all or let's tease people for a bit with moment of contact because it is an amazing Amazing documentary. I won't go into it. I won't go into details. I'll just say this I will I put my reputation on the line for this. I get it It sounds so spectacular It sounds so unbelievable But when you watch the documentary it sounds less spectacular Similarly release spectacular but more believable. So here's it. Here's here's the point. Okay It's either the most elaborate complex hoax that involves half the town of Virginia This is like 130,000 people living there. I mean I go down to the town square and to start talking to people I did it the movie and you everybody's got a little piece of the puzzle. Most people have a piece of the puzzle It's phenomenal or the UFO crashed Live aliens were recovered And the Americans I was captured by the earth the Brazilian authorities and the American stepped in and flew some of that back to the United States And that's when the case goes cold There's no in between definitely the sexiest version. Well, yeah, there's no right There's no in between but you speak of a sexiest version. This is a I was looking at the thing in 94 in China Oh, yeah, oh good. Yeah, that's what I was saying Most bizarre contact in China occurred in June 7 1994 when how do you say his name? Meng Jogua Meng Jogua of Phoenix Mountain food How do you say that? Fujian Fujian Fujian province Province Met a female alien first there was electricity between them then things got amorous According to Meng The female alien looked like a white monster She was very tall about 2.5 meters and wore tight clothes with only her big eyes and private parts exposed She did something to him that felt like an electric shock and he passed out when he came around He found several scars on his body according to Wu. She planted something Meng being sized in his body into his body Things were about to get even stranger Meng had sexual intercourse the female alien She suddenly fell down on him. He could hardly move his penis felt hot then ached The experience was more pleasurable than anything he had ever felt that's him Yeah, then they gave him a light detector test any bastard I don't hear about that aspect of the encounter. I heard about bass those especially crazy too. Yeah I did not hear about that aspect of it, but any I didn't I didn't go But my point is that he was banging aliens Yeah Respect that takes a lot of courage, but I was very attracted to the avatar lady the big blue one that saves them So shot. So she's hot. We'll we'll we'll go back here. Let's let's go I think so. Let's go back because I've fucked it switch right over that. I I am Here so We'll get back to moment of contact. I want to say the last thing with moment of contact. I'm gonna get back to the other cases It's either The case who've all been waiting for the case that could settle the debate once and for all right if it's true Could you think of a more extraordinary? Let's just say hypothetically for a moment it happened as all the witnesses stated it happened How big of a story do you think that's an immense story because it means that they're real if it's true that it means they're real I mean something that we don't understand Was in the sky got hit by lightning got caught up in a furious lightning storm and wound up crashing and That these things survived and they got out and Skye got hit by lightning got caught up in a furious lightning storm and wound up crashing and That these things survived and they got out and the fact that one guy handled one of them and got this Insane infection and died very quickly afterwards and he was very young and healthy military man and the fact that all these people have the same story They all have the same depiction of the disc the the craft They have the same depictions of seeing these beings not one witness came to us We had to track down every one of those witnesses And there's a story behind each and every one of them that I could go on for an hour or four I'm sure I won't bore you with the details But the first thing will bore me. Well, we got a gravity bottle there. We could be here for days Oh my god, I'd be like I know But there's nothing that goes better. They marijuana in aliens when I went Every time I'd get back from Brazil I'd get home and people and I'm not there for a month knocking on doors talking to witnesses chasing people down trying to convince them to come forward Like crazy. Yeah, this is not like us a quick adventure to make this document 12 years That's insane and so and so I'd come home from a trip in Brazil And I'm telling you man. It was like my mind was just torqued. I was so I mean another alternate reality I'm thinking oh my god. I'm coming to the realization. This happened when that man Takes you to the spot And it gets overwhelmed with emotion. He was gone for 25 years Marco Liao, thank you Marco and and co I said that guy you don't have a story. We got to find we got to find Carlos to salsa Yeah, unless that guy is a Daniel de luez quality actor We don't need Brad Pitt anymore nor Leonardo caprio this guy if he's full of shit best actor He's one of the best actors ever because that moment when he gets that spot and he's overwhelmed with emotion He starts tearing up and oh, yeah, and he's freaking out like just imagine if 25 years ago you experienced something that literally destroyed your Understanding of life itself in the universe that there's a thing out there that can visit us That's different than us and it's probably been here forever My DP David West been shooting for over 40 years and he's like I'd never seen anything like that that guy was That's about as legit as I've ever seen that was so believable crying and I mean not only that but it's like the guy Disappeared he's never made a dime office. He gave one statement 26 years ago to a guy named Claudio Kovo Claudio Kovo was a Engineer and he was a researcher UFO researcher in Brazil. Thank you. May you rest in peace Claudio Kovo and there was a guy named Ubitajata Rodriguez He was a prominent lawyer. He's also investigated the case We wouldn't know about this case if it hadn't been for a handful of dogged Brazilian UFO researchers Peka Chini deserves credit this guy named Marco Petit AJ Jivard Virginia is 150,000 about 130,000 that they so it's like Boulder Colorado size. Yeah And I'm the surrounding areas, but you know I I I I was going to include like maybe like a like I did with Rua in the phenomenon I was going to include like five or ten minutes of that case in the and I just I worked so hard for so long with so many people And then I just deleted the whole thing out of the out of the film and I was like oh god Marco's gonna kill me when he sees this that I just didn't include any of it because I just couldn't squeeze it in and There was too much it was just too much Well, I'm glad you did it that way honestly because moment of contact is for it It's really good. There's a few of these documentaries that I go god, I shut them off and I go If that's real holy shit imagine being those people Imagine being these people in this small city of 150,000 people and then something happens and a fucking UFO crashes in a field and people witness it And everyone is just stuck there then the military shuts the town down. Can you see this? Yes This is Brigadier Jose Carlos Pereira of the Brazilian Air Force Okay, I met with him with Marco on two occasions The second occasion was two thousand that camera might be so sorry Jose Jose Worse, okay, this is Jose. You could look him up Jose Carlos Pereira Brigadier Brazilian Air Force, okay, so Marco and I met with him twice The second time was two thousand and thirteen He gave us an interview some of it's in the film and He said like I'll talk about the 1986 UFOs over Brazil I'll talk about the colores case that happened in the 70s phenomenal photographic evidence that's out there You asked me about Virginia and this interview is terminated Wow, what? What do you mean terminated like really? So anyway, we do the interview and I was like well I'm not gonna ask him I guess but when the camera stopped rolling I was like please I mean Marco and I were begging and pleading with this guy and I remember looked him the dead square in the eyes I said I swear on my life there are no recording devices. There are no you know cameras rolling please Tell us about Virginia. Why do you have that reaction of Virginia? Marco was too we were begging I'm actually licking this guy's boots and he's getting prepared to leave and he's got a driver waiting for him Outside so we were following and pleading with them all the way out there Please just tell us please I swear on my life this happened He gets in the car doors open. He looks up and I'm only reason why I'm telling this because he died He looks up at Marco and I and he goes it happened Close the door off. He went now the reason why I share that is because That's not something that I can put any weight on for the documentary for people like you, right? But as a personal message for me knowing that level of validation On the inside it kept us going. It was like okay Why on earth would he have done that why on earth would he say and that kept Marco and I going and that was a personal? level of validation that is there any conventional explanation why the military shut everything down why they had military barricades set up Around that area No, they did try to say that the the creature was this guy who's got like some deformities But I've seen the guy mowed Dean or something like that, but you talked to the witnesses Why would the why would the military? I know because of the guy in the deformities and then for the doctors in the hospital They said though there was a like a midget having a baby or something weird just something that was just so ridiculous It was like and you talk to the witnesses and they're just like oh come on. I'm not gonna You know, that's laughable at best. You know, I mean these girls came within eight to ten feet three three women Katya two sisters Liliani and Valkaria 14 16 and 21 they got within eight to ten feet and broad daylight of this creature and one of the things it doesn't come across in the film When they saw this thing they're looking like what are we looking at here? They're walking through this field and it's up against the cinder block wall and that one of them looking at the status. What is that? And it was crouched by the wall it was weak and feeble and one of them kind of like screeched Yeah, like what is that and it turned and it looked right at the girls locked eyes on them Liliani grabs her younger daughter to her younger sister who's 14 Valkaria and makes a High tells it out of there Katya is 21. She's frozen in her tracks locked eyes with this creature and it's communicating with her Please help me He wants help. It's weak and feeble and it's scared and it's crouched down Liliani realizes that Katya is back there. She gets I don't know a hundred feet down the path She leaves her sister stay here. I'm going back to get Katya. She runs back and I asked Katya and I asked all the girls During that moment of contact when you lock eyes I know it's only a brief second but during that moment of contact What did you feel like put me there? That's where the title comes from moment of contact because that was when they locked eyes on this creature And that's when Katya said help me. I'm scared and it was feeble and suffering and it's it's a very powerful moment and And and these girls have been saying the same thing the mother The first time I'd ever reported on these so-called like men in dark suits show up and intimidate witnesses Honestly, I've been hearing about those cases for so many times But I've avoided them because it's got so much baggage from men in black It's just ridiculous. I just didn't want to be associated with it But I'd heard it. I can go on until I'm blue in the face. I go talk tomorrow morning With the amount of cases with generals too But this time when the mother said that these men showed up and tried to get the daughters to say They were lying and offered her a briefcase for a hundred dollar bills And they could relocate I don't know for some reason I said okay for the first time in 25 years I'm gonna report on these guys and I did And it's in the movie you can hear the mother talking about it And she's so emotional and the mother came back to the location where after happened the smell that stench And the footprint on the ground I mean everybody talks about that stench that was so they said if you have take like a skunk Multiply that but I like a hundred thousand that would give you some indication the level of like how Putrid and nasty was paralyzing and it stayed in like it stayed in the areas like the hospitals when they did the x-rays and Everybody talks about it that stench their existence unbelievable like it fills your naval cavities and doesn't leave for a week It's incredible and then they all said the same thing and they couldn't get it out They couldn't get it out. Yeah, they sanitized the hospital The guy said that he had to close off that wing of the hospital while they were sanitizing it because it was so intense You know, so I How long did it last for? I heard days and weeks is what I heard from a people and even the mother said when she when she went to where the creature was She said that the stench even there after the creature was gone got in her nasal cavities and she tried to flush it out with water and saline or whatever and and She couldn't get it out of her nasal cavities Really crazy, but they all did I mean everybody talked about that stench. You know, I mean the military officer The guy that drove the creature around I was sitting across from him. You can't see his face, but I did and I'm looking at this guy in the eyes I'm thinking I could be looking at a guy That drove a fucking you have no idea dude. You have no idea. How did he describe? When I came back from that trip People are like how is your trip to Brazil? What was it like man? They got great, you know, smoothies and coffee and I'm just like I think in the aliens of his ship crashed And they recover live aliens and we made contact in the Americans came in. I don't know what thinking about so I told couple people On the last trip I came back. I was just like I was so rocked I couldn't I couldn't reintegrate back into culture It was Joe. I was just like it's the biggest story ever so people were asking me Even my neighbor who runs like the he runs that make-a-wish foundation. He was like James He goes Bro, I like you a lot. I got a lot of respect for you, but you lost me on this one Now it's like I don't blame you bro. I really don't but listen to the witnesses Just that's all I say just and I would tell people and I realized I can't talk about it All I can say is just listen to the witnesses don't take it from me But I'm looking at that guy in the eyes Joe And I've been at this for 30 years. I've made almost, well, I'm working on my seventh film right now I'm looking this guy in the eyes and I'm like this guy probably and it trip me out so hard and it ruined his life his To get this guy to go on camera just like a week earlier He was like I don't care all the money in the world. I'm never coming forward The risks are too high. How did it ruin his life? Because you're harboring the secret you're being watched you're being told not to ever talk about this And you're looking over your shoulder all the time and they call you the military calls you periodically I want to know where you are And he's got this secret inside him that he can't tell the rest of the world and he's thinking about all the different Everyone's out there speculating as it reels it fake as it real the fake and this guy drove a body around Just think about that for a second Think about the doctor who took the x-rays of this thing Marco Liao, thank you Marco. You're the man. Marco Liao found him eight years ago And he was like he confirmed the story and was still working original hospital. He was on never come forward Marco kept going every year back and forth and he retired in 40 years after retired He agreed to meet with us. He wasn't even sure he didn't go on and I said look man We'll put you we'll film you from the back. We'll disguise your voice Show this photographs of him at the hospital. We know we've he's been we've been trying to get at him Excuse me at the end of the interview. He's the thank you. I feel so much better I've been soldering that burden for 26 years and I've told so desperately wanted to tell somebody to share that story with the rest of the world You meet these people and you think why on earth they didn't come to us They're not trying to sell their story We tracked them down and begged and pleaded with them to come forward When I found Martha The sister of the deceased military officer Marklechore easy We were knocking on doors. I remember the sound guy from from Rio de Janeiro He was like you're out of your mind. What are you doing? Can't just knock on random doors I was like man if there's a will there's a way I'm gonna find this lady And we found her and it was like this kind of kind of sketchy area You know, it's like when you when you get out of your car and you could see like people drawing the curtains back and looking at you and you're standing out like Dude, I still like like a sore thumb man and then we walked up Had Markle with me. Thank God night. We had camera crews and stuff. It's kind of sketchy And uh, Martha appears and her husband appears in this big Who's a big guy and he's got like a white beater shirt on and he looks like he wants to rip my can head off And I'm like and she's looking at me and he's just looking at her going. Martha's looking Marta's looking at her husband and her husband's looking at Marcher like give me the signal. I'll kill this guy That's the fucking and I is looking at Marko and I was like James You need to think quick. Think quick on your feet right now And I said immediately please translate this. I'm here to give your brother justice. I'm here to get the story out Please Talk to me and we developed a relationship with her slowly over that And those are the first words that we exchanged and we eventually got her to come forward We talked she'd gone forward in the past But she doesn't know who the hell I am. I want to take you back to the doctor. Okay When you talk to the doctor, what did you describe when you said that that it was a normal day? January 1996 it was regional hospital So every day and all of a sudden all these military trucks and police cars showed up at the hospital They come in armed and they got a bag they got a thing in a black body bag and He was like hell's going on here. They're you're gonna be taking some x-rays He's like, okay And uh and they had him inside and they had armed girls and I was asking him like what was it like? When I when I interview witnesses, I always want them I always ask them to project like I sometimes I'll even close my eyes because I'll use their words to recreate So I'm like living it through them. Do you know what I mean? So I'll close my eyes and I'll recreate the scenes in my head with their words Right it's harder in a Portuguese because I'm having to get it translated But I asked questions like what was the atmosphere like? Dudes, is there any talking no talking super tense atmosphere very tense armed guards on the outside Armed guards on the inside military truck starting nobody comes nobody goes And he said I first time in my history in the history of my career I took the x-rays and I couldn't even verify that they were good because they took them immediately And then they said this event never happened. He said the stench note in the in the hospital was overwhelming and he goes through the different x-rays that he took the abdomen the head the arms legs the thorax out, you know and It was incredible in fact. Ubert Adrada Rodriguez if you're listening to this He's one of the leading researchers has gone quiet Pecachene disappeared for 20 years. He said did he get to see images himself? Did he get to see the body himself? Oh, he saw that he was right. Well, they didn't open the body bag, but he was he said the stench was just overwhelmed So they x-rayed it through the body bag so he never got to see it not see the alien and he didn't get to see the Ex I mean people are coming forward and droves right now we just got two forensic pathologists for the first time ever Working together to come forward to make statements and they're providing Documentation of the of the autopsy reports done on the deceased military officer That's the first time ever these guys are coming forward. It's happening right now. Let's explain what happened People haven't watched the documentary. Yes deceased military officer. Yeah, so So right after the three girls came and came within eight to ten feet of this creature or being or entity or ET Whatever that you want to call it about an hour later When I was about three o'clock in the afternoon, I would say probably maybe around five o'clock There were two military guys on patrol on the lookout for something unusual What they were told they didn't take a UFO had crashed they were on the lookout for something highly unusual And it was Eric Lopes at the wheel and Marco Shreese military police in the passenger seat They were about a block and a half to two blocks away from where the girls had seen the creature a couple of hours earlier and This thing runs across the car in front of him. He had slammed his brakes on and without a moment's hesitation Marco Shreese jumps out of the car and grabs the thing with his bare hands Yeah, he puts it in the back seat and they drive it to a clinic and the doctor is like what the hell is that Get it out of here. I don't know what you know leave so they went to regional hospital And then ultimately I went to humanitarian's hospital and so we have tested money from military acts That when he drove it from he might have test hospital it's in the movie, but he drove it from he met at us hospital to As a military base where it spent the night the truck for one night and then it went from there to esposects Campinas it's like a university. It's what all the intellectual scientific heavyweights reside And then it was there. I think under examination According to the witnesses that we talked to for a day or two and that's when the Americans flew in to Campinas And we have the radar military Control officer who came forward last year actually one two years ago when we were there filming for the last time his name is Marco Fettuce F E R E S and he came forward for the first time and said yeah in January of 1996 this plane came in you Usaf he kept calling it United States Air Force came in it didn't have the authorization of the Brazilian government He was like this thing can't land and some higher-up stepped under them. This is all This is his testimony. I'm just relaying it what he said He said some higher-up came in the room said let it land and it came in it landed at Campinas And then from Campinas two helicopters according to him flew to Vargina, Brazil Vargina back to Campinas then they loaded something on the airplane and then off to the United States and that's where the case goes cold So I will say this One of the most exciting aspects for me to getting invited on your show is that you've got an honor You've got a huge platform of a lot of people listening. I want to know We all want to know desperately What happened when the United States took over where did this stuff go? Who was involved who flew that airplane the flight records all of these things and so I'm asking you please Please if you're listening to this to come forward and talk to us There's an ongoing investigation if you're too afraid to talk to me There's new Whistleblower protection that Senator Gillibrand and Rubio and a handful of others just signed into law You can go and contact someone like Andre representative Andre Carson And there's a process you can go and testify and tell everything we know without fear of prosecution Are violated any NDAs. I beg and plead for you to do that now Excuse me. There are a handful of Congress people and senators that I believe are since Seriously trying to get down to the bottom of this stuff I've met with some of them and I've continued to try to meet with someone else And we're working with a guy named Brian Bender. He's kind of consulted on the project He worked for political and he's got great access as well. So the two of us are trying to We're trying to address The evidence the photographic evidence The potential debris Evidence the potential body evidence Where is it and who has the authority to release it? whom I? You know, I've never really covered it. I know that I put my reputation on the line, Joe And I I totally understand for your audience that are listening to this right now I'm thinking that I've lost my marbles and I completely respect that I have the same reaction myself and I'm not out here trying to sell crazy I don't have a go fund me asking for money on evidence that I don't have I don't not doing any of that All I'm saying is This is potentially The biggest story that we've all been waiting for the story That in my opinion Could settle the debate once and for all this story Happened in 1996 and the vast majority of the witnesses are still alive people are coming forward and droves right now Like I said earlier on the show Those two doctors coming forward the the forensic pathologist you want science They're given a science They're given us the long-form autopsy report Leslie Kane is having to professionally and medically translate it and she'll have it Looked at by medical removal that she knows so that's an ongoing investigation Just the fact that Marco Liao and we got access to those people I was doing zoom calls all last week leaving up to come in here begging them and pleading them to come forward Please do you My gosh, it's really what you want is actual footage. Of course. We want footage. You didn't sell what I showed you earlier Come on, man, you think I'm like, you know You know, I'm going after oh, no, I know you're going after it I mean, that's really what we need. I know it's what we need. I mean, I'm telling you right now close It seems like you just So close like a movie when you reach for the key I know you can't quite reach this is like you see it dangling right there You're like come on and I get criticized out there people are like no, I have no photograph Again, I don't believe it's all garbage look you got to start somewhere Okay, it starts with the story. How are you supposed to go look into something if you don't even know it exists? Right, so now we know that exists We've talked to people that have seen it in fact Michael Schellingberger Called me up when the film first came out and he goes Hey, this is Michael Schellingberger. I'm Think about putting together an article with the New York Post And I could tell he was kind of rocked by the story, right? He was like man, this is pretty wild I was like, yeah, I know because well, I'm thinking about putting together. I go, I said well, if I can do anything to help out Just let me know He goes, well, I want to know about the photographic evidence. I was like, okay I was like, well, I could put you in touch with a couple of people that have seen it And I was actually quite surprised with the New York Post wanted more than one source They wanted two sources that could see it and describe it And we made it happen. Back at Chaney. It was shown video footage. He describes it in vivid detail Go find the New York Post article by Michael Schellingberger and I suggest your audience reads She did read it. Yeah, it's pretty pretty pretty cool, you know, and we know where it is and we know who has it And it's like the frustration is I remember one of the people that we approached on we offered $100,000 And it was nothing then we offered $200,000 people claim they saw aliens after UFO crash land in Brazil in 1996 documentary reveals And that's a trailer for moment of contact Yup, scroll down down. I think a little further you'll get details of the description That's wrong. That's the drawing that was done right after the incident And actually held the original print in my hands from Ploio Co. was daughter So one of was one of them dead and one of them was alive. Yeah, apparently and you look there were up to up to accounts of possibly five And this is another thing that a lot of people don't even realize when they watched the movie and it was shocking to me was that We stayed at the we rented this house in this kind of gated community and it was owned by a doctor and they had fellow doctor friends And they're like oh, what are you doing in Brazil? What are you doing in Virginia? Oh camera crews and Caravans of camera gear and tripods are like, what are you guys doing here? We're like, oh here we go Well, we're here to cover the Virginia UFO incident and the doctor goes You know my friends saw something that you might want to talk to them about and we they kind of chuckle a little bit They're all this these guys are serious the whole family side so we actually go to their house and They They're like whoa no no no we didn't say we're gonna go on camera. We just said we'd meet with you We're not we're not going on camera. I was like well What do you mean I'm going on camera? Of course, you know I'm doing a documentary. Oh, no, no We'll tell you what happened. I said well look we can film me from the back. We want we disguise your voice And so anyway, so we do the interview Reluctantly these guys did not want to do it, but they described This craft that was looking for something that was late into the night Late like probably 10 or 11 o'clock at night. They were ordering pizza at any Brazilian will tell you they liked to order pizza late at night And they said the whole family was watching this thing and I kept saying to them What do you mean it was looking? How do you know it was looking for something? They said it was going like this really low looking? So I'd shot my drone over the whole area I shot my drone over the the point where the girls had the contact The point where Marcus Rizi and Eric Lopes captured the creature And the point where the military blockades were And I realized I took my drone straight up and I filmed straight down and I show it in the film the proximity To all those events is within a few blocks The house that the entire family witnessed very credible people that didn't want to come forward That was just a few blocks away from the incident. It looks to me like That was a recovery mission a rescue mission that was going down. I know it sounds crazy Believe me. I know that and I'm reporting my 30 year reputation online Do you know what my reputation when I finished the phenomenon? I had a level of government access And I never thought I could possibly have as a complete independent Joe public guy me right I'm meeting with senators and just all kinds of intelligence folks I mean as a dream like how could this possibly be how can I have access? Well, I was throwing that Flushing that down the toilet by reporting on this case potentially But I did it anyway because I was like okay, I understand that I'm sounding crazy and I understand Keep saying that, but I don't think you are well. I don't think you're selling crazy at all You don't know no because I've been I've been so much lack for this The town is obsessed with it. Well, I think people People are very much married to their initial ideas and when you have an initial idea that something like that is stupid It's probably fake. I would have heard of it. It's probably fake and then you're confronted with what you've uncovered and Imagine if someone hadn't gone through the exhausting work that you've gone through going back and forth to Brazil over a period of 12 years to make this documentary Imagine most people would think that sounds like nonsense. I would have already heard about this You know, this big you tell me you go to vargina and you see that enormous statue of a UFO That's pretty wild like who funded this Why do they have this like why is it a part of like and the ET guys all over the place? Yeah, bus stops he's he's in the downtown Plaza. It's like Dan and the mayor The city mayor bears excuse me. Thank you, by the way for For coming forward and sharing that information with us mayor bears mayor bears Help just fun. It was really funny. We were interviewing with him And I was like this guy gonna say what is what is he gonna say? He's a city mayor Right, and he's like, you know, I gotta tell you man. I know a lot of the witnesses. I gotta say I think this thing happened I really do He goes if there's anything I can do to help out you let me know I was like, oh pull out your roll of decks I want you to help me find Eric Lopes Eric Lopes is the key he's the only living survivor of the second capture He was a driver of market sure he is you, right? The family of the deceased military officer Marta Her mother could not get statements from Eric. Lopes. She said every time they'd pressure him He'd be smoking cigarettes and drinking and getting really nervous her officer. Marta, her mother could not get statements from air collobe. She said, every time they'd pressure him, he'd be smoking cigarettes and drinking and getting really nervous and just wouldn't say anything. She wanted me to go after it. She was like, we want a statement from air collobe. So badly, he's the only living, you know, person witness. So I said to the mayor, I was like, yeah, if you really want to offer some help, help me find air collobe. So he's like, no problem. So he does. So then we mean in the town square with a good connection, it was like a former chief chief of police or chief military guy and his son, Homelo, who's a lawyer and prominent about was a prominent politician. And he goes, I'll take you out there to his house. Then you guys are on your own. So I was like, all right. So this little voice, as we're all getting in our cars and driving off to go see this guy, this little voice in my head goes, you know, maybe I should get him to walk up the door with me. So I jumped out of my car and I flagged down the Mercedes, that black Mercedes that we followed. I told Homelo with the translator, Hey, is there any chance you'd consider just walking up the door with me? I honestly think that had I not done that, he might have just opened fire on me immediately, because who's this gringo guy walking up to his door on his property, asking questions about something he does not want to talk about. And when we got up to the door, I remember I heard talking as we walked up and it was a pretty intense moment because I had heard about this guy for years, but nobody could find him. He wouldn't talk to anybody. Got up to the door. There was a handful of us cameras rolling. And I hear voices. I hear talking, but I can't see anybody. I'm like, where is this guy? Who are they talking to? And then I realized he was up in the window looking down at us. He had his arms on the window, he's looking out the window. And he's talking to Homelo and he's talking to the other translator. And I'm looking at this guy's face. And I saw a face. This does not translate in the film. I saw a face that I've never seen before. It was a face. Joe that like was harboring a deep, deep, deep, like burdened with that with something so disturbing and profound that I was just I just got lost looking at this guy's eyes. I was like, oh my God, I've never seen a face like this before. And he's looking out there in the whole time. He's threatening to shoot everybody. And I didn't know what he was saying. And the trans, everything was so chaotic. The trans writers weren't telling me. He said it three times, you don't get out of here. I'm a bullets are going to start flying like he's military, you know, guy like he's armed to the teeth. But I was looking at this guy's face. And I'm looking at Dave, the DP, Dave West. And I'm like, I'm hoping that he's getting this guy's face. But Dave had the wrong lens. And the guy was looking at my DP. And he was going like this, Dave said he's never been more intimidated trying to film someone in his life. And he was like this. And he had one hand under here like that. And he kept doing that to the camera guy. And Dave said he was trying to like zoom in on the face and was going blurry and he couldn't, you know, it was very intense. And then Homelow looks over at me, term me not. Oh, like I we didn't, he doesn't speak, he English. And I don't speak Portuguese. I know very little, but that lucky game me. That was like international. Like that lucky game is we're getting the hell out of here right now. Right now. And he's like, I'll tell you later kind of thing. And then we left. And I asked him. I was like, was he serious like that guy? Look, all he had to do was come outside and be like, you know, guys. And the first thing he says is the first thing he says always says aircloves, Eric's not going to talk about the ET. That was the first thing out of his mouth. Like why would you say that? Like it's like the police showing up at your house and you open to the door going, there are no drugs in here. It's like, well, I didn't ask that. But now that you mentioned it, okay, I guess you guys have drugs. And he's like, I can't talk about the tea. Eric, gloves could have just come outside and said, oh, this is a huge misunderstanding, nothing happened. I'm so sorry that, you know, my name got dragged into this story. There's nothing to it. That's all he has to do. And it's over, right? He didn't do that. He's threatened to kill everybody and said, I'm not talking about the ET. So that's very telling about what happened. And they just named his street after Marcus were easy three days ago. So it's an ongoing story. It's a, excuse me, it's a fascinating story. And I'm going to hang my hat on this that if I have the right help, we're all in this together. If there's enough compelling, I wouldn't as testimony to make one to think this very well might have happened. Doesn't that merit further investigation? Doesn't that merit further efforts to solve this riddle once and for all? This debate's been going on for 80 years. I'm handing this case to the world on a silver platter and saying, help me. Let's get this one done. Imagine if some of that autopsy photos got out some video. Well, I'm talking to the doctors. And I can tell you right now the doctors all talked to each other. And there were doctors that shot video of that creature. I guarantee it. I know that for a fact. And no one controlled that video. No one stopped them from doing that. No one apparently the doctors were left alone in the room for a while with this thing. And here's something that I really want to put out there. Hopefully this gets translated into Portuguese and the people of Brazil are here this. The doctors that were written about in Dr. Roger Lear's book, one of my biggest regrets. I was filming in Los Angeles 2013. I was covering the ruins and bobway case. And I had flown in all these witnesses with the help of this guy ran on Nickerson. I had flown on all these witnesses to the landing case that happened in Africa as adults. And I was doing this really intense shoot down there. I had Kim Arnold, the daughter of Kenneth Arnold. It's one Paula Harris helped me lock that was nightmare trying to get her on camera. And I just had so much going on. And meanwhile, I'm getting phone calls from this guy, Roger Lear, Dr. Roger Lear, and he's going, I understand you're investigating in Virginia. You got to get me on camera. You got to get me on camera. And I kept saying, I will, I'll try and I ended up, he got really upset with me. And he's like, well, if you're not going to get me on camera, I said, it's not that I don't want to get you on camera. Roger, I'm so busy right now. He goes, well, what he didn't tell me was I've got cancer and I'm dying. And please get me on camera, because there's aspects of the story that you need to know that I know. So anyway, he died. He gives me these tapes. And then he dies. I actually I sent the tapes back to him and then he died. And I got his book to and I was reading his book when I'm putting the film together. And in the book, it's basically a transcription of all the tapes that I have. I could see that because I have the tapes. And he's got a professional translator and he's got this guy, Uber de Jada Rodriguez going around the countryside with him and introducing all these witnesses. And it's all on camera, except the meeting with according to his book that took place in humanity's hospital with two doctors. I couldn't validate this and I didn't put it in the movie. But if there's two doctors who listened to this, apparently the creature was alive. The one that Marco Shurizi brought into Humanitas Hospital was alive. And according to Dr. Roger Lear's book, everything else is accurate. I can't say if this was accurate or not, but he put it in his book. So I'm assuming that it is. And Uber de Jada won't talk about it. He's a witness. There were two doctors that claimed telepathic communication with the live entity. And that's in his book. Now I'm not telling your audience that's true. I'm telling your audience that it might be true. We know that that entity, that creature, that being that ET, whatever you want to call it, went to Humanitas Hospital. We know that because we have testimony from the people that took it there. We have testimony from people on the inside that claimed it was there. But we don't have any testimony from the doctors that claimed there was a telepathic communication. Do they talk at all about what it said? It said that they felt sorry for the human species, not realizing their potential, who they really are. Like they're not, we don't realize as a race who we really are. That's what they said. It's in his book. So anyway, what did they mean by that? We don't recognize, I mean, I'm not quite sure. I guess that we don't recognize the potential that we have as human beings who we really are. I'm not sure what they meant exactly more than that. But if Uber, a Jard-ar-Rod Regus, who's listening to this, please come forward and tell me who those doctors are. If the doctors are listening to this, they're still alive. What does it take? What will it take to get you to come forward? Anything. Just tell me what it takes. And I can tell people to contact me at my Twitter, I guess that's the best way to talk. Right? At James C. Fox? Is that, yeah, would it be the best way to do it? Yeah. Yeah, that's what I'm thinking. I'm not going to give up my email. Don't give up. No, I'm not going to do that. But let's put it sorted out. I want people to know about this case. And I want people to know that this is an ongoing investigation. This is not solved. This is an ongoing investigation. It's something that we could all hopefully unite and really push to get answers both on the US side and in the Brazil side. We have a lot more answers in Brazil. We've got not a lot going on. I know that Leslie Kane is pushing. She's contacting some of her people on the inside that have indicated that it did happen. To me, one of the weirdest ones was Ryan Graves. Ryan Graves has explained to me how they upgraded their systems. Sort of picking that stuff up. And they started instantaneously picking up these things. There was just defying physics that they didn't have the ability to detect before because the systems weren't as good. Just interviewed him in Washington, DC. And you know, one thing that he told me that I was fascinated by, he said that the Admiral came in, I think it was in 2015 when they just got into that, that one object that was kind of rotating kind of like a disc looking thing. He said that the Admiral came in and he was like, oh, God, the Admiral's here and there had a debriefing on it and they were showing the videos and the Admiral stepped in. And he took a look at it for five seconds and it's much longer than five seconds. He shrugged his shoulder and it's kind of like, oh boy. And he walked out the room. I was like, well, what do that mean? He goes, that means in my opinion that he was very aware of this is this phenomenon is nothing new. It's been going on and they've known about it. But what can they do? Right? What can you do? You try chasing them. The fly rings are on the jets. I mean, they're doing what they're doing. It's almost like they have their own agenda. Who the hell knows? But they're stationary. They're in the air. He goes, they don't have to recharge. That's what it was at the gimbal footage. Yeah, the turn sideways. Yeah, I think it's called the gimbal. There's the go fast. There's the tick tack. There's the gimbal. See if you can find that gimbal footage. The gimbal footage is fascinating. Pretty see it rotate. Yeah, see it. Do this thing that everybody describes. Taking it night. And I also like to put out there, if there are any pilots, any military personnel that have any photographic evidence and you'd like to come forward with it, please do so. I've got a new project and you can do it anonymously. Hopefully you'll do it not anonymously. This is the thing. But whatever it takes, it's flying. And there's another one too, because it's slightly better. Maybe he changes the, I think he does. Yeah, there it goes. Yeah, that looks like kind of like change this way. And then with the clouds somewhere along, and it looks very similar to those things that we were just looking at, those photographs, very similar. It looks very disk like. These are the tip. That's another thing that that Senator Reid revealed to me during the interview. He said that here's rotates the objects wild. He said that the material, the evidence that's been released. This was Senator Harry Reid, former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid told me this on camera. The evidence that's been released is just the tip of the iceberg. Now, let me go through a couple cases. Do you mind, please? All right. And the reason why I say this is because I talked to you earlier about that some UFOs, some UAP, I can't underline that word represent or originate from a nonhuman intelligence. And I'm going to go through a handful of cases that I personally have looked into. These are cases that upon, that could prove one way or the other certainly make a very compelling argument that that some of these objects. So let's start with 1945 Trinity. Jacques Valet just wrote a book with a woman named Paula Harris. Fascinating case, I met two of the witnesses. I went to the landing site, the alleged crash site. I'm very compelling. There's probably military records on that. If that's the case according to the eyewitness testimony, that should be looked into. Roswell. Now, I know your audience is going to say, Roswell has been beaten to death. And, but well, how about this? Let's say that a murder took place even though it's 80 years ago or 75 years ago. Does that make it like, oh, well, so much times pass? Let's not worry about it. No. And the reason why Roswell is so relevant that most people don't understand is that you had the 509th bomb squadron. The most elite squadron, hand select unit in the world, exclusively responsible for the deployment of atomic weapons, announced that they recovered a flying saucer. That's a fact. Okay. Then they recant and say, oh, terribly sorry, it was just a common everyday weather balloon. Jesse Marcel, the first person at the at the debris field with Mack Brazel. And thank you, Don Schmidt and Kevin Randall for all your work. We wouldn't talk about this have hadn't been for them and stand for even. Mack Brazel takes Marcel and another guy, intelligence officer out of the debris field. Mack Brazel says this stuff was the material was clearly not of Earth origin. I know weather balloons inside and out. He described the material like tin foil that you crumble it up and it regains this thing. These I these I beams that are purple with high riguatic writings that things of that nature. He takes it back to his son who I met Jesse Marcel Jr. I knew him well when I'm Larry King with the guy a bunch of times. He described the same material that he handled personally in his hands. Okay. The press conference they had with Colonel Dubois, Roger Raimi and and Jesse Marcel. Two out of three of those went on the record on camera. Said the original story was true. That was the the balloon story was a cover up. Okay. You've got the FBI memo by Jay Gohover in his own handwriting. He talks about in the in the SW case could be Southwest. The army grabbed it and wouldn't let us have it for cursory examination. That's pretty compelling. You've got astronaut, Apollo 14 astronaut Edgar Mitchell who just so happened to grow up in Roswell. And when he came back on the outskirts and when he came back from his mission to the moon in the 70s, Apollo 14, six man to walk on the moon, he gets back and he knows all those ranchers and those ranchers tell them. Yeah, that was not of Earth origin. He's gone on the record saying this. And he also confirmed that his intelligence sources, he's an astronaut. He landed on the moon, told him that that Roswell was real. So based on just that alone, that's extremely compelling. And I know that Sheila Wittenall, the former secretary of the Air Force in the 90s under the Clinton administration, she went after that case because Clinton was went after that case. And they weren't happy with the answers they were getting. And then the Air Force comes up with Project Mogul. Well, if you look at Project Mogul, Project Mogul is just exactly the same explanation as the first one except it's a bunch of these balloons string together. Paul Seward, 10 for it, absolutely blowing. If the Air Force really wanted to squash it, show us that material that the first hand eyewitness testimony, the people that have gone on camera described, show us that material that crumbles up from 1947, show us those I beans with hieroglyphics on it. Can I stop your note? Sure, absolutely. The material that crumpled up with the fascinating is it's exactly the same as what was described in the far genie case. Yes, that's what that's what Carlos the styles are described. Yeah, this material was light like a little bit of foil. When you crumpled it and let it go, it's right back to form. It took back his shape. Yes. So anyway, so that's Roswell. So someone has this. Yeah, so well, yeah, supposedly. And someone probably has photos of this, supposedly. Yeah, there's a memo out that was found actually called the Wilson memo. They most researchers think it's a smoking gun. I've got it here, actually. The Jackie Gleason, Jack Gleason's amazing. I'm a medic guy who Nixon thinks. Oh, absolutely. And Jackie Gleason told my buddy, uh, uh, Jeff's a gasket. Don't listen to what anyone ever tells you. I had 100% confirmation these things exist. He didn't say that the president Nixon drove me out to a base in Florida, but he told them, don't listen to anybody. He says, I know for a fact, these things exist. That was really cool. Anyway, this is the Wilson memo. We should look into it. That actually came out of when when Dr. Ed Gremage will pass that leaked out. Hey, my name James Rigney had something to do with it. There's been analysis work on it, but this is considered a smoking gun evidence for for crash materials and programs of that nature. There's got him how put off that's mentioned Eric Davies has mentioned. Uh, Admiral Wilson has mentioned, uh, quite fascinating. And it could be. I think there are other people out there like Richard Dolan and, uh, who's the other guy, Ross Kohlhart, they know a lot more about this document than I do. But in any case, let's move on. Now you got, uh, 1950. Can I stop you one more time? Absolutely. You said Clinton looked into this, wasn't happy with the answers he got? Yes. How did that go? What happened was Lawrence Belmond, Rockefeller was pressuring the Clinton administration. I know this because I talked to John Podesta about it and other people. And, uh, he was basically saying that if you don't, uh, push for government transparency on this topic to Clinton, then I'm going to expose the fact that you're not doing it in every newspaper journal across the country. Okay. So Clinton administration's goes, okay, fine. What do you want me to do? Which, Kate, pick a case and they said, I want you to go after Roswell. So Clinton went after Roswell. They were not happy with the answer they were getting about Roswell. That's, that's that side of the story. I mean, Podesta basically said, yeah, we looked into it and they, they eventually came back with that report. Roswell case closed and they talked about this, uh, stupid weather balloon. It was the project mobile. Project mobile is exactly the same damn weather balloon. Just a bunch of them strung together. Same damned same excuse. Same thing. Anyway, this, let's, we'll move on. Go to 1950. You've got a couple. I was talking about earlier, Evelyn Trenton or Paul Paul and Evelyn Trent, photograph a disc. It's very credible. Mick Minville, Oregon, very good case. 52. You've got the two consecutive weekends in July of 1952 where you've got UFOs over the White House and UFOs over the Capitol. You have testimony. Think to a thank God to a guy that guy was in the radar room that night that heard the transmission between the pilots that was scrambled to intercept these things. Alchop, a guy named Tom Tulion of Project Archives. Thank God got him on camera. Thank you, Tom. And you get a hear testimony of a guy who was listening to the pilot flying at 500 miles an hour in the pitch black over the Capitol and he's surrounded by UFOs. And he's radio and back to the tower going, what do I do? And they were all silent. Now, the interesting thing about this is that the Air Force was in full swing. The Air Force conference was the biggest press conference since the termination of, since the end of World War II. It was General John Sanford. And he basically says there are credible people making incredible claims. And we don't think that it's us. But the Air Force in 1952 refused to let the public hear the testimony of the pilots like duh. Imagine not hearing from David Freaver. How are you supposed to put together a story if you can't hear from that? You got a public like you got a public project, blue book, and you're not going to share with us. I mean, Rupelk wrote a book about it's amazing. That case in in 1952 is phenomenal. That's a fantastic case. Jacques Fillet is convinced that they had orders to shoot these things down, that one of them piece, a piece did fall down and it was captured. We had an argument about putting it into the phenomenon. I ultimately said, Jacques, it's hearsay I can't do it and I didn't. But Jacques convinced that we have a piece of that from 52. Fast forward, 1955, Alabama, William T. Coleman, United States Air Force, World War II pilot, flying a B-25 bomber. He describes along with, there were two engineers from Lockheed Martin and Boeing, I think, in the cockpit. They see an object about roughly 9,000 feet. They chase it. It ends up at treetop level. He guy told me, and I interviewed this guy personally at his home in Florida. He said that the chase was so dramatic at the end. The disc was right in front of them. There were a treetop level that maximum continuous power. I said, what did that mean? He goes, if I went any faster, the engine was going to blow up. He said, I thought I was going to hit this thing, this disc. And they're all just like, hell, it's a broad daylight. What do we looking at here? And the disc is eventually, he has to turn to avoid hitting the disc. And the United States Air Force, World War II, and T. Coleman. He has to pull up first because he said, if he dipped to the right, his wings would hit the trees. So he pulls up, dips to the right, misses this thing, close nearly. And when he gets regained sight of it, it's giving across a recently plowed field and it's stirring up dust in the back of it. The plane lands, they give their test, so many all three of them. This is a hydroproject blue book. He was later put in charge as public spokesman for Project Blue Book. William T. Coleman, look them up. You don't do it now. But the fascinating aspect of it was that report was never included as Project Blue Book. The better the case, the more credible the witnesses, the less likely you'll ever hear about this. Okay? Fast forward 1957, Edwards Air Force Base. I personally interviewed, Mercury astronaut Gordon Cooper. Gordon Cooper told me on camera that they were supervising the installation of a new runway F86 for F86 fighter jets at Edwards Air Force Base. He was not present, but his camera crew was. A desk in broad daylight came, came into view and it landed on the dry lake bed. The guys turned their cameras on it, they filmed it, they walked towards it and lifted off and it shot off at a high rate of speed. It was 1957. He said he had the film footage developed. He told me this all on camera. He had the film footage developed, he held it up, he saw it was probably good footage. He's phoning the higher ups. Eventually a courier jet comes in from Washington DC, footage was taken, never seen it heard from ever again. Typical, right? So, let's fast forward, let's go to the 60s. I talked about that case earlier in 1964, you got the landing, Lonnie Zamora, right? You got the closing count of the third kind, one of the most well documented cases in US history. What does the Air Force do? Air Force tells Lonnie Zamora the witness, do not talk about the beans because that is incredibly difficult to explain, right? In fact, I don't want to talk about the case at all, but particularly don't talk about the beans. 1966, you got UFOs landing in Michigan. You got then Congressman Gerald Ford gets involved because that's when the Air Force Dr. Heineck explains the whole thing away as swamp gas. Pisses off then Congressman Gerald Ford, he puts it for congressional hearings, those happen as the hearings are ending. April, I think it's April 4th or April 5th, 1966. There's UFOs landing on the other side of the world, at Westol primary school. It's an incredible case. Over 300 witnesses, including the science teacher who I got on camera. So, let's go to, let's see, want to be jumped to the 70s. We got 70s, 1973, Lieutenant coin encounters the UFO and a helicopter. The UFO momentarily takes control. It was helicopter. He testified at the United Nations in 1978 that was put on by Lee Spiegel and Jock Filet and Dr. Jalen Heineck fascinating case. We can go to night to December of 1980. I talked about that case earlier. Joint US military base in England, bent waters, rental some forest, got a landing, housing nuclear weapons. You got the deputy base commander. You got all these men talking about this crap that's sitting on the ground, fascinating case. We'll go forward to 1986, Anchorage, Alaska. You've got JAL, JAL Airlines, with the Japanese pilot by the name of Kenju Tarachi. Fortunately, the reason why we know about this case is because FAA official John Callahan kept records of the cockpit recordings, the radar recordings, the voice recordings of the actual pilot talking about what he's seen. It's absolutely mind boggling that directly correspond to all the radar data which he has. He went on the record about it, number of times. He said there was a meeting with the CIA stepped in. I'm just reporting what this guy said, okay? You guys believe me or not believe me? The data's out there. Go look at it. It's a thing I did call the know and I saw. He testified at the National Press Club in 2007 with Leslie Kenan. I organized as to what was going on. He kept that radar data, fascinating case. The pilot Kenju Tarachi said it dwarfed his airplane. It followed him around. It did maneuvers that were impossible. It made his airplane so small and he was in a 747 and 747s got an elevator in it. That was 1986. Now let's jump to 1989, 1990. You've got Belgium. I've personally investigated this case. Belgium, the Belgian Air Force, General Wilford de Brower said there were objects that were the size of a football field triangular in shape. Didn't make any sound on the slide buzzing, shooting beams the light down to the ground. Okay? I interviewed de Brower. I flew him out from Belgium to the United States to testify at the National Press Club in 2007. He said that two men from an unknown government agency in the US requested the radar data, the tapes. He said, sure, I'll make copies for you, but I needed a official request. They wouldn't do it. He was all, well, that's awfully puzzling. This is General Wilford de Brower going on camera with me. I know that's what he told me. Okay? Now let's go to 1994. Now we got a landing in Africa. Ruiz and Bob Way, Ariel's school, roughly 100 witnesses, fascinating case. Dr. John Mack investigates the case. He's actually getting funded by also Lawrence Spellman Rockefeller. He was doing a major funny in the 90s about this stuff. One of the best cases, Ruiz and Bob Way, 1996. You got the crash in Virginia, Brazil. Now let's jump to 1997. You've got Phoenix, Arizona, March 13, 1997. You've got a number of objects. One in particular, that caught my interest, was a boomerang shaped craft that, according to the witnesses, and everyone was out under the night sky to get a glimpse of hell bob comet at the time. So a lot of people saw that floated across the state of Arizona, roughly around five o'clock to 830 from north to south. I interviewed families that were lying on their backs. It's all, I have it all documented. Lying on their backs and they said this thing was so huge, it took four minutes to pass over our house. It looked like it was going to land. While I also interviewed the governor, five Simonton, he too saw it and said that he launched his own investigation with Luke Air Force Base and they had sent planes to intercept the thing. He investigated Luke Air Force Base. He contacted his people, the Pentagon, they shrugged the shoulders and said we don't know what the hell that thing was. It had the ability to move very slowly and when an accelerating took off, it took off and the blink of an eye was gone. Okay. So now let's go forward. Let's go to, let's say 2004, you got the Nimix case off the 200 miles off the coast of San Diego. We all know about that case, David Freaver. They've got photographic evidence, right? Flier footage. Four people that saw it. They chased this thing. It flew rings around. I mean, Freaver describes the technology that thing displayed made a joke of their F-18s. Fastening in case 2006, we got a O'Hare, Chicago O'Hare airport. Terminal 17, you got half the crew United Airlines seeing a disc hovering over the airport. It hovers there for several minutes. There's the guy John Hill and Carter, I think his name is John something. He wrote an article about it and he actually sent a FOIA request and got the tapes from the tower. You hear them talking about it while they're looking at it. It's a amazing case. When the disc, according to the United Airlines people personnel, left the area, it punched a donut hole in the cloud, brilliant case. They said it was weather phenomenon. Is that recording the recording of those air traffic controller guys talking about it? Is that available? Absolutely. It's out there. You can find it right now. Let's find it right now. Yeah. So 2008, let's go to 2008. Okay. Steve is going to find that. We'll get a play that as soon as you find it. Stevenville, Texas, you've got an object that was so described to be so big that you could land an airplane on it. Okay. I interviewed one of the best witnesses civilian witnesses and I can, I have police officers I interviewed as well. Police officers. So I interviewed this guy named Ricky Searles. I tracked him down and with the help of Angela Joyner and Ricky Searles is one of the best witnesses. He was a deer hunter and he said he was going out at dusk and he's got his rifle and he's looking down and he's careful not to step on the dry leaves to make the cracking sounds and scare the deer. So he's looking down and suddenly feels like something's up. And he looks above him and he sees this object right above him. That's so Fry leaves to make the cracking sounds and scare the deer. So he's looking down and suddenly feels like something's up. And he looks above him and he sees this object right above him that's so big. He said he couldn't see the edges from any direction. So he gets his rifle and he points his rifle up and he's a metal worker too. And he said I was looking to the scope and I was examining the metal. He said I'd never say anything like it. There's no rivets, no seams, no weld marks. And he had these recessed cones on the belly of the thing. And he said when it took off, it took off. It took off so quick how did I blink? It would look like it just disappeared in place. And it didn't do what you'd think it would do like that. It went like that. So anyway, so I'm interviewing here. You're saying this all audio too. Oh yeah, some so-so-so-so-so. So it didn't, it just shot straight up in the, it didn't go like a saucer skimming across the water. It just shot straight up in the air. And he said it was so big that you could have easily landed an airplane on it. So anyway, so I'm interviewing this. I mean, if you're in other police officers and I'm just investigating this case for a couple of years, I put a lot of it. And the part I'm about to share with you right now, I didn't put in the film because I couldn't. But the guy who's going to come, he's going to come forward next year. And that's the police officer that pulls me aside and I'm filming in downtown Plaza, Stephenville probably in 2009. And I was standing there doing some filming with Ricky Sorrels. And it was like kind of like on our lunch break. And this guy walks up to me. I'll never forget it. And he whips out his badge. And he's like, you James Fox? And I was like, oh, God, what did I do? And he shows me his badges. I'm officer so and so. Can I talk to you for a minute? I'm like, yeah, okay. So I go off to a cafe. He sits with his back to the wall. And he's seen him coming forward. He says everything Ricky Sorrel is telling you was true. I want you to know that. I said, how do you know? He said, we all watch at the entire police force, all watch this thing. And it was like a department store. I pulled out my radar gun. I shot my radar gun at this thing. And it was doing 22 miles an hour. It was floating like a city. It was actually called LOSL. He said, one of my mates took dash cam footage of it. And one of his biggest regrets was they ended up with the local Air Force base. And they and they took it. He's going to come. I know. But I'm saying that that the reason why I'm saying this is because those people out there that are possibly hopefully listening to this podcast, if they know where the evidence is or if they were involved in this in any way, shape or form, they want to come forward. Please come forward now is the time. So that's an incredible case, Stevenville, Texas. Did you find the auto recording? Yeah, which I've actually found a couple of them. Yeah. Which one specifically was... They'll say so and so took a photograph of it. Oh, sorry. Of the 2006, oh, Harry UFO incident. It's phenomenal. Trying to remember the name of this gentleman, John, something that wrote the article. It was exploded all over the headlines. You are so good at recall with all this stuff. You can really tell that you've been obsessed with this for so long. It's so fascinating to watch your mind go through these cases and remember all these details, barely even looking at notes. It's all just... I have... Every time I get up and I do something like this, Joe, I'm representing all the witnesses that have trusted me. I'm sorry. I'm representing them. So when I hear Dr. Patrick say what you said it, it's a personal salt. I don't know where you're talking about. Well, you're just dismissive. When I hear the government dismissive of this whole thing, I'm thinking to myself, I take it personally. Because when I'm out there talking to people like you on these platforms, I'm sorry, it just tends for me. It's like, I represent these witnesses. When I'm a voice for them, I come out here and I represent them and they trust me. And that means a lot to me. So, sorry. I just... Oh, I get it. It's just... You're passionate about this. It means something to you. And that's one of the reasons why your documentaries are so good. I give a shit about the facts. Listen, man, if you're right and if this is real, this is one of the most important things to talk about. And if it wasn't for documentaries like yours and Jeremy Corbells and a few of the other ones that are out there, it wouldn't be as big of an issue with people. They wouldn't think that this was real, that there's weight to this. And, you know, like I said, when I heard about the Virginia case, I remember thinking, oh, come on, people lie. That's... I always think that. I always think, ah, people, because they do. Some people like to lie. Yeah, no question. But that's not that simple. That one's very complicated. That one's very complicated. And again, that man who goes to the spot where he saw that 25 years when he starts crying and Jesus Christ. I tear it up. Do you know that I showed him? I interviewed military ex, as you know, he's in the movie. But military ex, it's in the credits. Military ex said, for the first time, it all started my alini farm. My alini farm is where we took him for the crash site. Was there any indication on the ground? Yeah, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So I flew the drone over the crash site. I'm in New York City a couple of weeks ago at a conference. And this guy pulls me aside and he goes, hey James, I just watched the movie moment of contact. Holy shit. He goes, you know, I'm a geologist. That ground at the impact site has been tampered with. I said, thank you, because I'm not a geologist, but I took my drone and I flew it over. It's in the movie. You can see it. You looked down at that site and that area looks so different than everything around it. It looks so different. According to Sowsa, there was some sort of acid like that was burning from the craft. And that acid is what smelled so bad. And 26 years later, you can see it. Excuse me, it looks so good. There is acid from the craft, but it was also the biological smell of the beans. That too, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So it was a bunch of different. Yes. I mean, and so does he think that someone excavated the site? Well, all I know is what I was told. I went to Roswell 50th anniversary. And I met with people, lots of witnesses at Roswell 50th anniversary. I was in my 20s. And they said that people were shoulder to shoulder on the ground picking up pieces. And after that, they lit it on fire and burned it and then they bulldozed it. So I would imagine that they might have done the same in Brazil, but I don't know. One of the things that didn't end up in the film, I don't know why, I was, I got talked out of it or something. We met the farm hand at Marley and the farm. And he was talking about the neighbors all saying they heard a huge boom. It happened like five o'clock in the morning, 4.35 AM, something like a huge boom. And there are other witnesses like truckers that saw it too, where that actually gave some testimony in 1996. And I couldn't track it down. But again, it's an ongoing investigation that truckers saw the thing. There was the farm hand and there are certain things that don't add up like Carlos of Salsa. And I love him to death. There was a statement I think I haven't seen it, but I've heard that he made that one time was that the military trucks arrived within minutes of him getting there. But he's also made a statement that they were there or they were pulling in when he got there. So there's a couple of minutes discrepancy. I don't know. You know, I believe the guy, if the guy was highly traumatized, he had a visit and his life was threatened and he was pointed at gun point to get out of there. The guy goes in hiding for 26 years. Could it be that he remembers it a little bit differently? So he described it one way back then and another way now. Exactly the same, but that the military trucks were either there or are they coming just a little variation. That's very possible. Yeah. You just forgot it. That's not as important as what he saw. No. And then like a given other example, like, you know, Carlos Salsa's convinced that that was on the 13th of, because he was going, he's an ultralight pilot. And he's also like a history or geography professor in Sao Paulo that it was the 13th of January. And the girls saw the creature on the 20th of January. How did those creatures get from the crash site to the town? Well, there's a river and I've talked to some researchers that think that that's a possibility because the river goes from the crash site right to the area where the creatures were found. Could it be they got in the water? I don't know. Maybe I have no idea. And what do they do for six days? I have no idea. So the crash was six days different from the crash happens according to the witnesses, according to Salsa, he's convinced it happened on the 13th and the girls, they know they saw the creatures on the 20th. So you see them saying like, and then how did they get what happened during that period? What about the record of when the US Air Force jet flew in? That was the guy's, the guy Marco Feddeth, F-E-R-E-S. He said it was January. He was like, oh, 20, 21st. He's like, yeah, he was like, I think it's 20, 21st, something like that. So it's somewhere in that. Oh, total range. Right in there. And the plane lands without authorization from the Brazilian government and it lands in Campinas. And then the helicopters go from Campinas to Virginia. And then they go from Virginia back to Campinas. They load something on the airplane and the United States Air Force takes off again. All without any authorization from the Brazilian government. And that's what these guys are saying. Every single military person that we met with, we put a lot of little nuggets in the credits at the end, they all said the Americans were involved because I didn't know what I went into this. I had no idea. That's a fascinating thing. They would listen to us. It's absolutely fascinating and I want them to come forward. People on the US side come forward. Please, we need your testimony. This is the case that could sort of this riddle once and for all. because the people that saw it were alive and seems like there's real footage and real photography. What would you do? What would you do for the footage of the creature? You personally, what would you do for it? Would you go to Brazil? I'm just asking. Just to get it? If you were guaranteed to get it when you got there, would you go for it? If I was you, you, I'm talking to you. I'm just curious. You wouldn't do it. I'm busy. I know you wouldn't put into an alien. I'm not going. Okay, but if you go, I'll definitely watch the video. Yeah, Logan Paul was like, well, I want to guarantee you, I said, look, there are no guarantees in life. There's death in taxes. Okay. Well, especially to a girl, like you've been chasing this for 12 years. Well, that case, yeah, I know. Well, you know, I mean, I look at Mark O'Layown and I look at the other researchers and I tip my hat to them, but it's amazing. It's a phenomenal. If it really is a look, it makes sense that we're not alone. and it makes sense regardless of a people like Neil deGrasse Tyson. Oh, I can't believe you just said that. Yeah. Okay. So here's my thing. We love Neil deGrasse Tyson. He is a treasure to the world. He makes science exciting. He gets children interested. The guy is gregarious. He's funny. He's wicked bright. But when he talks about this aspect, UAP or UFO, we all cringe because he clearly doesn't know and he goes right to ET and like nobody's screaming from the hilltop ET has landed. We're saying that there are structured craft of unknown origin exhibiting a technology far beyond anything that we comprehend according to the military people I've talked to around the world. And we don't know where they come from. We'd like to know. I said Neil deGrasse Tyson. I'm serious and I hope you don't take this the wrong way. But I'll put $25,000 on the table right here and right now. If he watches the phenomenon and he has the same position after watching that evidence that we put together carefully with the help of Jacques Valet and many others to present that case to a jury. If he has the same viewpoint after he watches that film, you tell me pick any organization of your choice, nonprofit and I'll give $25,000 to that audience. I don't think you're going to change the mind with that documentary. No. What he's going to say is what he's going to say is clearly there's something going on because I even got Michael Schurmer who's skeptic magazine is like, wow, this isn't intriguing because you know, you know, you know, you know, you're cockoo. Yes. It's publicly stated now that the preponderance of evidence is now it's it, it, it, it leans in the direction of it being real. Yeah. No, it's that look that the phenomenon is real. The only speculation is what is it? What is it? Jump to conclusions quickly and they start talking about babies floating in incubators out of Alpha Centauri. And that's when you just lose everybody. It's like, whoa, hang on a second. Nobody's saying that. What we're saying is there's a physical phenomenon taking place nuts and bolts craft that are flying rings around our fastest jets that have leapt imprints on the ground or picked up by radar sensor, photographic sensors, florist sensors, they're seen visually. In some cases, people claim that we've recovered them. Okay. But let's just forget even if that aspect of it, let's just say that, you know, the David Frevers of the world, in those cases dating back forever, I mean, really credible cases. What are those? Is it us? Wow. Well, if it's us, they sure had been hiding some revolutionary technology for over 75 years. That in itself is a huge story. They've got things that fly without wings without visible means of propulsion without making any sound, any air disturbance that can do right angle turns at high speed. Everything we know would shatter on the inside of that cockpit, particularly humans. So what I'm saying is we know that we know that five or 10% of this represents possibly originating from a nonhuman intelligence. That seems to be the direction we're leaning in. So when Neil deGrasse Tyson comes forward and says what he says, I'm like, you're just not, I've had intelligence folks go, God, I'd like to talk to that guy. Well, the weirdest one he says is that why would they be interested in us, which I find hilarious. Why wouldn't they be interested in us? Yeah. Why wouldn't they be? Of course, especially once we develop nuclear technology. Totally. I mean, we could fuck up. We're crazy. A territorial apes has to be a correlation there. Yeah. I mean, it makes sense. It only makes sense. It literally only makes sense. Really. You're an alien life form that is interesting in the development of intelligent life in the universe. You would realize it's probably a precarious balancing point when they reach this apex of technology, especially when it comes to nuclear power. And especially when it comes to like what we have available here on earth in terms of natural resources and we battle for it and we control what we're territorial, we control territories. We're like aggressive. Yeah, we're crazy. We're like we shoot at these things. Warlords. We shoot at these things. Yeah, we shoot at these things. And we certainly have in the past. So I mean, I think they're probably beyond our ability to interact with them in that way. They're probably so sophisticated that they're well aware of guns and things that could damage them and injure them. But when you think about things like storms, like the Virginia case, like how do you account for, I mean, the amount of energy in a lightning storm is fucking insane. And if they just plan it wrong, which is possible, something shifts. I mean, we're assuming they don't have control of the weather. We're assuming they perhaps miscalculator or got bad data, who knows? Or just a weird phenomenon where things, I would imagine that even as technology increases, there's going to be risk in everything. Just like with everything in life, with car accidents and plane crashes. And I would imagine that even at super advanced alien level technology is probably the potential for a crash. All right. So speaking of crash, this is something I really wanted to read to your audience. This is the recent UAP amendment or legislation that was signed into law. I'm reading this directly verbatim. Okay. And I'd like to know what prompted this language. Any activity, thank you Senator Gillibrand and Rubio and others. Any activity or program by department or agency of the federal government or a contractor of such a department or agency related to unidentified anomalous phenomena, including with respect to material retrieval, material analysis, reverse engineering, research and development, detection and tracking, development or operational testing. Now that's right here. You're looking up the UAP legislation. What prompted that? What prompted that? What prompted the whistleblower stuff? I mean, let's listen to the whistleblower stuff. What does it say? Protection for individuals making authorized disclosures. Okay. Shall not be subject to a non-disclosure agreement entered into by the individual who makes the disclosure. So I'll be deemed to comply and it goes on. That's, does that not say something? That Congress and the senators are getting wind of what's going on? Why would they put that language in their reverse engineering? We covered materials. I mean, come on, man. It's pretty compelling stuff. Well, I'm sure they're hearing more than what we're hearing. Oh, they're hearing a lot. They definitely are. Listen, if it wasn't for people like you, I mean, in your documentaries, it just spurs so much interest and it gets people so excited. But, you know, when I watched it, I immediately had to talk to you about it. I know. I got your text and I was in a workout room. We have this old dad. It's called, it's called dad bod class with this guy Marty's Australian. We're in there listening to like, what's that song? Rocky Balboa? Come on, dad, dad, dad, dad, dad, dad, dad. I had to die. We're in their music, I know it's so silly. We're laughing at ourselves. You know, we're in there doing our weights and everything. I always keep my phone by my side because my son is in school. He's eight years old and I got to be available as a parent. Like something goes wrong. And I hear this, I was like, ah, damn, I'm doing my thing. I go in there and I look and it says, un-number. It could be Joe Rogan. I was all excuse me. Anyway, that was really funny. That was really funny. I want to know your favorite part. If you don't mind me asking this, what's your favorite part of the moment contact? I don't know if I have a favorite part. Going over the whole documentary, it might be when that man starts crying, when that man goes to that site and he starts crying because it's so intense. And you just imagine being a person who has this extraordinary once in a million lifetimes event where something from another world, something you can't believe is real, something crashes down and you're there to experience it. And you're of a handful of people. I know, right? And you have this memory burned in your psyche forever. And then someone brings you back to that site. That guy was just overwhelmed. Yeah. That might have been my favorite part. I mean, I think it's the doctor and the military actually drove the creature around. I looked at that guy in the eyes. Yeah, I was happy to look him in the eyes too. Oh man, that was so intense. And I met him like a couple nights prior to that. And it was just just something about it was just it was an incredible opportunity. Hey, do you mind if I if I acknowledge my family for all their support? Sure, please do. I want to acknowledge my family, Rebecca and my son, all he's been so supportive of me. Shout out to all. Yeah, I said out to my son, all my citric Kelly's been working so hard on my cousin, he and my other sister, Janine and Emily and Felix. I you guys have been so supportive and this is an incredibly laborious thing you've done. You know, the amount of time and effort, especially this Brazil case, how do you walk away from a case like this if you think it's true? I mean, it's true and you're you, you can't. I mean, you can't. You can't. You can't. You can't let it go. You can't put it down. It's just like you have no choice. Like I can, what am I going to do? I have this guy walk out to me one time and he goes, why do you do what you do? You're so compelled. What what gives? I said, well, let me ask you a question. If there was tangible evidence being withheld, I'm not saying this is the fact I'm just saying hypothetically. If this was going on and if it was being kept in the general public that there's evidence that suggests we're not alone, how significant of a story would you give that? And immediately he's like, oh my God, if that was true, that would be the most important thing ever. I mean, that's that's what we all want to know. And I said, well, I'm convinced it's happening. So how do I walk away from it? Thumbless like what you love kills you, you know. Well, I don't think it's killing you. Well, I think almost did with Eric Lopes. Yeah, that wasn't sketchy scene. I think it's important. And I think you should be praised. And I think that if this case is real and if these people are telling a truth and my God, it certainly seems like they are. It's unbelievable. I mean, the confirmation that some and what's fascinating to me is like that there are all there's a lot of variation in these things. There's a lot of variation in these experiences, a lot of variation in these crafts. You got to imagine there's probably not just one world that's what I was interested in. That's what I always think it could be all the above. It could be many worlds. It's such a huge universe. It's impossible to even wrap your mind around how big it is. And if something out there is like earth where intelligent life is evolved to a very significant point, but then keeps going for a thousand years, 10,000 years, a million years. What if they live in a more stable environment where they're not getting pelted by asteroids? Like we are neutralized the energy. Yeah. What if they stop the energy process where they're not subject to the same biological ailments that we are? What if they incorporate some sort of technology into their physical bodies? And that's them. What if they're a hybrid of artificial intelligence and biological life? Like there's so many possibilities. So many possibilities. I mean, it's almost impossible for us to even imagine the variations that could be out there because you're talking about a truly infinite universe. And the areas where they've already identified Goldilocks planets more than one, multiple Goldilocks planets in the known universe. My son came up to be a couple of days ago and he goes, Daddy, I haven't thinking a lot about this. I've been thinking a lot about this. I think those creatures in Virginia, they came from a Goldilocks zone. Oh, it's like, oh, my God, I just about died. That's amazing. So cute. He thought about it. Yeah. He's been thinking about it. I'd like for the next generation. I love the idea of like not having all this secrecy and look, we know for sure. There's secrecy surrounding this topic. That's just a fact. Why? Why can't we do that? Well, don't you think that once it begins with secrecy? So if you take us back to 1947 to Rosalind, Mexico, if it begins in secrecy, if the first ever crashed UFOs, if that begins in secrecy, like what would compel them to stop that and what how much resources would be involved in disseminating that information to the general public. And why would you do that? Especially the way that the government has treated us always when it comes to matters of we can't handle the national conflict when it comes to virtually anything they lie. And they always come up with a narrative that is very loosely based on facts. And they spoon feed the American public what they want us to hear. Anything that would take away their agency, like if you, if you want to pretend that you're in control of the United States, United States is in control of the world. But all of a sudden there's these beings from another planet that behave in a way and move with their crafts in a way that's impossible for us to replicate. We don't even understand the technology. We have no idea where they're from, how they got here. They communicate with us telepathically. I'd probably shut the fuck up too. If I was a president of the United States, if I was a, you know, I just asked that very question to representative Andre Carson a month ago. Because I was curious. It's like, okay, you guys got a arrow. Right. You got all this investigations going on. You got all this probe going on. Let's just say that they make the determination after a careful review of the data, the data that you and I don't have access to, that some of these things represent or originate from a non human intelligence. Let's just say. Yeah. Now what? Now does Kirkpatrick go to Congress? Does he disclose that? It's not his job. So did he go to Congress and did they disclose that? Well, it's not really their job. Basically, they're going to be saying we're not alone. So they go to the president. Whatever president that is, there, there were already so controversial. Have the country hate them. It was going to be politicized. So the president can't do it. And who is that? Why don't we represent 4% of the world population? So we're going to tell the rest of the world that we're not alone. Do we do it internationally through the United Nations, a panel of international scientists? If that happens, then we have to share all of our sense of the private data, right? Potential materials and bodies with the rest of the world. I don't see how they can do it. Do we answer with you? And I've never really thought it through like that before. Like think of the actual execution of disclosure. How might that occur? And I asked that very question to Andre Carson, representative Andre Carson, the other day, and he's nobody's got a plan. There is no plan in place. Right? It's all wow. Yeah. It's all wow. Honestly, one more thing. There's a documentary that just came out. The guys got a totally kind of different perspective on what he put things together, but the cast of characters regarding recovered materials. It's pretty compelling. And it's called accidental truth by guiding Ron James. And I watched it. And again, it's not my style. I tend to kind of be more than true. Yeah. I actually don't know what to do. But they're available. I probably on iTunes and Amazon, I'm guessing. But it has the cast of characters that deal with potential recovered materials. And it's a little bit, you know, like the artwork and stuff is not my cup of tea, but I did watch it. And I was like, oh, this is interesting. Anyway, I thought I'd mentioned that since we're on the topic of recovered materials. So, etc. For the more it hints forth. Listen, man. What you're doing is very important. I really, really believe that. And if this turns out to eventually get released, you're a real trailblazer. And I think the amount of labor and just the intense focus that you put into just to make this one documentary, forget about the phenomenon too. It's amazing stuff, man. I'm glad you're out there. I appreciate you very much. Thank you, Joe. I really appreciate you having me on it. I really means a lot. My pleasure. One more time, your Twitter for everybody. It's James at James C Fox as in cat James C Fox. That's my Twitter hand. Okay. That's the person I've ever given it out. There you go. Thank you very much. appreciate you. Thanks for having me on the moment of contact. Go watch it. It's fucking amazing. Bye.