Joe Rogan, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Good to see you champ. Yes sir. We were just trying to figure out how long it's been. What year, what was the last one we did together? I think it was 2017, almost 10 years. Yeah. Or maybe it might have been 16 years. Yeah I think, yes it was it really? No. No. Number 71. Wow. Yeah, he has to date it. He's got it. I haven't like. Maybe we just got punched in the head a little bit. A little bit. Well listen man. I want to tell you that that fight with Usyk was one of the craziest things that I've ever seen in my life. Never in my life that I think a guy who would go straight from kickboxing. Did you have any professional boxing matches? One. One professional. I've been boxing for 15 years. Of course. So you're arguably the greatest kickboxer of all time. Thank you, thank you appreciate that. And you have a fight with arguably the greatest boxer in the heavyweight division ever. He's in the conversation. 100%. 100% in the conversation of the greatest boxer in the heavyweight division ever. And you won 10 fucking rounds man. You won 10 rounds. Yes, close to that. Yeah. I mean I don't give a fuck what those judges were saying. Those judges are trying to say it was close. Like it was almost like you were up. I think one of them had you up by one round. And the other one's had a draw. Yeah, I think that's that's like crime. If that went to score cards and somehow you lost that decision, that would have been a crime. A crime. I know and I gotta be honest. I think like we're just straight jumping into it. So and like I think that's that's the hard part of it. It like I don't like losing but I don't if it happens but I think that's the part that that makes it even harder that I've it felt so in just and it felt in just the stoppage felt in just it didn't seem like it made sense. No, but they were looking for a way to stop the fight. Exactly. But next to that like you say this as a combat sports commentator for years and pray you bring do you bring in this sport for so many years and all other professional boxers and commentators etc. They all see the fight a certain way like you saw it like how I experienced it. And then when we look at the score cards, we get like a totally different fight. Like what what what is going on there and that is for me where the toughness is of the whole experience. Right. It's very difficult to accept. And if you had lost by decision it would have been in sanity and we've seen those insane decisions before and I never know what's going on. You know I don't want to think it's corruption. But it's almost worse if it's incompetence. Yeah. If you have someone who's judging a fight which is like the most pivotal fight arguably of your career. You think about how long you've been reigning as the heavyweight champion of kickboxing for like a decade which is crazy at the highest level. Especially the heavyweight division. It is so hard to stay at the top. Nobody does. Everybody's like even in the UFC it's like one, two fights and then they fall off. Yeah. If you do be the heavyweight champion and have fucking wars like Jamal Benson, Deek, that fight. Yeah. Some of these fights even had wars. Yeah. And to come out on top every single fucking time. Yeah. And then you have this enormous fight and you have terrible judging. Yeah. And it's like it's almost worse if it's incompetence because if you've got these people that don't know what they're watching and they're calling it like their eyes, their decision makes a difference about whether it's a W or an L and it doesn't make any sense. It's not fair. It's not right. I think at this point in time they should really seriously consider having alternative scoring. I think there should be more. One of the things I like about glory is that glory has more than three judges. Mm hmm. What do they have? Four or five? Five. I believe. Five. I think five is the right number. I think three is too few. Yeah. Because you could have two people fuck it up and one person gets it right. And then, but if you have two more judges, the odds are they're going to get it right too. Yeah. The people that fuck it up, it's the minority. Yeah. But if you ask me like next to us as athletes putting our health on the line, which makes it very, very hard thing to cope with, but also for the people watching the fight, it's like it's like it feels in just and I definitely feel like especially in the time that we're in now, everybody wants transparency. If you look at the World Cup that just finished, like even there when something happens, the referee is still a person. He can make like a mistake. He can look at the foul. And he like, I saw it this way, but now what they're doing, they're looking at the far, they're looking at the cameras. Right. And multiple people are looking at it and like, hey, we can interpret it. The rules like this because this happened, we can see this and this is wrong. Yeah. So even it's going to be a cart or it's going to be a penalty or whatever. There is this is what's happening. But within this situation, it's just like if you ask me, and it's still possible, it's a human being, the referee made a mistake. And that is possible, but there should be people or a situation where it's like, hey, sorry, ref, but you made a mistake. This isn't the right call. So we can overturn it in a second. The only thing that's really hard to do with that subjectively is fight stoppages because sometimes, at least in MMA, a referee sees things in a fighter that you might not see things watching on television or sitting at my seat as a commentator. A referee will see guys eyes roll back and it's dead. He'll see something that I don't see. And I'll go, oh, I thought that was a little quick. And then, but they're right on top of it. They see certain things that you might not be able to see. I would say it's the thing. We, I appealed it. I appealed it. And everything we appealed upon, we got, they said like, you guys were right. We got stopped after the bell. Yes. Right after the, after the stop, which the doctor came, he's, I wasn't disorientated. I didn't have no concussion or whatever symptoms. So everything, everything we got, they, they were like, no, you're right, you're right, you're right. But they never overturned it. They're never, oh, they're nothing. Well, also, how would they overturn it? Would they go to the judge's score cards? And if they did go to the judge's score cards, what would it be a majority draw? Because if you are down or you're, you're even on both cards and then up on one. And then did they count the knockdowns in the, the, the final round because if they did, you might have lost that fight which is even crazier. Yeah. But then you have something like, hey, guys, let's look at the scoring cards again. And that, like, another, other, other people, other judges look at the score cards and look at the fight and score it again because. Well, here's what you know, it's crazy. It's crazy. Here's what you know, it's crazy. It was the most competitive fight of U6 career as a heavy with champion. Yeah. And they're not even talking at all about a rematch. No. That's kind of crazy. Right. And that kind of crazy, they're saying, Deontay Wilder, which all love to Deontay. Yeah. Deontay is not the Dante Wilder of 2019. No. He's a different guy now. That's a good, that's a good thing that you just brought that up because before this fight, you heard the whole conversation. Okay. We're going to do Rico after that. I'm going to fight the winner of Dubois awardley. And after that, I want to fight Tyson Fury again. Right. The other two. Yeah. Not in the conversation anymore. Yeah. Without taking too much credit for it, I think like with this fight, he saw like, hmm, this was a little harder than I expected. Yeah. So let's take a different route. And for me, I don't want to rematch just to have the rematch. I would like the rematch because it makes sense. There's a story within this rematch. It's huge. And it's something that it is unfinished business. Yes. And it's a rocky story. It's a very rocky story. It's 100% and that's why for me, where I'm looking at it, and I'm liking the fall of my, or maybe in the winter of my career as an athlete. And I just want to do big fights that make sense. And then you're like, oh, this is what I want to see. Well, not only that as a promoter, what makes more sense than that fight. Yeah. The Deonta Wilder fight again, all respected Deonta. I love that guy. Yeah. It's one of the greatest knock on the percent. And the history that we have with division. He's not the same guy. No. He's not the same guy. For whatever reason. It happens to everybody, right? I think he's 40 now, right? Yeah. It happens to everybody. You just got off of a crazy performance. Yeah. And the whole world got to see it. If any fight warrants a rematch, it's that fight. Yeah. That fucking rematch would be gigantic. It would be so huge. Yeah. It's the ultimate rocky story. I was watching that fight on the edge of my seat. Oh, I love that. It's in the beat. The fight starts. Yeah. And I was like, oh, it's going to go down. I'm like, whoa, first of all, I'm like, oh, it's your Rico's fucking huge. You realize that big you are. And, you know, Ustick is a cruiserweight. He's a cruiserweight to put on ways to become. He's a big cruiser. Yeah. He could still make cruiser. If he wanted to, he wanted to get really lean, he could still make cruiser. He's your way bigger than him. That's a giant factor. And then it's your experience. Your world championship level experience. You've been in so many big fights. I know the percent. It looks so calm and so relaxed and so in the moment. And I was like, holy shit, he might pull it off. And then it got into like the third, fourth and fifth round. I'm like, I don't see this changing. I'm like, this is crazy. Wait a minute, is that everybody really? The commentators, they were like, okay, Rico's moving a lot. And he's fainting and he's doing this and he's doing that. But how long can he keep this up? Well, they don't know about your cardio. Exactly. There was one coming to the, that, that, that also accommodated for glory. He was also there. Yeah, he was also there, but the commentator for glory that he knew like that cardio wise. I live in the gym. That's what you know as well. Like I love this. So I don't, I'm never going to lose on cardio because then I lose for myself. So you're in anomalies in terms of like 260 pound men. Yeah. It's very few guys that are as big as you that push a pace like you did. So I wasn't, when they were saying that, I was like, you got, you know, you guys don't understand what you're saying here. He's going to be able to do this all night long. Yeah. And you know, credit to Usyk for finally catching you and rocking you, but the fight was stopped too, too quickly. It just was. Yeah, 100%. And you were still okay. You got in a world championship fight that's that close. If it just, not even really that close. Yeah. You were that far ahead. You got to give someone a chance. Yeah, but let's, let's reverse it. Right. Let's refer. What if he was in this position? There's no way they would stop that fight. No way. Look, it's either incompetence or corruption. And I tend to think corruption. Yeah. I think these guys want to keep judging fights and they want the favor of the promoters and the money is in Usyk. Yeah. Usyk is a huge name. He's a, he's their big star in that way. Of course. They don't want like a guy coming in from a different sport. And one professional box. Exactly. And making the biggest, making the biggest upset in boxing history. That would be, yeah. That would be pretty crazy. It really almost was the biggest upset in boxing history. I mean, it was crazy. It was really crazy to watch, man. But you were the perfect guy to do it because of the pace thing. Because of the fact that you are so big and you can push that insane pace and keep it up. For example, we're not so game plan wise. Mm-hmm. We were so smart on the game plan. We did something that he has not seen before. That he has not experienced before. Even though he fought the best boxes in the world. But all the boxes, what they were trying to do is out, that if you were a boxer, we're trying to outbox a Cruiserweight. How in the hell are you going to do that? He's lighter, he's smaller, and he's faster. So how are you going to out-super-tech now? Exactly. So how are you going to out-box him? Did you just kind of have a super-strong game plan? That's what we had. So when you looked at it, when you first got the offer, first of all, how far out did you get the offer? How far out away from the fight? How much time did you have to prepare? Well, did you know the story, how I got into this whole thing? No. No. It's a crazy story. Okay, let me tell you. So it all started with the Canelo Crawford fight. And Jason State, that was a good friend of mine. And I saw he was in Vegas for that fight. So I texted him, he was like, yo, you there for that fight? Oh my god, yeah, this is going to be great. So we went back and forth. He's like, yeah, bro. So he told me, brother, you need to be in boxing because he was at the tournament, when did the eight men turn them a few years ago. And so he comes to my fights. And he's like, oh, you got to be in here. You got to kill these guys. I said, yeah, yeah, I think I'm pretty good. He's like, you know what? I'm going to throw it out there and let's see what happens. Okay, so that was, let me see. There was Vegas time during the day. So Amsterdam time, it was night time. So the next morning, I'm on the treadmill, I'm running. The phone ring, Jason. So yo, bro, I'm on the treadmill. Let me call you back. Listen, I put your name out there. I showed your videos and they're going crazy. They want you. I jumped up. I was like, what do you mean? They said they want to do something. They're going to call you. I gave them your contact. Like, okay. So that's how it started. A few days later, they call me Rico. We want you to fight. Blah blah. We love what you do. We want you to fight Anthony Joshua. So I'm like, okay, let's go. I'm ready for this opportunity. But I was on the set of Roadhouse too. So there was like, oh, shit. Now we got to combine everything. I've got my trainee coming in like during, yeah, during takes and like, okay, we do some pad work. And then finally, we were supposed to fight in February. So I think the deal came around October. October November. So I had like around 10, 10 good weeks to train. And then finally, I finished off the movie in December. And he, but in between, Joshua got the offer to fight Jake Paul for a crazy amount of money. So he was like, of course, right. I'm going to do that. And then after that, I'm going to do the Rico fight. Perfect. Okay, he does the Jake Paul fight. Well, that went like loud wind. And then they reached out like, can we push the fight a little bit instead of February to March? Like, I'm good. The more time I get, the better. So to train, to transition into boxing. So that happened. And then the end of the year, like two weeks later, that tragic accident happens. So that was, yeah, we're talking about Anthony Joshua. Yeah, it was an Africa terrible car accident. Yeah, terrible friends. Yeah, terrible. So that derailed that whole situation. But I had a whole training plan scheduled. I was going to Spain to train there for a month. But I didn't know what was going to happen. So I just did what I had to do. And I just continued training. So I wasn't Spain training, training, training, and then at the end of the training camp, we were talking about it. And they said, like, yeah, we don't think, and also with this manager, Eddie Hearn, like, I don't know if he's going to be back soon. So what do you want to do? You want to wait or you want to fight? I'm already training. So I would like to fight somebody. But we don't know what makes sense. No, let's think about it. So we thought about it. We thought about it. They thought about it. This episode is brought to you by Squarespace. Once you've got a great name for your business, you need a great domain. And Squarespace makes it easy to lock in a domain. You just search the name. You want buy it. And then you're ready to build. No hidden fees. No weird upsells. Go to squarespace.com slash Rogan for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use the code Rogan to get 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. And then we were talking about, hey, what about, what about Usyk? Does that make sense? Was it your idea? Yeah, it was our idea. I'm like, yeah, that makes sense. Why not? Because he's the top dog. He's like, I'm just going to keep boxing champion versus the undisputed boxing champion. Like, there's a story there. And I'm like, let's just throw it out there and let's see what they say. Okay. Pick up the phone and call them. Yo, guys, yeah. We have an idea. So I pitched them though. I'd be undisputed for undisputed. Silence. What did I just do? Did you see? Then the first thing I hear back, we love it. Whoa. Is that okay? What does that mean? What does that mean? What does that mean? What does that mean? So that is that, you know what? We're going to talk to Usyk's team and we're going to come back to you. So like, and then in two weeks, they went to Usyk. Usyk loves the idea as well. So again, big shout out to him for taking that fight as well because he had hundreds of options and he took this fight outside the box. So I love it also to his Excellency Turkjela Scheik for setting this whole thing up. Oh, he has set up so much. So he's so important to support super much respect for both of them and thankful also to Jason, of course. Presenting this whole thing up. Yeah, getting me into the conversation. And then like, so there was after two weeks and then at two weeks later, we were on a FaceTime call for like a minute. And yeah, after that, they got it done. Wow. And then afterwards they said, oh, it's going to be title fight. And then the whole world went crazy, of course. Like, oh my God, how is this guy going to go for a world title fight? It doesn't make any sense. Oh, it's just like, lads go in and shot the world. Well, you know, it's not like you didn't have a lifetime of striking. It's only the difference is removing the kicks. Yeah, but the thing is like the boxing fans, the straight up boxing fans, they're not too much into MMA. And they're definitely not into cake boxing. So they had no clue. Right. Right. Oh, who is this guy? What did he do? That's why they're also the WBC. They also have their Muay Thai department. So for them, it made sense. It's like, hey, Rico with his credentials and what he did into in cake boxing. It makes sense to make it a world championship fight. But we just have to tell the people. Well, you know, it drives me nuts as a fan of combat sports. It's also a giant fan of kickboxing. The kickboxing does not get the love that it deserves in America. It doesn't make any sense because in MMA, the casual fans love stand up and fights go to the ground. They boo. So it makes no sense to me how you have boxing huge. MMA huge kickboxing almost non existent in America. There's no big kickboxing leagues. No, baby, because they want to see, yeah, their own people win, maybe. No, no, it just hasn't been promoted. No. It doesn't make any sense. It makes no sense because their own people don't win in MMA. I mean, there's very few American champions. There's Justin Gachi and Sean Strickland. Yeah, but at least they're really competitive. And in K-Boxing, they're right. That's true, but we don't care. Honestly, in MMA, no. I mean, Alex Pereira was the biggest star in the sport. It's fucking delicious. Yeah, exactly. But Brazilian doesn't speak English at all. It only speaks Portuguese and whatever other languages travel language. And so then you have Islam Akachev was fighting next weekend. Huge star. Yeah. You know, from Dagestan, no one in America all they care are you the baddest motherfucker on earth. That's all they care. And I've really genuinely believed that if someone came along like I really wish Zufa would do it. Because they're doing it with boxing, they should do with kickboxing. Because kickboxing or more time, whichever they decide, you know, I think is the most exciting stand-up sport in the world. I don't think it's even close. I'm 100%. I love glory. I fucking watch it all the time. I watch it all the events. Yeah. It's so exciting, man. It's so fun. And the fights are so chaotic. And if you're a fan of brutal and technical at the same time, I mean, some of the most amazing fights. I mean, that's how I knew about Pireros because I was such a huge fan of glory. Yeah. When he came over to the UFC, I was like, everyone's fucked. I'm like, you don't understand. Everyone's fucked. This guy's a different man. Yeah, he is. He's different. But it was because I knew him so much from kickboxing and he was so exciting in kickboxing. And like kickboxing should be huge in America. It should be. It really should be. Yeah, 100%. 100%. And it's a part of MMA. So I think a lot of guys. But I am part of MMA. The most exciting part of MMA is the kickboxing for sure. Yeah, 100%. 100%. Makes no sense. It's a, it's a, it is an untapped market. There's somebody figured it out and dove in and made it, it would be gigantic. It would have to be like the UFC though because they, you have to have the kind of publicity machine, the kind of media machine that the UFC has to build up the stories and show these guys and show like all the champions. 100%. But I think that's in every big fight and every big organization is where the strength is the storytelling. Yes. That is where I think where and also you ask me like when I was in glory where it lacked on, on experience like the storytelling. Right. Where does this guy come from? What is his background? And like you want to get to know the person instead of just like the guy that throws punches and kicks. Exactly. So UFC does an awesome job with that. They have a whole series called embedded. So like next week when the Ian Gary is on my ketchup fight takes place. They're going to have one on Monday. So you get up a Monday morning. It'll be there on YouTube and everybody will watch it. And they're like, oh shit, you watch that one and you watch the one on Tuesday. Yeah. You see them training, you see them eating, see them in a sauna cutting way. Yeah. You see them doing all their press stuff. You see them, you get hyped man. You get hyped. But you get drawn into like, oh, yeah. This is the guy behind the fighter. Exactly. I think that's so much more interesting. And then they have the countdown show, which is an hour. The countdown show is like highly produced and all this different stuff. So the interviews and conversations with their family. Yeah. It's fucking amazing. And it just gets you so jazzed up for the fight. If the UFC did something like that with kickboxing, I think it would be gigantic. You know, they tried glory in America for a while. It was doing pretty good on Spike TV, remember? Yeah. But they had the last man standing tournament in Los Angeles. Yeah. I went to that. It was awesome. It's just, it just never fucking caught on. No. It was hard. It was too bad. So then after the last few years, we were just in Europe, more in the Netherlands. That's where we, yeah. One is doing a good job with kickboxing. One FC in, I don't know. You don't know about them? No. I know about them, but I don't know what. No, I don't know. I don't know if they're doing it. I don't know if they're doing it. In the lighter weight divisions, because they get a lot of guys from Thailand and a lot of guys from Japan. Yeah. They're more Asian-based, right? Yes. Yes. More Asian-based. But they have a lot of stand-up fights now. A lot of like either they have Muay Thai with MMA gloves on. Yeah. In a cage, brutal. And then they're also having kickboxing in a cage. In a cage. And kickboxing in a ring. They mix it up between rings and the case. Yeah. I mean, I personally think the ring is better. I really do. Because I think that there's a lot of weird stuff with the cage. Especially with MMA. I don't like it because you could use it to get back up. Yeah. You can get your back against it and pull yourself back up. He could also use it to take people down. Yeah. It's harder to take people down with the ring. Yeah, I'm a percent. I'm a percent. Yeah, so that's why it's good for me now. Like, yeah. Well, I know a person's heart. Yeah. I was talking about you fighting Derek Lewis. Yeah. I remember that. And then you got this, the offer to box. Yeah, so much money. Yeah, the Joshua fight. Yeah. Oh, that's right. Yeah, that's where it started. So yeah, so we were in talks because I was a free agent. I vacated the belt. How many MMA fights have you at least one? One. One. Yeah. This one. I did some graph length. I did one professional MMA fight. So after that, I faking my belt. I was a free agent. So I'm like, OK, let's. Yeah. Our toes in different water. Let's see. Yeah. What's on the landscape now? Why did you decide to vacate the belt? Because you had done everything you needed to do. I did it all. You cleaned out the division. I did it all. So I was like, I wanted it to make sense. And first, we talked within the organization of like, hey, I'm looking to do big stuff, different stuff. So like crossover events because that was getting more and more talks about like the big crossover. And I think, yeah, in my opinion, I am one of the baddest men on the planet. So it made sense to do it. But then yeah, within the organization management, wrong management, like we just didn't get to a place where it works out. So I was like, OK, let me just leave it then. So I left it. And then we talked with UFC to see. Yeah, what was going on there. But then yeah, I got the other offer and it made more sense. Now was the other offer of one contract fight, one fight contract? So you're free. I'm free agenting. Yeah, wow. So and that's why it was any conversation at all about a rematch. Right away, his excellency came into the ring. And he said, you're going to fight this guy again. That's the first thing he said. But couple of y'all also came into the ring. I cheat couple y'all. The WBC Interim champion. And now the champion because Usy Kvekated the belt as well. So he also wanted his shot. So there was like a lot of talk. And at that moment, I was there. But it was just like, I don't know. I was like, chaos. Yeah, chaos. And for me, I was just like, wow, did this. They just fucked it. Yeah, it just really just happened. And it took me like at least six weeks before I watched the fight back for the very first time after the fight. Wow. Because it still hurts. So yeah. So now I'm like a free agent. When you get so many offers. What is it like watching it and watching the fight get stopped after the belt? It's still hurts. I'm like, wow, what did you want me to do? You want me to move around. You want me to punch back or whatever. Like you know, I've been in trouble multiple times within my world title kickboxing fights. I was behind multiple times. And I still came on came out on top. So there was for me, there's no conversation in like, okay, could he continue? Is he going to continue? I never stop. They don't know you. Exactly. Because the conditioning thing, like your conditioning is so good. You bounce back so quick. And there's been so many times where guys try to empty the tank. To put you out. Yeah. And you're not going nowhere. No. And it was just a few seconds in a referee should know that. So next to that, like with all the experience you know that I have within the combat sports, like it's just a few seconds. Let it go. And let me at least give me the opportunity and give the fans the opportunity to see that 12 round. Right. So all of it's all excited. Yeah. Oh my God. Also, looking now looking back at it because there was also open scoring. And I love open scoring because within that gives you the right position and gives the fighters the position. Like, okay, where are we standing within this fight? But now looking back at the fight after eight rounds because after every four rounds we hear what's. Like, okay, where are- where- where we're standing within this fight? But now looking back at the fight after eight rounds, because after every four rounds, we hear what scoring is. After eight rounds, my trainer Peter Fury says, okay, we gotta really start winning these rounds now. I was like, what? I'm- I was like, am I hearing this right? I- I feel like I'm already winning these rounds. He said, no, we're equal. We're- we're equal on the score cards. After eight rounds. So I was like, okay, so in the ninth round, I- Even the commentators are like, what? Yeah, exactly. But then I really started pushing even more. But I was pushing already. But if you know, you're like eight or seven rounds head, and you feel like you're getting tired the last two or three rounds, which is move round. Yeah, it's a tip tap, and maybe you lose it, maybe it's a draw, whatever. And then still you win, uh, because you were like five rounds head. Then it doesn't make any sense. But now we had to keep pushing. And then, oh, it's like walking straight into that upper card. Like, oh, it still gets me. Oh, I'm gonna look back at it's like, oh, and then that last part, that's what I find so hard. And I feel like I need to work on that as a, as a human being for myself, as a person. I can only look at that. At that one mistake, I felt I made at the end. Because I gave them the opportunity to pull this card. That's what that's, that's how it feels for me. Mistake being that you pushed too hard or a mistake. Yeah, the mistake, like there was one mistake that I made running into that upper card. Like walking straight in, swinging. And we said in the in the in the whole prep, I tried that a few times like, oh, that's dangerous. Don't do that with Lucique. And still for whatever reason, I did that at that exact moment. And that that's what frustrates me if I look back at it. Because I'm only, I'm not looking at what he did well, because that upper card was amazing. I'm just looking at what I, what I'm responsible for. I'm responsible for myself. I gave them now this opportunity by making that mistake. And that's like, oh, it's so hard to get over that for myself. But I need to work on that because I had the same with the jump open. So, I dig fight with the eye. I, everybody's like, oh, Rico, you showed them. You're never giving up. But I know I got that. I know I got that from the inside, but I never have to show that, because the skill set is so, so big that I don't get in trouble. So I don't have to show that I can continue and never giving up. But I can only look at that. Oh, that one mistake. Why did I do that? Then I get the eye look. You're super, super. So I can only recap that. Yeah, it's that guy fucking punches hard. Yeah. He's a big fella. Yeah, he's bigger than I am. Jamal Bensideek is huge. Powerful powerful. So that's that's that's hard for me. I got to work on that before myself. Like, yeah, but that's also why you're great. I mean, you have to, you have to hate mistakes, hate them. Like they're poison. Yeah, they are. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you got, you got, yeah, you should have seen me after the fight. Like I was, I was like a big baby. I was crying in my, my hotel room. Like a big, big baby. I was like, oh my God, I was so close with like shocking to world. And yeah, now this happened to us. Like, oh, it hurts so bad. It's so hard to do it. It's a certain extent. But at least you could laugh at it a little bit now. Yeah, I can only imagine. It's me watching it as a fan of yours. I was like, oh my God, he's going to fuck it, pull it off. Yeah. I was on the edge of my seat. And when we're going into the ninth and 10th Browns, I was like, I don't see how ooze it can win. No. And then when they started talking about the scorecards, I was like, what the fuck are they watching this? They're looking at a different fight. But that's so, but for me, the corruptor incompetent. Yeah, but the corruption. The corruption, if I look at it now and for us talking about it and for you being so long into combat sports and being a competent and doing it yourself, wouldn't it be something? Wouldn't you be maybe a spokesman or a part, could you be a part of a way how we can make this whole judging thing and this whole transparency better? Well, I think one way to do it is to have more judges like Glory does. I think five is probably the right number. And I think another thing to do is maybe have a bunch of people online that are recognized experts like top trainers, top commentators, people that really understand the sport and maybe they get an app. Maybe there's like a special app that those guys can judge on. So you have a collective expert opinion and you get to look at that as well. But that's what we had now. Like if you look the professionals, the trainers, the commentators, they also the fight a certain way, but the judges thought something totally they were looking at a different fight for some kind of reason. Well, that's crazy. The problem like we talked about is either in competence or its corruption. And I think it might be a little bit of both. And I think maybe the corruption isn't even conscious, but it's like they know who the promoter wants to win. They want Usyk to win because Usyk is where you can get the next Tyson Fury fight or the Anthony Josh will not Anthony Joshua, but whoever he would decide to fight. You know, again, and now it's going to be Deontay Wilder, which nobody's caught on to. I don't know if it's going to happen. Where is that? Can you please find out if the Anthony Joshua or excuse me the Deontay Wilder, Alexander Usyk fight is signed because people were talking about that being, I think they were saying like December or something? They were trying for it. At least I know this is what they were trying for, but for me, like that's why for now it's not officially signed yet. Okay. Okay. Not hopefully to his excellency, Turkey, Alshek. This is the fight. But here's the question, does Ulic want that fight? That's the question. Well, you have to think it's really tough fight like that fight. And then, you know, they ask you to do it again. And it's your last time out. It's called, I mean, this is his last fight. Yeah. If this is the last fight and he almost lost to you and he has the potential of losing again, he didn't have to entice him. They didn't have to fluke him. Yeah. Pull out that face. That is like shrink, big bang. And he's like, oh, okay, if I lose, yeah, that's what it is. Exactly. Just, now, but this one is so good for me now to be in this position. I'm a free agent. We got offers from the biggest organizations across the world like after this fight. And I'm just like taking my time. What offer is they giving you that's exciting? Can you talk about them? Not really. No. No, no, no, no. Yeah. No, so I know a lot of people talked about you possibly boxing Francis and Gohano or having an MMA fight with Francis and Gohano. So was that on the table? Yeah. So to be honest, like two weeks before the Usyk fight, there was the MVP card. But then they approached me like weeks before MVP to MMA versus Francis. And then I was also like right on the edge of like closing the deal with Usyk. And so I had the two options on the table. And yeah, to be honest, like the other, the MMA deal, like they kept on like stacking up, stacking up like because like, okay, what have we given you the? Hmm. Okay, but what if you give me the, okay, let me look at this option again. So, but then yeah. I just looked myself in the mirror like I respect his excellency and Jason gave his word and his excellency gave his word that they were going to do it. And if I look at myself, I'm looking at a legacy and that Francis and Gohano fight is still going to be there after Usyk fight. But how crazy is that as a cake boxer coming in, fighting for a world championship with in boxing and potentially winning because that's how I, I only have one, one plan and that's winning. So that's how I went into that fight and we saw how that went and that was. Didn't you wish you could kick him? No, not really. Not at all. No. Because we wish you could just a few low kicks. No. Because that he definitely got to make it to the end. No, but that was so funny because everybody's like, we go, you think cake boxing for so long. Like what happens if you had kick him like, don't you have that feeling like, like guys, like, I've been boxing next to doing cake boxing like for 15 years or something. I've been working with Peter Fury for so long and I'm used to this, but I know for, I think that's what made me such a good cake boxer as well that I was into boxing. But there's a giant difference between working with a kick boxer and even being a kick boxer and fighting arguably the greatest heavyweight of all time. I never said, but the crazy thing was I think he was around five or six. He was jabbing me. I was just ticking it away and I was like, bump, bump, bump. I'm like talking to myself in the fight. I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm out jabbing the champ. This is crazy. And I'm a trade out here, trading my journey to Dennis. Rico just keep doing what you're doing. You're winning this fight. Let's go. Let's go. Because he also don't didn't want me to take too many risks. Okay, you won this round and then continue from there because that's how they were experiencing it. The fight and the rounds on the side. Let me ask you this, when you first started formulating a game plan, did you watch a bunch? I'm sure you're already a fan of U6 watches. Five percent. But did you rewatch them and try to find patterns? How did you formulate this game plan? Of course, with my trainer Peter Fury, he's crazy. He's the very, very, very, very best at what he does. And we were just like analyzing these fights. Like, so first he already had the thing in his mind and he asked me, like, what do you see all these boxers do and what they shouldn't be doing and what do you think they should do? So look at it. I look at it. And I think, basically, started with if somebody is a South Pole, why would you stay right in front of them? That's one thing. And because you cannot go if somebody is orthodox, you move to the right. But you cannot move to the right with a South Pole because you're walking straight into a left hand. So why is nobody moving to the left? Because then, as soon as you move to the left, you're walking away from that strong arm. I think that's what it is. Exactly. Which is crazy. It's just so many people are so stuck in their patterns. Exactly. The way they like to move, they like to move to their right. Yeah. That's what they like. They feel good. They want to move to their right and throw right hand. But yours running into that power head. It's crazy. It's not just that, too. It's also the size difference. That was one thing. It's like you were so big in that ring that you were smothering him and you are top of him and you were throwing those shots in tight. But the combination of those two getting him out of that position took away so many of his tools and then like he said smothering and getting into him and using my size because if you ask me, like all the guys he fought, they're my size. They're way bigger than him. Right. Because the way they fought, they couldn't use their size on him. But the way I did it, I could. Tyson Fury did a lot. He used his size a lot. And he said it different kind of big though. He's big and long where you're fucking thick. It's a different thing. You're very lean and huge. It's a different. It's like the mass of you when you were on top of him pushing him. You could see that it was a factor. He was recognizing it. But it's so hard. Like if you look at that fight that you just mentioned is how are you going to get, he tried to use his size. But how are you going to get close to him walking straight into it? Because he's, then he's just going to keep moving. Right. Because he's so fast on his feet. But that's what we tried to do. We tried to be fast over on our feet and move to the side and then get into it and then get close. Because then as soon as you, he's the software you keep moving this way and just keep getting closer somewhere you're going to be there. You're going to reach him. But it takes some time. And I didn't think if you look at the heavy weights, what they all want to do is they want to, they want to hit maybe boom, boom, one, two versus the very, of arguably one of the best to have ever done it. And then especially in the cruiser weight, how are you going to hit him in step A? Right. You're going to be at least step B, C or D when you're going to hit him. You got to have multiple plans. Like for me, I was just throwing throw throw throw throw throw. And I know I wasn't going to, I was the first time I was going to hit him was maybe in punch six or whatever. Because then the distance is going to be closer. So I didn't even think about trying to knock his head off. That's what I said. I said, I don't know if that's what I'm going to do. I tried to knock his head off. Of course, I'm going to tell him that. This is definitely not all we're going to do. I was just going to get close. Right. And keep working. Volume. Keep working. And then finding when you're there, that's the moment you're going to put in some power. But that's like maybe punch seven or eight. But the first three, four, you're not even going to hit this. You're just hitting air because he's too fast. Right. He's like a giant Loma chanko. Exactly. That's how we thought about it. Try and hit him in the first two or three punches. Throw them. So he has something to look at and something to think about. And then we're going to get there. And as soon as you get there, you smother him, bump, punch him in the body. What heavy way boxes have you worked with over the years? All the top fighters. Of course, that's how I got with PDFU. I started with Tyson Fury. I trained with Argyro Caballia because he was also in that comeback then. You with Fury, Peter Sun, he's also, he's been going up and down because of his health. But he's definitely one of the best. And we're going to see more of him because, yeah, he's such a good competitor, such a good boxer as well. great skill set. So there's been a bunch of fighters that we're working with. That's so massive because sharing all that gym time with elite guys like Tyson Fury and Colby F, though I haven't that kind of experience in the gym must have also been a huge confidence. 100% especially now these whole last thing is just trying to get like good South Pole fighters. Oh my God. That's the hardest thing. The hardest thing. We had one big guy and one smaller guy. It was so hard and then mixing that up. So we started off with first six with the big guy, Mosa Jolly, an amazing boxer but he's big. He's big. He's not an oocyte. He's like twice as big as oocyte but he's a South Pole. So he has that power and we could really compete. Then after that we jumped in with James Branch and he's like 90 kilo South Pole. So he's like rubber fired. So and that change within sparring. So the first six with one and then six with the other. Oh my God. That was it was next level. It was like six months of pure hard work. Wow. But it was so cool. It was so cool. And it just opened up my mind to a whole different, to a whole different world. And it's for being in combat sports since I was six. And after all these years saying like, okay, this kickboxing chapter within the book is that's done. That's start a new chapter. Well there's no big kickboxing fight that can compare with what you just did. No. You know 38 37 37. So at that age like you've got to like look at what you've already accomplished. Yeah. And kickboxing, there's no fight that everyone's calling out for. Like oh you know, it's not like Batterhari's in the prime. No. It's not like one big fight. No. So there was like hey, especially with the whole crossover fights being at the biggest attention right now. It's like hey, I think that's something we got to look at. So after the fight is done, Turkey, Alashik comes into the ring. So as you guys are going to fight again. And it's been a couple months now. So what has happened? What do you talk to anybody? Has your management talked about it? Yeah, they talked about it because it's been crazy. Like all the biggest organizations reached out. Hey, we were looking at this fight. We're looking at that fight. Right. But what about what makes sense for us? And that's where I'm looking at now because like I said, I mean, I believe I'm in the winter of my career. So I'm just looking at big fights. Do you want to get out? No, no, it's not setting stone. But let's see, let's see. But like I said, I feel like I'm so excited. I'm so happy and I'm so grateful to be in this position right now. That's yeah, make history. Yeah, I mean, it's all about legacy, right? They fucked you over, but you did win. You got a big win out of it in that you performed way better than anybody expected. And then there's also this element where people are rooting for you because they do think you got fucked over. Yeah, 100% you were getting fucked over in the scoring. And they got you got fucked over with a stoppage. And so it's very marketable. And so what my question though, what I'm asking is, is anybody talked about the rematch other than that one time? I knew this was going to come. I mean, that's what I wanted. Oh, it's talking about the rematch. That is the fight. That is one of the biggest fights in heavyweight boxing right now. 100%. If not, though, it's got to be other than Tyson Fury versus Anthony Joshua is going to be big for England, right? For them, that's an all time fight. Two of the all time greats in England, two of the greatest British heavyweight champions ever. A little bit late, but it's a little late. Yeah, especially after Anthony Josh was last fight. That was a scary one. I was like, whoa. Yeah, but both of them. Yes, both of the fights they did. Yes. Yeah, it's not they're not the same guys. No, but still, it's still super excited. Exactly. And it's a huge fight to that finally. I made other than that, the fight is a rematch. Yeah, you and O'Sick is under fight. That's the fight in the heavyweight division right now. There's no one else out there that's like, there's Moses I Tama who people don't really know about enough. Not yet yet, but he's the future. 100%. That guy's good. Dynamite dynamite dynamite dynamite. Yeah, so good. Yeah. And he's so slick in how he moves in and out. Oh, no, that's the next generation. Yeah, he's the future. Yeah. I mean, he's like our generations Mike Tyson. Yeah. Well, you're watching me 21 years old is coming up. You're like, oh, yeah, shit. He's like, but other than, I mean, but he doesn't have an experience yet and doesn't have enough name yet for what he really is and what his potential is. Not just. It's one day will happen, but for you and for O'Sick, that and for heavyweight boxing, that's the vibe. Yeah, 100%. 100% of remoter. Yeah. Maybe we'll get Dana White to get Zufa involved. Oh, that would be crazy. I don't know. Is there some sort of a deal that O'Sick has with anybody? I don't think so because I believe that is one of the reasons as well why he faking it, those belts because you have those belts. No, because when you have those belts, you get forced into fights. Right. You're like, OK, you're mandatory to fight this guy. And that was the, I think for him, the position that he was in fighting me, he could like, that was a voluntary defense and he decided like, hey, I would love to do this on my terms versus another guy. And I think they looked at it like, this maybe going to be an easier fight. So this is nice to do that didn't go the way is planned. But still, I think that's where where his mind is at now. Like he's like, I just want to do what I want to do, which makes so much sense after what he has accomplished. After what he has accomplished, he should be able to call his own shots. And I want him to make the most money possible because he is a legend. But that's this, that's the fight. But the problem is it might be too hard. Yeah. It might be too hard. It might be one of those ones, which is why maybe, you know, no disrespect to Deontay, but he might be looking at Deontay thinking Deontay is a little softer. Yeah. We're going to ride into the sunset. Yeah. But it's also spectacular knockout. Yeah, but it's also then, like you said, it's not going to be the big money grab that, because I've asked people going to pay for that. No, exactly. They're not going to be paid that that crazy money for it. It's not a big pay per view fight. That's the thing. It's like, people will watch it just because he's an all time great in any time, oosic fights, people are going to watch. And Deontay still, he's still the greatest one punch knockout artist in the history of the world. Yeah, you should never know what's going to happen. What do you lose is the power. It's power is fucking crazy. Yeah. He's geeky. I finished you in the 10th. Yeah, but one shot. Yeah. Coming out of nowhere. Yeah, he had a Ortiz on the top of the head and put him out. I was like, that is nuts. Yeah. He's just a level of power. Different level of power. But again, 40 years old, it's twilight of his career. And this hasn't looked good in the last, you know, last few years. But for oosic to want that fight, signals to me that he just, you know, wants to just go out with one more payday. And that's it. And I don't know if that was his choice that fight. Maybe that's just the internet talking. Yeah. Maybe that's Deontay Wilder's team wants that fight. I don't know. I don't know. But like I said, I got, I got all the options. They gave me all the options. Like, hey, you want to find this guy? I want to find that. So if they talked to you about MMA as well? Uh, yeah. Yeah. But yeah, I'm keeping the options open, but I'm leaning towards boxing. Yeah. Because I've been in the boxing game now. And I've enjoyed it so much. And that's like for me, like I just said, like I came from kickbox from being six years old and doing it for over 30 years. And then now getting really into boxing, I was always boxing, but I was boxing to kickbox. It's a totally different game. I had to rewire everything that that was in there. So now that I did it and I performed the way that I performed, I was like, yeah, this was fun. This episode is sponsored by better help. You've probably heard about better help before, but maybe you haven't heard from those who have actually used better help that feedback can tell you everything you need to know. Go to better help.com slash reviews and check out the feedback from hundreds of people saying how much they love this service. It's easy to see why to get started. All you have to do is answer a few questions. You'll get matched up with a therapist based on your needs. And if it's not the right fit, you can switch therapists at any time. See the reviews. See what stands out and see if better help is right for you. Visit betterhelp.com slash JRE. That's better HELP.com slash JRE. I really enjoyed that. Also that is the glory division. No pun intended of the heavyweight division is the heavyweight division of boxing rather is the heavyweight division. The heavyweight division is where the real money is at. Always. That is the baddest. It's always been that way. And for you after that performance, I got to think there's a lot of options for you. Yeah. Like I said, they threw us so many stuff at us, but we're like, hey, we take our time, look at the different options. And of course, still, is excellency has our first preference because they gave us the opportunity right when yeah, we had we had to like to fight in front of the pyramids. That's crazy to insane outside. It was insane, Joe. It's like let me tell you another story. That happened also while I was in this camp. It's not a nice thing to say, but my mother passed away during the moment I was in camp for this fight. And well, that happened. It was hard. And then we had to clean out her house and then finally doing that and cleaning everything and then we come by a bunch of pictures. And yeah, you can see it on my Instagram and then I see the pictures of my mother 30 years prior being in front of the pyramids. It's like, wow, why do I see these pictures now knowing that this fight is in front of the pyramids? It was mind blowing. And so for me, it was like full circle going back. I like literally made the same pictures my mother made 30 years prior before the fight in front of the swings in front of the pyramids. And that was like a goosebumps. So for me, having that whole experience being in front of the pyramids, doing that was like full circle. When you can say come up with that idea to have you guys fight in front of the pyramids. Well, the way they look at that. Yeah, that's crazy. That really is crazy. Wow. Wow. That really is wild. Yeah. Still like the course course. Yeah. So when did they come up with the idea of having a heavyweight title fight in front of the pyramids? Yeah. So the communication is always like really like straightforward. And they don't say too much. Oh, the way it began like the first thing I got was just like what's that picture. We're thinking about this location. That was the thing. Because first let's all the picture. I opened it. Oh, it's the pyramids. Nice. And then after that, I looked at it. We're thinking about this location. I'm like, how are you going to do that? Like to me, it didn't make too much sense. And then afterwards it said like this. I mean video like, yeah, we're going to do it. And here it's going to be outside. And they're like, oh my god, it's going to be outside in front of the pyramids. It's like mind blowing. And that was that was also a thing. That's what I said. Like it was like the rumble and the jungle, right. But then with that being said, what people thought like what is this guy talking about? Is he putting himself in the same category as Ali and Foreman or whatever? That's not what I'm saying. I mean, not the location. I never put myself in that. Everybody knows me. Like I'm super almost. I never would say something like that. But that's what I meant. Like it was something like the rumble and the jungle because we're talking about the location. Right. Like the location was a part of the experience. Exactly. It was insane. You know, like, and then for me they asked me like we go, can we ask you to do like a certain choreography? Okay, I don't want to do too much. I want to focus on fighting. It's okay. Only thing you've got to do is like punch the ground and then the ground is going to crack open and then we're going to like for the first time that evening. Too much. I want to focus on fighting. Oozing. It's okay. Only thing you've got to do is like punch the ground and then the ground is going to crack open and then we're going to like for the first time that evening boom we're going to turn on the pyramids. That's cool. That sounds good. I'll do that. So I did that buddy. So I punched the ground. I turned around and for the first time we see like the ground cracking open and and the lights shine onto the pyramids. Wow. It was a goosebumps moment. Was that your first time being at the pyramids? Yeah. Yes, so that's why this whole picture and this whole thing was for me it was like a full circle. Like wow it was such a special moment, such a special event. And then okay then I turned around then my whole theme song comes up you know how I run to the to the ring. Yeah. But that wasn't like a real catwalk and during the day I already went to see like what they expected from me and like how I'm going to and there was like some small steps like down like five or six. But then I hear my song boom I do my thing and I do and I run to the ring. But I was like walking straight onto these steps. I'm like I'm not going to take these steps fast. I'm like no, fuck them. I'll just jump down. I just decided that at the moment and then I landed it was like ooh this was high. Then I just kept on running. It's like just think about like maybe I just like bring my ankle or something. I jump around the crazy oh my god. It was so funny because afterwards the camera man we woke up to me he's like I almost missed you. You were jumping down. It's like I was looking at you looking at you like whoa you were gone. That was why. Yeah it was it was wow it was outside and it was the temperature was actually was pretty good. What was the temperature? I think it was like 20 degrees. So that's Celsius. What is that? It's like 70 something. Yeah. It's really in that in the real mid part. Yeah. What's that Jamie? I mean 100 you know it was boiling and 212 is boiling for Fahrenheit but like zero and 30 I don't know what you have. Just put it in the I will. I'll do it right here. I'm just on the screen I can't. What is 20 degrees Celsius in Fahrenheit? 68 oh perfect. Yeah so that was nice. So you're like ah and I run and I run. I just just fell down. Wow no it was so cool. Did it feel any different than any other fight you've had before? No. No. We've had so much. How many kickboxing fights have you had? 75 something? 75. That's crazy. Yeah. That is crazy. Yeah. That's a giant huge advantage of having so much combat sports experience. Yeah but but where everybody was leaning towards was like this guy has one professional boxing fight. What is he doing there? It doesn't make any sense. Like guys I've been in and around the ring for quite a while though. I have a bunch of friends of mine that are just boxing fans. Yeah and they were talking about kinds of shit like you know. Also I had so many apologies. That's how I'm. I'm so many famous boxers and they're like I didn't know what you were capable of but damn this was this was crazy. I'm like oh thank you appreciate that. Quite honestly I didn't know what you're going to be capable of either because I knew you as a kickboxer were one of the greatest of of all time. Yeah. But as a boxer I hadn't seen and like you take you away one of his biggest weapons which is the low kicks. Me your low kicks are phenomenal. You have to treat trunk legs. You know so it's like that's a giant weapon that's removed from them. Like we'll see he's also fighting one of the greatest of all time if not the greatest boxer of all time in the heavyweight but to have that kind of a performance and to do it the way you did it. It's like man it was it was amazing to watch it was as a personal watch in combat sports. It was one of the most exciting things I'd ever watch. Yeah I think it's so much appreciated that but for me I think would work the in my advantage the most was if you look at kickboxing and it's logical like physically it's like you're so square on and everybody thought that was what I was going to do. Mm-hmm but I was boxing always to kickbox so but Petey Fury has been telling me to do get more on the side for years but how as a kickboxer I'm not going to be more in the summer. You can't. They're going to kick my leg off because I can't block anymore. Yeah so I was constantly trying to find the balance within that and now Petey was super happy because now finally he could teach me boxing to box right so now I had proper stance every time I'm like okay go more to the side more to the side because you're too square on right go back go ahead so I need it the six months. Mm-hmm it so much hard work we we had to put into that. Did you find yourself like having to correct it mentally or did it get to a point where it was instinctive the stance and the positioning? No we had to I had to definitely correct and they had to tell me but were you correcting in the fight and the fight was it down it was it no it was you got it we got it down but we did the whole prep it was really do need the six months for 100 percent yeah 100 percent so for me this whole experience of getting into boxing like it was perfect it was perfect for everybody around it it was it was really terrible of course we're we're Anthony Joshua went through and everything so that the most horrific thing ever but for me getting into the transition to boxing I needed that time to get it like a clean transition and that's why I was super happy with with the six months and the change of fights so I still I believe like the Anthony Joshua fight is still a big fight that we there we could do but yeah getting the opportunity to fight for a boxing heavyweight title is another level big of course oh yeah it's you gigantic and then also I've got to think that from that experience you're even better now how you're present you have to be better you just we're in there with the best guy ever yeah 100 percent but the the funny thing is like that's why I made the meme of Jim Kerry like everybody was like he's moving pretty strange what is he doing but we knew that that thing would work versus first is it we say and but we got so many more tools in the toolbox that we can pull out because in another fight versus a different fighter we're going to show a whole different Rico again but if we're going to fight it was sick again it's going to be slightly different but it's still like basically the strategy works well you gave him so many things to think about constantly yeah there was no time to set no there was always chaos there was always hands moving there was always your bodies moving yeah moving forward you're shuffling around there was so much activity that his mind has to constantly process all these different but normally that is what he does yes and that's if you look at the whole heavyweight division all the previous fights he was in control he was showing them so much and if you have something to look at the whole time he's like it keeps you it gets your mind out of what you want to do because you're constantly anticipating what your opponent is doing and that's yeah what we try to do we try to take that from him what were you doing for conditioning like well I just want to know what your conditioning is like in general because you are such a big guy and to be that big and have that kind of cardio is very extraordinary do I agree do I agree maybe partially I agree with that because to be honest at the top Joe everybody works hard right that's what I do I just work incredibly hard but I believe that mentally when you get tired or when your body gives signals of starting feeling to feel tired how do you cope with that in your mind that's that's where I think the the biggest difference is because if at the moment I feel I'm getting tired then I know my opponents is feeling fucked right right because I know how hard I work to be fit and to do everything possible to be in the best shape ever because if you look at training schedules or whatever for my schedule first is another guy schedule and I find it hard to believe that I'm training so much harder than all the other top guys yeah that's my opinion I find that hard to believe so for me it's just like a mental thing as soon as I start feeling it like okay not a fight starts well there's certain certain people have genetics that lean towards better cardio and conditioning yeah like in the UFC came Velasquez was famous for that as a monster he just had insane cardio for a heavy way but for you are you what I'm getting at how much time are you spending on strength and conditioning versus skill work I think it's pretty balanced it's pretty balanced but for example everything I do is based on endurance so even the power I don't have to do 300 pounds pitch press right I don't care I know I'm already big right I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm no I'm not the hardest puncher within the I don't have to be the hardest puncher in the game but as soon as I hit I'm still halfway still right 260 pounds behind it so when I hit you you got to feel it so that's how we approach it I don't yeah just lean into what works for you I'm not the strongest puncher I also don't believe I'm the most skillful but I'm definitely the hardest worker and that's what we try to emphasize like just keep working keep working hard so we you had the pace is high we can show a lot we can do a lot do you have a guy that's just a strength and conditioning guy that so like what kind of work were you doing what kind of things are you doing you want to know it all right yeah I want to know though I do a full body full body workout three times a week and just a lot of reps a lot of reps so this is more strength than conditioning or is it both at the same time it's both it's all the same because what we do is we have a for example we do chest and I do like 20 reps just the beginning 20 reps then we get to another exercise and then again I do 2020 reps so we do 40 reps each and those reps are gonna go up the clothes will be get to the fight but the rest between the exercise is just 30 seconds and then we change excellent we go to a different muscle group and then we go back to chest and then again we do 2020 30 seconds okay we go to a different muscle let's again 30 seconds so it's the pace is is incredibly high and I think that whole training takes maybe 35 40 minutes max yeah that's got to be a giant factor because I don't know how many people are doing that that way you know a lot of guys are doing strength and or conditioning they're running they're hitting the bag they're doing different things ever for me like I'm not focusing on when I'm focusing on strength I don't want to be big I feel like I'm already pretty big right and the more muscles I have I have to just carry them with me and all those muscles they they want and they need oxygen so them are hard it's gonna be like pumping just to get get that oxygen there I just focus on that boom and then I start with 20 and I get to 22 and then I get to 24 and then with the same exact weight so you get so much stronger at the same time you get so much fit there right and that combination just I don't know it's just it's just been working for us throughout the years so are you using apps and heart rate monitors and things on those lines yeah you know these heart rate monitors the running in different different ways we do the interval running we do the endurance running sometimes it just run for an hour and then you do the interval running is this mostly treadmill work yeah yeah because like my my body's been through a lot right so running on the concrete running outside rough on the knees no it's a no believe it's smart so I have this special treadmill which I can take some of my own weight off so I'm just a big balloon around me oh okay I know what you're talking about I've seen those before yeah so I got that since at the ACL surgery underneath and ever since I've been using it I love it I love it so I can do the running experience and because I love running because it's so hard so heavy on the body and mentally it's so hard but then I don't have to full force on my joints like right right right right just like yeah it's not good well I mean you got to think of all those years of leg kicks that kicks and oh my god first of you when I got the ACL I was like oh my god how long ago did that happen three years ago three years ago yeah I thought I thought I was done so much pain so much pain I was like why I'm like getting close to the end of my career now this happens like and then getting back from that within six months that was like because I had a bucket handle meniscus and at the the ACL I had exactly the same thing yeah it was terrible did they remove the meniscus no they just stitch it up you back so the smarter yeah they know that now yeah but the first six weeks you're not allowed to to put too much pressure on it right right but oh my god they used to think that you should cut them in this case out now they're they've done studies and they find that there's no benefit to that of course because it's human issues right between the bones the bones the bone and bone it's exactly so it's especially with me being so heavy and so big and like oh within 10 years she's gonna have trouble if we're gonna take it out yeah I have trouble on my left leg because of that very reason they took a big piece of it out when I had the bucket handle tear and it just that that area hurts all the time yeah it is what it is they do a cadaver graphs will it take a cadaver meniscus and put it in place yeah they take a piece of meniscus out of a dead guy but it doesn't always work and you know you really have to be young for it to work more effectively I guess they say that but that also could be dependent upon what you're doing with it like are you using peptides are using stem cells are using hyperbaric chamber yeah are using red light therapy are using all the different modalities that could help you heal quicker but yeah they do I know a guy got it you definitely use everything because you have an age of the day since as since you get the last shows I use everything I don't know how you do it but after the show you gotta give me the recipe well I probably do a lot of things you do because I know you do cold plunge every day I love it I do that every morning and I do a lot of song of work but I do a lot of red light therapy I do that at least four or five times a week I try to do it I've done I have a hyperbaric chamber I do that a lot yeah I try to do that as many days a week as I've done that two days in a row now I'll do it three four days a week if when I'm really feeling better it's when I'm doing it three or four days a week I just constantly training like you have to see yeah can't get out of shape you can't get out of shape you get out of shape but if you stay in shape it's remarkable how much you could keep it going look at Bernard Hopkins I mean he was performing at a world-class world championship level at 50 years old as a boxer which is not this insane and it's just because of his discipline you know never got fat never got out of shape always stayed in the gym never ate bad food but ultimately it keeps you just imbalance yeah to be bad because that's what I believe why just training in general for everybody is so good because that's me time yeah that's the time that you're working on what is good for you and for your mental health and you're not thinking about hey I'm at work I'm making money to provide for the family or I'm doing grocery for this no I'm in the gym and I'm working on me I can turn your phone off yep this is just a music and just like work on your body and your mental health it's it's so good and the effects of it afterwards the alleviation of anxiety and pressure and just how good you feel do you in orphans yeah I just wish people that don't do it could understand that because so many people they just have an aversion to the hard work they have an aversion to like getting there they just like oh I don't want to do it I don't want to do it but if you just do it you'll feel so much better and then everybody wants to talk about discipline a discipline is very important it's the most important thing probably but almost equally important is momentum and once you have a few good days in a row the discipline is not as hard anymore now you have momentum yeah 100% you're right but the thing is what happens same with the cold plunge that we do multiple times a week almost every day is like some days the same as going to work or whatever you just wake up and you just do not feel like doing it yeah but then the discipline comes in like I do not I do not feel like doing it but I am going to do it yeah because if I can do it on the days then I do not feel like doing it every other day is going to be easy and that's the for me what I felt like like I was just sharing with you like what I find so hard for example with the losing and that the mistakes that I made that's what I've been doing like to be honest my whole life that's what I'm trying to work on now it's like everything that happened in my life like spending some my mother passed away within this preparation and I do not take the time to really take that take it and take it in like what just happened and I had the same thing with my father was like right before the bent sideek fight and I just take it and I continue because what I do I take it and it's a certain emotional pain and I use that to put it in physical pain so I can use it as fuel for what I do in the ring and whatever for as my job but I feel like personally in relationships and just in general in just living I think that's not the way to cope with it so that's what it's very difficult to be balanced if you also want to be excellent yeah if you want to be the best you know if you want to be and accomplish what you've accomplished you have to be obsessed and if you have to be obsessed it's almost impossible to be balanced it's almost impossible to have a balanced life and also be obsessed on a goal no 100 percent but it's I don't feel like it's it's so much about the balance but it's just not the way to to cope with with life in general next to being an athlete and being a fighter which is a big part of what you do but just like in general like okay how do you how do you cope with with things especially now with this for example with this loss it's like how do I find a way to give this this loss and a way of like okay that I can work with it without like feeling frustrated or like oh I got robbed or whatever right so I have feel like that's getting better so I watch my mom funeral back like I think like four or five weeks ago for the very first time so it's you pass away February that's when I've watched it back for the first time just to take it all in again and again I went like all the way through it and I'm like okay I need to to do that more to get I don't know if it's balanced or just I don't know just to get like a way of feeling like you know I can I can take that that emotion in them because now I'll just every time I was pushing that emotion away and just using it as fuel to be a fighter and be the best version of me right but like as a as a person it I don't feel like it's a healthy way to just like keep pushing everything no circling pushing it down well it's great that you recognize that though and that will definitely help you as you transition from being a fighter to being a retired fighter and doing whatever else you want to do you have so much time left in your life to do anything yeah 100% recognizing that that is an issue is huge for your for your ability to move on to do other things yeah 100% that's a giant struggle for a lot of fighters yeah the struggle especially fighters that have competed at your level you know the glory the excitement the the chaos of it all is so huge yeah that to step away from that it's very very difficult for a lot of guys yeah that's why I'm so happy and I also believe that what gave me this is that I found my new passion within acting but so being on on set with Jake Tylenhol with Dave with Easter with eldest hodge and those guys being so excellent and what they're doing as actors and they're just talking with them about this I think that also gave me more and more that realization of hey instead of just like pushing it away I can use those emotions and that feeling to be an actor at a certain point so and I always said like yeah I just oh just kept pushing it away and I don't want to feel it I don't want to feel it as soon as I feel it I turn it into physical pain so I know I get a bit be a better version of me within the I hear what you're saying but if you want to get into acting it's good to feel because as soon as you feel it's even better it's going to transition even better on camera because then we see that you're feeling something and if it comes out of your own experience it's even better it hurts still but you can turn it into something positive and that's where I'm really happy about like after being a fighter I really found my new passion within acting because it's so much fun that's great fun to be on set and yeah being great at something else that's great that you found something else you're excited about that's really important very important so how many movies have you done I did a few did a few I think like a handful I think that the most recognizable things I did was Denofthees Pantera Denofthees too nice with Girard and O'Shay Jackson Jr and the last one Roadhouse so and of course I've been you've been talking with Jason like for quite some time now to do something together so we're looking at different different options like hey we could do this but he's like he has a certain focus on what he what he sees like hey Rico I want you to do like this type of movie and I want you to be this type of character because I don't want you to die and I want you to do this so it's yeah for him being yeah so experience within that world I just also him coming as an athlete as well exactly he was a world class diver right yeah yeah so and he's a he's a martial arts fanatic he loves it yeah he loves it yeah so so that's yeah now that's that's amazing so and then he had telling him that like hey I love the X right he comes to my fight like I visited him on set like hey I just look at what he does and how he does it it's yeah it's out of this world it's the next level well that's so good that you have something really excited about as you retire like transitioning into that and that you already have some success with that yeah 100% 100% Dave Batista is another one like right like the huge success in WWE went on to do that and now he's done a ton of movies yeah but he's really good yeah he's really good yeah it's not just like oh he's an athlete that right try to do some acting no he's he's a really good actor and he showed so many different sides of himself he was great in the woods that the glass onion was that what it was called yeah the what is that yeah knives out glass onion right that's what it's called he was great in that yeah he's great he's I mean again it's like you see these big guys and he say oh they're big and they're just gonna play a brute but no it's like he's a human yeah human beings have depth yeah you could do a lot of different things yeah exactly so he's got a he's losing weight now just like show he's like yeah he looks nice yeah he's still 200 I mean like oh he's so small it's 240 yeah now he's huge and he's a great shape he's the nicest guy as well oh that's cool he's the nicest guy so we had now we had a lot of fun we had a lot of fun so it was such an honor to be there on set with them and on such a big production look what I was looking at so how did you balance that out like now that you like as you've said you're in the winter of your career would you accept a movie role right now if you knew that a big fight could potentially happen yeah so you have to be careful right now yeah yeah for me it's like I'm focused on finishing that and as soon as as then I have a movie like okay but then I'm not gonna do a fight that's it's gonna be hard so and especially uh within the other one I didn't really get the option because I was on roadhouse and then I got the empty Joshua fight but back then I was just the cake boxer right the cake boxer world champion but that didn't really say too much so I was in young the dark position I was in the passenger seat now I show what I can do so now I got a little more like yo guys I got a movie so can we push the fight a little bit further so I have to get ready for it right so that's that's better now but for me I would never blend those two together or like hey okay let me finish this movie real quick and that gets traded to a fight camp that's gonna be like a two two and a half months I need a good like clean four months to get ready for a fight of this magnitude right so um when you're talking about these different conversations people have had with you is the door completely closed to the UFC because I know that they did contact you and you were talking they were talking about you fighting and that they were going to try to do that Derek Lewis fight and I was excited about that yeah but the money was nowhere near I'm sure the money did you have for the fight so I believe that that the gap is even bigger yeah sure so I think that's that's where that's where the actual problem is just to be completely transparent so for me it doesn't make any sense to go around the bush and go backwards no financially yeah if if they would want to do something it really has to make sense but yeah we all know that yeah that's not really like how the UFC works so I don't believe that that is an option well that's an option because is our heavyweight division is so um have you ever worked with Tom Asplall of course he's a very good friend of mine oh really well that's what we trained we crazy video if you guys do yeah we trained so much all very like I think close to 10 years man he got a bad deal he got really fucked over um for that that fight you know the way people got upset at him for stopping the fight uh with those eye pokes that to me that drove me crazy like what do you expect the guy to do he's defending the heavyweight title he get poked in the eyes and he can't fucking see and he's had two eye surgeries and he's the east and nice his guy he's the nice guy he works incredibly hard and he would never and he can't fucking see and he's had two eye surgeries since then. And he's the eastern nicest guy. He's the nicest guy and he works incredibly hard and he would never, never even though because I understand where it comes from from the people who served in the extent because they feel like, hey, God was doing so good in the beginning of the fight. But it was just the beginning of the fight. It was just like the first round or whatever. So it's possible that, hey, because of some ring rust, you have to get into it and then the fight ain't over to this over, right? So you can have an opinion about that the first round and I'll get an eye poke off. Now he's going to stop because he knew he was behind or whatever. He would never and never in whatever world do that because he has no fighter heart. That the eye poke is not, he was knuckle deep in his eye. Yeah, it was like gone. Yeah, I mean, unfortunately, serial gone has a history of doing that. He's definitely, I truly would because I know serial as well. He's also a very nice guy and I do not believe he's doing that intentionally to fuck with people or whatever. It's just a bad instinct that keeps happening. Yeah, maybe it's a happy or whatever you're doing this and you're running right into eyeballs. It's just they need to stop doing it. I mean, there's a bunch of different conversations about how to stop it. One of them has changed the gloves. You don't need open fingers like that. They don't have, you don't need that for grappling. No, they could cover the tip of it like a mitten, you know, and there's a way to do that where it would probably eliminate a lot of the eye pokes. Another one is a guy named Trevor Whitman from Onyx Sports. He's an adjusting gauchy trainer who makes a much better glove. Okay. And his glove, your hand is in this position all the time. Instead of the UFC glove, UFC glove, your hands like this. Yeah, you think you have to pull it down to tighten up a fist. And this with Trevor's gloves, it's curved like this. So this is an actual decision. So you would like when boy tie fighters like cereal gone, they frame off like that all the year, right? You know that. Yeah. So when you have those UFC gloves, you're framing off like this. Yeah. That's when you're running into eye pokes. Yeah. You know, so they try to tell you, keep your fingers up, which is great. But sometimes it doesn't work that way. Yeah, exactly. You can't do it. You're leaning away. Yeah. You know, I don't think cereal gone's a dirty fighter. I just think he's trying to finish fights like Alex Pereira thought he was dirty for hitting him in the back of the head. And I watched the fight over again to watch it. And what I saw is Alex is moving. Cereals trying to hit him and sometimes when that happens, some of the shots are going to run. Right. But what is it? The referee that needs to like say like, hey, stop it. Yes. Yeah, we're fighting. So you can't get it. It's hard. It's hard because you also like you might not have the best position to see it because it's chaos. And also like if you're trying to hit like a guy right here and then his head moves and then you hit the back of the head, who's fault is that? Is that your fault? You're supposed to pull back. You're in the middle of a shot. It's very difficult to stop. Yeah. It's hard to say. But when you look at his performance in that fight against Alex Pereira, it was fucking extraordinary. Yeah. There's a group chat. I have a few friends of mine, Dean Thomas and Matt Sarah and John Raulo. We do a podcast together. And we're just talking about how basketball is a phenomenal base for some of these guys because serial gone. I'm going to show you. I'll send you this video. I'll send it to Jamie. And serial gone can't fucking move, man. And some of the light, light feed it as well. And he's 250 pounds. Yeah. But it's the way he moves is so extraordinary. And I think some of that is because of basketball. Because yeah, well, no, it's not that one. It's pretty new video. He's playing against the NBA center here. Oh, man. There's multiple videos of it then because he's I mean, he's pretty sick. Yeah. But that's one of them. I was with him. We did a little moving, moving around together on Dennis Deafs. Two. Oh, okay. He was in there. We were in the seat together. So that was fun. It's just having a guy such a nice guy. He's like so light. And so light, he moves around. So like, and so hard to hit, man, it doesn't. He's never been in trouble in the fight. I mean, he got finished by John Jones, but that was a submission. And Francis and Gano just beat him by grappling. Yeah. But he's never been like rocked or staggered. He hardly gets hit. No, because he's movement is so good. Especially for a big guy. But that's why I believe. But Tom has that as well. Yes, he has that move. He is like his flits is extraordinary. Yes, his ability to cover distances in St. Yeah. And he's got one punch knockout power. Yeah, it's so explosive. Like, boom, he can, that that's, I believe he can, he can be a good boxer. But he can also be a good kick box. And he's a good MMA fighter. Yeah. He's so all around because when he comes to kick, when he came to kick box, wow. Wow. So I just hate that fans reacted the way they reacted. And it's the casual ones is the shitheads. You know, for me, I was like, God, you got to give the guy some grace. He got his eye poked out. I mean, he literally was knuckle deep in his eyes. For him to, for anyone to think that he should be fighting with one eye like that. Who cares? He can't say that. That's insane. He got fouled. It's not because of a punch. It's not because of he got kicked or an elbow. It's a foul. And so no, the fight should have been stopped the way it was. And that's, that everybody should understand that. It's not his fault. It was his opponents fault. But how he got to this was like, because of the whole deal he has, like how much sense does it make for me to get into the UFC? Because Connor got like a great deal now for his last fight. No, for you boxing makes the most sense, especially at this point your life financially. And you know, for Tom, I mean, he, look, he has potential career in boxing as well. now that Eddie Hearn is managing him, which is very exciting. Yeah. Because you know, match room being behind him is going to have a gigantic hype machine, gigantic promotion. Like I think it's huge. And that they're at odds with the UFC. Like for me, I care about the fighters making the most money possible. Exactly. And that's how he's going to make the most money possible. Yeah. Like I said, that's what I believe that all the fighters deserve. The fighters that, that bring in the viewers. They're all exciting. Yeah. And they should earn a little bit more, right? That is everything should be a balance. A hundred percent. And that's, I mean, this is where Turkey, Al Sheikh has really ramped up the game. Really raise the bar. Because the, he's getting guys to fight. They didn't want to fight each other. No, exactly. And he's like, how about this amount? Exactly. Okay. Okay. But that's how we got the biggest fight. But next to that with him giving me the opportunity as well, what he does is he thinks outside of the box. And that's what I love so much about what he does. Because we had to also do the Francis Nagato types of unified. Right. And that was also like crazy, right? I don't know about that zero professional boxing matches for Francis. Exactly. So that decision was also a little bit controversial. Very controversial. I don't know. So, but that's why I like what he does. He thinks outside of the box. Like, hey, I like this idea. Yeah. Let's just try it. This Crawford versus Canelo Alvarez, that's way outside the box. Yeah. You got a guy moving up to weight class? Yeah. To fight at all time. Great. I mean, there was a lot of people thought Canelo's too big. Canelo's too big. Wow. That was an amazing fight. Oh my God. Crawford is one of the greatest of all time. 100% He is so smooth. It's so good. When he was just, pap, pap, pap, rip. And you're doing that to Canelo. Canelo, yes. Wow. Oh my goodness. Yes. Amazing to watch, to watch a guy that's that skillful and have those skills and move up multiple weight class. Yeah. Incredible. And pull it off against a garlic canelo. And everybody said, like, oh, he's not going to have a shot because Canelo's going to be too big. And he's going to get rocked. And he's like, no, I think that was incredible. And they were all at the fight. It's very much by the way. Yeah. That was a pretty good one. Well, so Terrence is very smart. And Terrence prepared for that fight for like a year. Yeah. And put on some weight, but not too much. You know, he just lost. But just enough. But just also, he was healthier because he didn't have to cut so much weight. No. That's the thing to take into consideration. You got a guy who's cutting all that weight to make all the different weight classes that he was champion all the way up to 154. And also, he doesn't have to cut weight. Well, guess what? He's probably walking around 176, 177. Anyway. Yeah. So it was probably a better performance for him, which physically he probably felt much better. Yeah. He's also used to faster guys. And he's so light on his feet. 100%. 100% so exciting. So that's what. Yeah. What he does. to fight that otherwise would have been made. Right. So I think I respect him for that so much. And I'm thankful for that as well. So let's see what he's going to pull out of the head this time for me. Well, I mean, for sure now people are going to be excited about you fighting again. And it's even more marketable by far than the first fight was. I just hope it's a rematch. I really do because I think that's the just fight to have. That's the correct fight to have a rematch. When a fight is that close and ends that controversially. And then the judging is the scoring is that bad. The right thing to do is to have a rematch. Yeah. And then different in a different environment and different situation. The Vegas or Madison Square Garden. Yeah. I got to be honest, Joe. They're both still on the bucket list. Yeah. New York, but it was like in the ballroom, something. I don't know. I can't even remember what it was. But he's, I think, 2012 or something. So yeah, Madison Square Garden Vegas are still on the bucket list. The Vegas is great. But Madison Square Garden is iconic. Yeah. There's something about being in that building. Every time we have fights, we do a UFC in that building. It's like, wow, we're in the garden. Like that is a special place. Yeah. So many things that happened there. Cold, and basketball, and everything. Yeah. So many concerts, so many fights, so many everything. It's just, and it's also in New York City. And as much as New York City's crazy, and it's like, it's beat, beat, and Hong Kong, and fucking, and it's still New York motherfucking city. To have a great world championship fight in New York City is something special. There's something you feel different when they say, live from Madison Square Garden. Yeah. Yeah, you can. Yeah. Woo! You know, when you're in the room, when we have fights there, being in the room feels different. Yeah, no, I'm not. But that's also one of the things that he did a fight on Times Square. I know. Who thinks of that? No. And the thing is, for him, I believe that whenever you hear something, he's like, nah, that's not possible. I think that's the right trigger. He does exactly the trigger. He needs, like, I'll make it possible. I'll make it happen. As you say with the pyramids, and then with the Times Square, he's like, nah, I don't think that's going to happen. Well, they have a bottom-up spank account. Yeah. That's the thing. They make things possible. They just throw so much money at guys. And that is exciting. I mean, that's something that boxing has needed, because it took so long to get Floyd Mayweather fight Manny Pacquiao. That was a gigantic fight that took forever. And arguably, Manny was past his prime when they wound up actually fighting, which pissed a lot of people off. If they had been around back then, if Turkey Alashay could have been around back then, in rheod season has been around back then, they probably would have made that happen when they're in their prime. 100%. That's what boxing needs. That's what MMA needs. That's what everybody needs. The UFC does that in MMA. They're kind of force guys to fight. You can't get away from it. No. Only the pay days different. Yes. But at the highest levels, guys, like Connor, they're making similar money. But that needs to change in terms of it has to be enticing enough that you're going to get the best athletes that realize, hey, I don't have to go into basketball. I don't have to go out. What I really like is fighting. And there's enough money in fighting now. Yeah. That's the percent. Like everything else. But that's the problem that we just talked about. we started off with the whole kickboxing. There's no money to be made. Right. That is the problem. So what? I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, people figure that out because they're dedicated to entering into the MMA space now. And they just merged with the PFL. Yeah. We don't think it's very exciting. Because I think competition is good. Competition is great. And the more competition, the better. And definitely better for the fighters to have options. 100%. And they've got guys over there in the PFL now that are a fucking world class, man. They've got some world class fighters. So it's exciting. It's exciting to have. It just, they just need to get bigger in terms of the public's recognition. Exactly. So right now, everybody thinks of UFC being MMA. UFC. And it's like PFL for the average casuals, like what? Who's that? Yeah. Exactly. What did he do? Right. Right. I think to be honest, Joe, if we look at 10 years ago, Koma at sports is at its all time high boxing MMA kickboxing. I think it's like going through the roof. Yeah. Everything is bigger now. I think we're at it. We're in a very blessed position. Well, 20 years ago, nobody even knew what MMA was. 21 years ago was the first ultimate fighter, season one, 2005. And that was really when MMA kind of made it onto the map in terms of the general public understanding of it. From the ultimate fighter and that Stefan Bonner, Forrest Griffin fight. But you could see a world where kickboxing could enter into that, 10 years from now, being a similar category. And I think it should be. I really do. That is just because of the modern day world, because of social media. And so many different people coming into the sport. And people can say to have an opinion about it. But for example, with Jake Paul and Etc. And all the influencers. But they're bringing a lot of new eyes to that. Yeah, it's for it. So boxing to a lot of new eyes. So I think that's good. Could you imagine if an organization got behind a guy like Ramon Decker's and showed him to the American public when he was in his prime? He would be like, oh, he should. Who is this guy? Yeah. His fucking monster, this animal, this technical animal, you know? Yeah. Like that's the thing. But that's the thing about where you come from, too. Like for people that don't know, kickboxing in Holland, that is the epicenter of world championship kickboxing. I mean, Rob Cayman or Nesto Hughes, you, I mean, so Peter, oh my God, you could go on and on and on and on and on. So many of the greatest kickboxers, of course Ramon Decker's. Yeah. But so many of the greatest kickboxers of all time came from Holland. 100%. You know, I mean, we mentioned Batterhari. I mean, so many of these great Melvin Manhoof. Yeah. So many of these great guys came out of Holland. Yeah. It's kind of nuts if you really think about it. Yeah. Now we're such a small country, but everybody exchanges their intelligence with each other. And I believe that because we're such a small country, that's what increases the level. So when everybody trains also with each other, go there. We go spar with them. We go spar with them. We go spar with them. And then you learn this from that guy. You learn that from that guy. And if you do that, for example, in the US, you want to trade with somebody out from New York, you got to fly all the way there. You're not going to stay there too long. I think it just takes too much time. And because in our country, we can just drive anywhere. But it's also one of the reasons why paper view never worked there. And if they wanted to visit an event, just drive there. Like, I'm going to stay home and pay for it. That's what they're going to say. I was just driving there and just go watch your life. Well, that's also one of the crowds we're so huge. Yeah. You guys got massive crowds. Yeah. You're some of those kicks out arenas. Yeah. People don't know in America. They don't know how big kickboxing is in Holland. In the Netherlands, it's gigantic. Yeah. Yeah. And I think number two sport. That's crazy. There's soccer. Isn't that funny? Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of crazy if you think about it. It's such a smoggy. How many people even live in Holland? 60, 70 million? Yeah. Yeah. That's nuts. It's a small country with the greatest kickboxers of all time. It's like it's an anomaly. It's very weird. Very weird how it happened. Yeah. And also, I think there's now, for the last, I think after, like, the last 10 years, it's we've been so good in keyboxing for the last 25 years or even longer. But now, since the last 10 years, it's been recognized as well for the public. You've always been good at it. But it's always been like, I don't know. Love it's shady or whatever. And now since the last 10 years, it's being bought or like put it on the map. Just explode it. And everybody just went behind it. Like, wow. This is cool. This is cool to watch. We're good at this. We're the best in the world at this point. Are there gyms all over the place in Holland? It's crazy. It was crazy. At a certain point, it was so crazy that every random guy could become a kickboxing teacher. So now, because it became so big and so public, they started to do it. Like, OK, you've got to get like a diploma and it's certificate to become a kickboxing trainer. You can just random saying, OK, I'm a kickboxing trainer. It started kickboxing. It started teaching people. But at a certain point, that was the case. Wow. Yeah, it was crazy. But it's so what happened? How did Holland become so big in kickboxing? I think they, yeah, with Ramon deckers and everything, they went to Thailand and just like sucked all the information out of that. And we had fighters, trainers going there. And they took like the Muay Thai of it. And they took that to the Netherlands. And then like exchange, like I said, because the country is so small, they exchange everything with each other. Like this guy learned that, that guy learned that. And if you exchange that with each other, you just get better. You get smarter. But it also has to be something about the culture. Maybe just mentality of the whole. Yeah. We're pretty, we're pretty big people. People, pretty big people. But Rob can't, excuse me, Ramon deckers was not. No, he was not big. He was not big. Which was one of the most extraordinary parts of his career was that he was competing against Thai. Thai. But it Muay Thai. Yes. Yeah. That was insane with elbows and his brutal. But his boxing too was a giant factor. He's so explosive. So explosive. And his style was so aggressive. Like he was like, he's kept on going. He was feral. He was just like, people who haven't seen, please go to YouTube and watch Ramon deckers highlights. Yeah. Whoo. Yeah. Oh my God. Some of the highlights of his knockout highlights are holy shit, man. It's incredible. Everything was designed to kill you. Every shot, every leg kick, every liver shot, every punch to the face, everything was just with full speed ahead. Power, explosive. Smash. His ankle was so fucked up that his doctor told him, like you can't keep kicking with that thing. Like you're going to lose your ankle. Fuck it. Taped it up. I was still blasting. I was like a kid and I was watching these fights. Like, oh my God. And then with him being so explosive and then kicking on a block, on a knee or on an elbow. But just right into it. He's just like, oh, I just bone him, bone him. Uh-huh. Just by looking at his hurts. Just destroyed his ankle. Yeah. I mean, in his later fights later in his years, like when he fought, between Ludwig. He got to have his ankle. Yeah. He got to all over the fucking place. Big thing was like hanging on by a thread. But that's what we were talking about. Like earlier, it's like we as fighters, putting our health on the line for entertainment. I mean, forever. He died young. Yeah, he died young. But okay, that happens. You do that because you love the sport. But then yeah, everything needs to be transparent and it needs to be safe and with the judging company. Yeah, it needs to be a better money-wise and with the judging. And everything just needs to be, yeah, needs to be right because what we do is out of this world. Yes. And it's not just kickboxing. It's boxing. It's MMA. That's what we do. That's what we do. It's the reason why it's so exciting. It's part of the reason why it's so exciting is we know how dangerous it is. Exactly. And that's why I feel like it has to be fair and it needs to be compensated the right way. Yeah. So I've actually like, oh, he's making so much money yet. But he can't do that until he's 65 or whatever. So yeah, there's such a small window, which is one of the things that's so extraordinary about your career that you've managed to stay on top for so long. Because generally, when we look at world class fighters, there's a rule that a lot of experts supposedly have said is that it's about nine years. We can only really compete in your prime for nine years. You've shown yourself to be an exception to that rule. Because you've been competing in your prime for a lot longer than that. Yeah, 12. Yeah. And you're not dropping off at all. And you weren't dropping off. You're still dominating kickboxing. When you decide to step away. So it's like, even though you are an outlier and that you've been able to extend it longer than anybody, it's still, there's a window. You're not going to be able to do this for your 50. You're not going to be able to do this for your 60. It's like you have a small window where you can compete. And the people are paying to see you. They're not paying to see the promoter. They're not paying to see anything else. They're not paying to hear the commentators. They're paying to see the fighters perform as a very highest level of the most exciting sport on earth. But that's why I'm saying this because it's not as much for me anymore because I'm close to being finished. You know, like I said, we said, I'm in the winner of my career. But it's for the next generation. Yes. The next generation should be excited to get into combat sports. And feel like, hey, I want to do this because I can. And it is fair. It is transparent. And I'm fighting, but I can make a very good living out of this. And I could build generational wealth with it. Well, that's what's really good about this MVP, PFL merger and having a bunch of hype on that. Like the more competition, the better, more it's, the more eyes on the sport, the more people watch the sport. The more money will be in the sport. And then the more the fighters will have options for who to fight for. Yeah. Yeah. And I think that's the best thing. Like you just said, like options. Yeah. It's phenomenal. If you have options, that's the best thing ever, right? Yeah. And like, hey, we got this. We got that. And it's not that you got to like, play them out against each other. But still, it is a good thing because if you just have one option, it's like, hey, take it or leave it. Exactly. This is what it is. And if you get like, ah, the other guy is saying this. So let me go there. Reality is we could use one more, you know, not just MVP, but also another, I wish one was doing better. You know, if one was doing better and they were viable option as well. Because I know some guys did go over there with great success. Like, my team house went over there with great success. We need more. We need more options for fighters. And you know, it's unusual in that in boxing, for instance, what's really important is the name of the fighters. That's what's important. You know, if a debut should be vols fighting, it's people are going to say, they don't give a fuck with a promoter. No. You know, if it's Arthur better, be that one. See him fight. That's all that he gives a shit, right? And MMA, it's UFC. Yeah. And the only, the exception to that was of course this last MVP card where Ron de Rousey fought. Yeah. So everybody's like, oh my God, she's a legend. She's fighting. And that, and for instance, and Ghana was on the card. So a lot of eyeballs got on that. So we need more of that. I'm more of that. That's good for everybody. Built. I like what Leg would just talk about. Built stories around those people. Yes. Who are those people next to being fighters? Okay, they're incredibly amazing at what they do in the ring or in the octagon or whatever. Okay, but who is the person behind? Right. Okay, he's a father. Oh, really? He has to. I never do. I always play chess. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. So it gives, that gives you so much more depth. And I also believe that that makes them more human. Yes. So seeing their families. See them interact with their kids. Everybody gets like closer to, wow, this guy could be my neighbor. Right. Right. He also asks, oh, he brings his kids to school. Whatever invested in him. Yeah. Like you like him. You want him to win 100%. I mean, that's a big part of it. And that's something that they need to do. And I think you're right about glory. They really never did that. That was not really a part of the glory promotion. No. They were just like put up fights, put the best for his, the best I just did it. Listen, for me, I work here. I love it. I'm a giant glory fan man. Every time there's a card, I can't wait. But like watching people like, what are you watching? I'm like, glory's on. Like, what the fuck is glory? You ever heard about that? It's like even my friends in MMA don't, don't understand. No. Wow. The real, the people that, the trainers and everybody, they, a lot of times they get like the glory fighters in to prepare their fighters to get into UFC. Yeah. Yeah. For big fights or whatever. Because like, hey, they know that they're, they stand up is, you know, the level. Yeah. I mean, and like I said, one FC has a lot of elite fighters. They're, they're, especially at the lighter weight classes. There's a lot of real Jonathan Haggarty. He, he just beat Yuki Yosa, who's another guy, this guy from Japan is a Yokoshin guy who fucks up people's legs. Yeah. And he's really good. And then this is this guy from Dagestan who might be the best striker alive. Asadula, Iman Gazzaliev. This dude, he's really tall and he fights at 135 pounds. Yeah. Fucking nasty man. He's so technical, undefeated. And he's from Dagestan. Like, there's so many savages that are coming down to Dagestan. Just straight up killers man. Yeah. There's a dude who just won in the PFL. My God, man, off we just won in the PFL. It's past weekend. Yeah, he fights like Iman Gazzaliev. Yeah. Real similar, both guys from Dagestan. Similar styles, man. I love it. It's a question mark kicks and it leads stabbing front kicks. Yeah. Just real slick stand up. You know, but in one FC, they're having these guys fighting. And you know, it's really big in Asia, but it just has not caught on in America. No, I think that's also where the problem is, I think, with them. But also with with glory, they're just like pouring in money, pouring in money. And at a certain moment, it's like I was on a stand like the one that's investing is you're like, how much money ever. I need to pour in this. Right. Before it's going to do something, you know, they asked me to be, they asked me to be a part of that at one point in time. They wanted me to be like the Dana White of glory. I'm like, I don't have that kind of time. I don't have that kind of time. Exactly. Because if you were going to say, I don't have that type of money, I look at you're like, come on. It's the time. It's you would be that you're so busy. You're so cool. You would have. I know how hard Dana works. Yeah. Dana works all day, every day. that guy is always doing something. He's always got deals going. He's always on the phone. He's always meetings and the headaches and canceled fights. And he's not trying to make things happen. And promotions and press conferences and it's like, I don't want to change. I would never have asked something like that. And you can't do that. To be a promoter is a lot. That is a full time job. It's a full time job. Yeah. You got to do that. And Dana set the bar very, very high. And he's the best ever, I think. He's the greatest promoter of all time. And for me to do that, I can. There's no way. No, that's why it's so cool that he jumps into boxing now. Yeah. It is going to give that. Yeah. and to me, for me to do that, like, I couldn't, is no way. No, that's why it's so cool that he jumps into boxing now. Yeah. It is going to give that. Yeah, very exciting. Yeah. Well, I mean, people always nervous when a new guy steps into sport, but I think it's only better. Professional arts is reputation. Yeah. It's only, yeah, with money, with the, you know, like, and the amount of money to throw the boxers, the MMA guys are like, hey, what do you do? Fuck. Like, where's that money for us? Yeah, they still need to build up. It's all good for everybody. The more money there is in the sport the more attention the more excitement It's better for everybody. It's better for everybody. How cool would that be if there would be a world where? MMA fighters UFC fighters would also be able to get into Zufa and Like hey, you're you're a good box. We see like maybe there's something this possible that they would do that But right now they're not concentrating on that. They're just concentrating on first need to yeah position themselves as But like for the future it would be but then if you got a big star like say if you take a guy like Max Hollow Or someone like that he decides he wants a box for a while that means it's not gonna be able to fight in MMA fights So that would like cut off their own Access to him as an MMA fighter and he's a huge star. Yeah, but maybe then he attracts different different eyeballs Yeah, but to do it right you got to do it like kind of like when Connor did it with Floyd He took a whole year off He was just boxing me really really concentrated on that You can't get like go back into MMA again because they had kind of messed him up Yeah, it kind of messed him up going back and MMA again He didn't have the same momentum. It wasn't the same amount of training training lost with grappling and especially with kickboxing Yeah, like oh, we are only doing boxing that training lost like you have to recalibrate your whole break. You're right forever Yeah, I was just it was just Exactment. Yeah, that's my except put it out there, but this is some guys it might take good option You know and for some guys out especially after knee injuries Yeah, you know where boxing is not as hard on the knees You know you could say that especially when it comes to grappling and leg kicks Especially like those guys that throw those side kicks to the knee. Oh my god. There's calf kicks. Oh, I know crazy. Oh my god crazy Oh, it's right but that was after that After we saw that within UFC with an everybody it kickboxing else is such I do Doesn't it not that it took forever for the calf kick to be a potent weapon like it's so dangerous It's also dangerous to because if you if you hit the shin like oh, it's the last kick you throw Yeah, but if you do it right Yeah, if you do it right like Alex Pereira destroys people's legs destroys them. I don't even know how it looks like he With the foot with the side of it. It's not even really like a low kick or it's weird He does it weird and he doesn't with no tell no tell no switching to the hips at all He just throws the leg out there and it only takes a couple. Yeah, there's a couple then your legs fucked And then she guys switches dances. Yeah, that's over and funny that it's over that kid that I was talking about in Japan Yuki Yosa, he's phenomenal at that man his calf kicks are insane He's just in every exchange every exchange. She's kicking the calves inside and outside He killed the shin guy. Yeah, so it's just all just hard style inside outside outside outside What is your opinion on that because me and my trainer we were debating the the calf kick because next would be super effective It's also a long long term injury when you get put out by Caffe kicks yeah, because it that injury stays there for quite a while. Oh, yeah, it's brutal It's brutal. So do you think like it's a thing that should stare at 100% it's a factive. I mean, it's real You can if you can knee bar a guy you can heal hook a guy you can rip his knee apart Yeah, you've got to be able to calf kick. Yeah, you know, this is it's a weapon It's to take away that weapon when we know how effective it is you got guys who Always use the standing heavy on that front leg now all of a sudden. They can't do the anymore Like Connor perfect example in the window between Connor Taking time off fighting Floyd Mayweather Getting fighting could be even then getting back in MMA then the calf kick came along He never fought with it was no calf kicks before does to Poi eight destroyed his leg Yeah, and that first round by the time the second round was rolling around in their second fight He was already wobbling on that front leg. Yeah, crazy. Yeah crazy that it took so long for that one technique. Yeah Yeah, it's just a thing you you see and okay, that's effective for everybody started doing it But again dangerous like you said you go I mean this out Chris Wiedman broke his leg Yeah, you know, he threw a really hard low kick and he caught the knee you caught really does shin right below the knee Yeah, snapped his leg in half if it gets checked and you've and you've hit it the wrong way Especially the low part of yours and the high part of his where it's thick and which sense yeah, that's the hardest part Yeah, but it's so effective. It has to stay The thing that bothers me more Okay, I'm happy I like leave the side kicks to the knee bother me more It's yeah, did you ever see Khalil round tree and Modesto spakasquez you ever see that? Oh It's the worst one of all time. They will you see the leg leg it turd sideways He threw a side kick caught him on a front leg and just turned his whole leg sideways and he screamed and the fight was over everything apart Oh, yeah, yeah surgery had have surgery after the fight this leg was destroyed. Yeah when John Jones fought Tiago Santos Athusi Theto Santos I think it was Yeah, Tiago Santos he blew out both his legs head out of knee surgery on both legs after the fight Both legs that's crazy crazy because just throwing those oblique kicks in the side kick to the knee Blue out both his knees. That's that's a kick. I don't like when Ian Gary fought shop caught Shop cop Rockman off who's a top welterweight guy one of the top contenders He hit him with oblique kick in his left knee and his knees been fucked ever since and he had to have surgery at a second surgery and he's still out Yeah, it's about That's what bothers me about that is that you might not ever recover if your knee gets stripped of shreds Your meniscus gets torn apart your ACL MCL gets blown out. So this is the this is Khalil round three watch this Oh Yeah, watch it from this angle look how It screams horrible horrible I wonder about that one look at that Oh, because I feel like that one maybe is too much. Yeah, because it's just like it's just career a career and career Ender yeah, I mean if we're I don't know I'm torn because on one side one hand It's like it doesn't happen that often and you should be able to defend against it and you know it exists You have to be able to defend against it But the thing is one kick could change and you're out for a year Yeah, like we said a fighter really only has X amount of years to compete So it's one whole year gone from one kick is kind of crazy. Yeah, but wait It's pretty extraordinary how you do that how you know all did all those names fights from I don't know how long ago I usually like Remember a lot of other things Really really good, but also kind of unreliable with some things It's just focused on the Something's on the things I care about which is a lot of it is combat sports But the the the knee one that's the only one that really bothers me that in I think Knees to the head to a grounded opponent. I don't know that's not no You don't think they should be able to do that. No, I don't think you should be able to turn Stop somebody's head, but they know how to do that. You can't stop But you can but they rise in a lot of like back in the day they did they did that Yep, you must be well stomp and soccer kick But yeah, they think when a guy shoots on your legs and just curls up in a fetal position It just holds on you shouldn't be able to do that You should be able to knee that guy in the head because he doesn't have to hold on to that if you're knee is free and he can knee You should have to adjust That's a it's too legitimate of a technique. Yeah, you know it's it's hard Groundy like there's the problem also is the cage versus the ring because in a ring soccer kicks make more sense and Knees to the head make more sense because you can move around and you can get away from it Because you could go under the rope like if a knees coming to your head there's movement where is the cage? Right there. I think that that's an Another element of the fight that's an unnecessary element. I think maybe even what karate compats doing This way to do it those those yeah, what is it? It looks nice. I think that might be the best way to do it the only problem with that is when you get to the edge You're stumbling because you're you're it's like half you fall over it And yeah, but but learn how to adjust to that and that's better than a cage Because a cage is just a fucking physical wall. Yeah, so the thing about the ramp the bowl That shit doesn't help you get up at all No, like if somebody takes you down against that that's you're not that doesn't help you Where a wall fucking helps you and there's guys that are doing workouts now Where they put their back up against a wall and they're doing kettlebell get ups where they're just a few less Yes, they're lifting up heavy kettlebells and they're doing it in stages Getting up from the ground just to emulate that position But it's a it's an element. Yeah, but that's where I feel like everything has the ring has certain things I feel like if you do MMA in a ring and somebody shoots or whatever Maybe they go through the ropes they shoot That's true. Yeah, that's dangerous, but and then you like sitting like when Bernard Hopkins fought Joe Smith Jr And he went through the ropes and fell and landed on his head. Yeah, it's crazy Yeah, that's all the fight ended. Yeah, like there's there's but I think that was just shitty planning I think they should have pads around the ring and they should you know case someone fall You shouldn't just hope they don't fall have something or have a larger apron too. Yeah That's you could you could fix a lot with a much larger apron where the guy falls out There's something around the edge of the ring But I think a cage the problem is in most people's eyes UFC equals cage Yeah, you fight in a cage and the mindset of it is pretty cool. Yeah, you get it locked up You're quick. Yeah, exactly that bar exactly like you're not going nowhere. Yeah So something to be said for that. Yeah, so it has something but you know I hear what you're saying, but it's like we just talked about everything has yeah He's pros and it's cons everything has its pros and its cons and everything is exciting in its own way like boxing on It's own like there's elements of boxing that you would not see if they were allowed to do leg kicks and elbows and all that So there's something beautiful about just pure elite boxing And there's something pure about elite kickboxing and then there's something pure about elite more tie Yeah, and then there's something pure about MMA about watching it all together And then you and Jiu Jitsu as well. See that's the other thing the UFC is doing UFC Brazilian Jiu Jitsu So they have these big UFC Jiu Jitsu matches. Oh really? Yeah, so like cool Good boxing. Yeah, let's try it's right there. It's right there guys I keep sending Dana White fights. I send him fights like because I'm trying to get him to do this I'm like you should get involved in it. I think he's too busy. Yeah, he's too busy It's also got that slap fight shit. So he's doing that Yeah, like fucking over getting this is fun to watch but it's like oh my god It's fun like well, I just stand there and just take a punch. I just like try to move around and just See if it's like you know you just stand there with your hands behind your back holding onto a thing just take it on the face Like yeah, yeah, you're pretty you're pretty big at him. Oh if you do that you're a cool Now that that's why for me that like now experiencing boxing I really can really genuinely say that I see boxing as an art. Oh for sure and K boxing is It's been my life. It's brought me everything. So it's so much fun, but it's it's more intense It's more brutal and it's quick. It's like the pace is so fast and in The I champion your fights with just five rounds right so if you lose one round you go And now it's like like I said, it's it's an art. Yeah 12 rounds and I saw the the bevel better be a fight and then for the first so many rounds better be if I so much better and then Later in the round and then bevel still got the good got the win like wow How cool is that right? Well the for if you look at the fight you think oh This is not gonna go well and then he's just Just and it changes so it's like I said, I really feel like boxing is so much of an art and you have 12 rounds to paint your masterpiece Yes, so I know it's an if you appreciate that art forms You really understand and appreciate it. It's beautiful to watch like it's beautiful to watch like Floyd when he was in his prime 100% we barely would get hit get steady and Floyd unlike anybody else was standing right in front of everybody He was barely getting hit. He was standing right there. Yeah, he wasn't running away and moving around He was right in front of guys didn't hit him extraordinary and that's what I what I also liked or still like about Canelo because after their fight you saw the whole transition Canelo made and he took so I think I actually believe that he took so much from their fight with with Mayweather Then he started applying it himself on question Oh, I love that. Yes unquestionable. Yeah his head movement got much better after my fight I mean that's the thing that happens when you fight the elite you get Daniel Cormeo He says you get the rub like you fight it a elite guy when lose or draw you get the rub you like you Some of it rubs off Yeah, exactly so that's why I'm excited to see you fight again, too I was so excited to to to compete again, but let's let's see who is gonna be well Let's hope this podcast gets the wheels turning we planted we planted some seats Yeah, maybe his actually will we'll hear this and he'll decide that it's time to go and I'll call you right after your Joe Thanks That would be make me very happy if we somehow or another motivated them to get back to the negotiation table because I But just let's let's make an agreement now Let's just make sure you're gonna be there then what was the last conversation you guys had about it? I think Week we go we can have a go what was more more of a general conversation. Hey, we're looking at Yeah, what's next So what did you say to them? Did you say rematch? Of course and what did they say? But yeah, you need to you need two parties for that Said I know Yeah, I got a roll up to U6 house with the brick truck Back that thing Exactly in the arm guards. Yeah, the door show them all the gold That's maybe that's my name of my face on it Okay, I'm gonna put it in first. I think that's the fight and I hope you get it I really do but at either way your performance was extraordinary and you've had a fucking incredible career man You should be proud. Yeah, really super Incredible career and kickboxing greatest heavyweight kickbox for all time. Thank you so much. I really appreciate that and It's not just for me being here sitting here now because I've been Seeing you and hearing you talk about it for yeah for years already so it like I said It is that it really really really means the world coming from you because you're an expert You look everything you look at everything you see everything the different organizations so you know Where the place certain guys and from history and from now so Means the world. Thank you so much my pleasure brother. It's honor and honor to have it again. Thank you so much again for being here So it's it's been a while, but we're back. Well, I had to reach out after the fight I was like oh my god. We got to do this. We got to talk It was like holy shit man. I reached out immediately. It was like the fuck you had it. Oh Yeah, I saw the That's what you guys did about it. You're talking about it. I was like oh my god It was incredible, but listen brother congratulations on everything and I really really really hope you get that rematch Good seeing you, sir. Thank you. Thank you everybody