Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, on day! Oh, yes, hello, mama. Good to see you brother. Great to see you man. What is this? Well, I'm in that. What is that? Oh, this is a motor vibe. Have you heard a motorbike before? No. So a meteorite hit in the Czech Republic millions of years ago. And the particular tech type that was created from the Earth Matterfall in back down to the ground became motor vibe. And most tech types are like a black or a brown, but motor vibe is green. Let me show you. It's really interesting. It's just holding up. Jamie's got some on the screen. Right, here we go. Hold it up to the light. Oh, that's fucking dope. So it's basically like nuclear glass. Exactly. That's the same time. Wow. And then that's the case my wife had made for me. And it's wrapped in an old chain that belonged to my dad. Oh, that's so dope. Yeah, keep with me all the time. That's fucking cool. I used to have a piece in the old tie amulets with the little little bronze. I used to have one in that. Took it out. I put the butter out and put a piece of mold of it. And it wrapped in a piece of UFC canvas. And I wore it just all the time. But my wife upgraded me. And she tries to do all the time. So the UFC gave you a chunk of canvas? I have a whole canvas. Oh, yeah. Yeah, nice. You remember? It was the Doom Volkov. From UFC London. And it's just covered in the Doom's blood. You guys know it was busted pretty badly. So, but it had to be in quarantine for like 12 months until they gave it me. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Because there's no blood. Yes, a biohazard. So it's an old die after 12 months? I guess so. I mean, I guess so. It was kept in a warehouse. And then they dropped it off for me. Do they check it? I think it was not. I don't know. I mean, I wouldn't lick it, but it looks fine to me. What could possibly be in the blood? I mean, does everybody get tested? That's a good point. That's a good point. Maybe there's just some kind of rule. I think they incinerate them all now, don't they? I don't believe them. I mean, they keep the, they've got the pieces with the names. But I think the rest of it gets, gets disposed of now. Huh. Yeah. I wonder if there's any logic to that. I don't know. Or if it's just people being scared. Yeah, maybe. Maybe. It's a cool thing. I've actually gotten the wall of my house, believe it or not. Oh, really? Yeah. I had it in the gym, but then it's on the wall of my house now. Oh, that's nice. That's pretty cool. Yeah. It's just a nice thing to have, you know? Dude, what happened with you in the UFC? Like, I don't know the story. I don't know. You got into it with Herb Dean about a stoppage, a late stoppage. Yeah. And you were upset. This was during COVID, right? Yeah, this was, I think it was Fight Island 3. And it was, it was the second fight of the night where it happened. There was a heavyweight that had gone down and just take, just took a bunch, too many shots before the fight was stopped. But the Jai Herber Francisco Ronaldo one was the one where you heard me shout up and yell stop the fight. And it was just, it was a weird circumstance. And look, you know, caveat, Herbs a great referee. He's refereeed me a lot. But every now and then people do make mistakes. And in Fight Island, everyone was tired. It was quiet in the arena as well. So you can, I mean, you can hear me yelling. It wasn't the first time I'd done it, though. I yelled at him in Moscow for a CB dollar way fight. And it's, the thing is, there's a point where I'm there for the knockouts. I'm there for the blood. But I'm also there to make sure that once it's done, it's done, and those fights are protected. Right. And the way that the Jai Herber fell, it was just, you get the rees, you know it. You see him falling, you're like, man, there's something not right about the way that he's falling. And then as he landed, he was looking up at the lighting rig but his arms were kind of stretched out. So he was gone. He was gone. He was gone out of it. And then there was this, and I think of course, because it was quarantine times, it was silent in there. The time it was like you could hear a heartbeat in the air. And there was just this moment where Tranado stood over him and looked at Herber. And Jai still on the floor kind of not fully conscious. And Tranado just started cracking him with more shots. And that was the point where I stood up straight away and I'm yelling and Paul Felder was doing the same thing next to me. I see Herber look at me through the cage and point at me and tell me to shut up. The thing that annoyed me about it was the miscommunication about what had happened. Because the message that got back to Dana and everybody at the top was that I left my commentary desk and went over and I was stood outside the cage. And I wasn't. Herber came to me. So like, I'm at my desk. We've got this piece of plexiglass because it's all COVID protocols. Right. Right. That stopped everything, didn't it? And then we had another desk in front of that. So Herber basically, and Herber doesn't move very quickly most of the time. He's a big old boy. And he was moving at pace towards me. So I stood up, took my headset off and put them down or had them in my hand. And he came over and he started yelling at me and you know, you stay out of it, can't be shouting. And then this and that. And that's where you see me go. That was two times. That's the second time of the night. After the, I mean, as it's going on, and this was when we're not doing interviews and the cage as well, right? So I'm standing on the larynx. Also hilarious. Yeah. Just breathe an eye to sweat and bleeding on each other. I wish shaking hands in the hotel and everything and it goes kind of odd. But because I'm not going into the cage, I'm now turning around. And my interview camera is behind me. So basically what the US he wanted me to do when Herber's marching over to me was to stand up to my back on him and put my headset on. Me as a martial artist, I'm not going to turn my back on someone when they're moving at me with the kind of pace that he was. So I, I, everything got a bit delayed because I was having an interact with interaction with Herber. As soon as the event was over and I was on my way over to the ESPN desk, Herber and I bumped into each other. And we had just had a brief minute conversation. Everything was cool. I said, look, I respect you as a referee. You left that one too late. There was no doubt. And it was the second one the night. And there are other instances where it's happened, right? Nobody's perfect. I would make mistakes as well, of course. Very difficult job. Very, very difficult job. The thing that annoyed me though, and for me it was done then. When I got backstage, someone from the production team confronted me about approaching Herber, I tried to make sure that the narrative was set correctly that he actually came over to me. But that never got escalated up the chain. So it was always, you know, you approach it official, et cetera, et cetera. And it just so happened to coincide with where someone had approached Mark Goddard and pushed him at another event, UAE warriors. So the whole thing kind of got convoluted and bundled into the same thing. Was that the Connor situation? No, that was in Bellator. But there was another one, it was UAE warriors. And I think someone had kept hold of a choke too long, and then Goddard had separated the fight. And then he came over to Mark, and he's trying to push Mark and stuff. And when Dana actually made the statement about if you approach an official, you'll be gone. That was actually referenced to the other thing that happened, but it was linked in with me as well. The thing that pissed me off is when I got to the, back to the hotel or to the airport or whatever, Herber posted this video and he was like sitting at the airport, you know, trying to justify what had happened. And but it was just like, he was saying things like, if you think you're the smartest guy in the room and just like poking at me, just constantly. And I'm like, I've got a bunch of hours sitting on a plane way back to the UK now. And you know what I'm like, I'm pulling this apart and I'm like, did I step out of line? Did I see something I shouldn't have said? And I'm assessing it and then I'm going to hang on them in it. Like my intention is to protect that fighter that needed protecting, right? His family at home's sitting watching that. They don't want to see him getting smashed in the face unnecessarily. They know the risks of the job already. So I kind of sat on the plane on the way home and I'm like, how am I going to deal with this? So I dealt with it the way that I would always do. I get all the facts on the table. I try and organize my response. And what I did was I created a video that I put up on YouTube, which the UFC actually contacted YouTube and had them delete off the back end. Oh, and it was about an hour and a quarter long. It was a decent chunk of information. But I went through what had happened on the night. Other circumstances where Herbert maybe not pulled the trigger quick enough or times when he'd been indecisive, like cowboy Mazvedel, not sure whether you remember that one. Cowboy went down at the end of the first round and they actually helped him back to his stall and sat him on the stall and Greg Jackson's going, hey cowboy, you're okay, everything's fine. Then he went out and got TKO'd at the second round. But if you remember that, Herb jumps in and waves the fight off at the end of the round and then decides to restart it in the second. So I pointed out a bunch of things where he could have maybe done a better job. I also gave him the benefit of the doubt in like the Robby Lawler Ben Askrim fight where to me that wasn't stopped early, you could see Robby Lawler's arm fall for a second. I think you went out for a split second and that one came back and complained about it. So in that moment and hard to tell. A very hard to tell, but you can see Herb in that situation going, oh man, I'm sorry. I'm sorry if I'm around. Like those things are gonna happen. I would always rather the fight to be protected than just kind of leave it for the benefit of the doubt just let him take him. It's different with the submission of course. But the point is I was trying to create something that was quite balanced. And the other thing as well was, you know, it was fight island. Like we're getting tested every other day. Like we're quarantined in our rooms sometimes. We were doing it at fights at weird hours of the day. So people were kind of foggy and fatigued and it was just a weird environment. So I gave Herb and all the officials the benefit of the doubt that, you know, you're not gonna be at 100% for a clock in the morning. But it was the way they responded to me, which pissed me off. And then the way that the UFC kind of pulled all their support for me. You know? And they contacted me and they said, hey, we're gonna organize a conversation with you and whoever. And I said, I just wanna let you know. I have got this video ready to go. And I am gonna post it because it vindicates what I did in my opinion. But it also offers some understanding of what Herb was trying to do and the job that he has and how difficult it is. And unfortunately, I mean, it got a couple of 100,000 views before it was taken down. But it's just, it's still on the channel now. If you look at it, it's just a little grace, grace square with three dots. And there's just nothing on the back. They literally went into my channel and took it away. So weird that they could take down something that doesn't violate any laws or rules. I mean, no, that's kind of weird. I don't know whether the contacted YouTube and said, hey, he's used some UFC footage. But it's like, yeah, I did. But at the time I had permission to use UFC footage, they were allowing me to make war rooms and all kinds of stuff. Because it only helps them. That's it. I was an ambassador for Europe as well as being a commentator. So my job in my mind was to spread the word of MMA, right? I'm trying to educate everybody as much as I can. And I could make a lot more content through my channel than I could rely on the UFC to make content. So I was just trying to turn extra stuff out to keep drawing attention to it. So they'd given me permission to use footage on my channel. And I'd built a company off the back of this. I'd employed my Raptors. And I think you remember meeting those guys. And all that was gone. And the thing is it was like, I understand that the UFC are not going to fire me for shouting up to protect a fighter. But I knew on that day my card was marked. And I knew that my card was marked on that day. because I was handled. I was too stubborn. I didn't wait for the UFC to tell me what I should have said. And I posted my video. I wanted to clear my name. And I wanted to back up the reason why I'd said that. Because it wasn't the first time I'd done it. It was the first time I'd done it in a quiet empty arena. But if you go back to, I think it was Moscow, with CB Dollarway. And he was finally going to go called Merter's Aleve. And for about a minute 15, he was just killed up in a ball on the floor. And he was just getting pounded. and he went from fetal position to completely belly down, to fetal position on the other side in the space of that minute. And at the end of the round, Herb's just stood over him. And he's lying there like a corpse on the floor. All right, this fight should have been stopped easy 30 seconds ago. Even CB Dollarway came out and said that he didn't feel protected by it. But the difference was that we've got 25,000 people in the arena. So you can't really hear me shouting stop the fight. And that's an area. Right. Right. It's just an awkward situation. Because I like Herb. I would never have him referee my wife. I always make a request to make sure that he doesn't. But that's more because of the history between me and him. I don't want to put him in a position where I'm going to get angry at him again for doing his job. Right. But I was just, I was disappointed that the UFC kind of pulled all support for me and backed Herb in that situation. Was there a situation backstage where you got into it with someone else from the staff? Because that's what I had heard that someone said something to you and yelled at someone backstage. I did. Yeah, I did. But in the scenario, I just left the ESPN desk. And this is like five o'clock in the morning or something now after the broadcast. And I walked backstage. I won't mention his name. I love him. He's a lovely guy. But everyone's kind of ragged and tired in fire, Thailand. Do you know what I mean? And as I'm walking back to my dressing room, he came flying at me. And he's like, hey, you can't ever approach an official and blah, blah, blah. I'm like, whoa, whoa, hang on a fucking minute. And just the intensity that he came at me with, just spiked my adrenaline again. And I'm already kind of like, I'm heightened because the fights have just ended. You know what? It's like with adrenaline. I'm like, three days. I'm like, excitedly shaking after a good event. And it was just the energy that he came at came at me with just pushed my energy up. So then we had this back and forth where I'm like, hey, you need to get your facts right. He approached me and blah, blah. And I don't know whether that information had already been passed on to people above him to say Dan Hardy is just approach Herb Dean after the fight. We're in actuality. That just never happened. And because that was the perspective that the guys in the truck had got, like, I automatically felt like I'm going to get in trouble here. Like I've done something really wrong. Right. You know? And I mean, the thing is it's like, I've been working with that man for a long time. The guy, the guy backstage I'm talking about. I love him. He's a lovely guy. We've always got on. If I saw him now, we'd have a good conversation. It was just, you know, he actually like heightened experience. And just the energy that he came at me with, especially with the misinformation of me now, you know, being the guy that took my headset off and marched over to the door to wait for herb as he walked out. Right. I just didn't do that. I'm there to do my job. But ultimately, above my job and above everything, UFC and everything included, I'm there to make sure that MMA is stable and the fighters are safe. Right. Because that's, that's my instinct, you know? Everybody that gets in that cage is someone, son or daughter or father or brother. You know what I mean? And in those moments, the people in the cage, they go from being, the best fighters in the world to a very, very human victim that is not being protected by the referee. And from a fighter's perspective, I want to feel that war like feeling when I step in the cage. I want to feel like I can throw everything at my opponent. And I also want to feel safe that they can throw everything at me. Right. I don't want to have in my mind all hang on. Do I need to pull this branch to the referee? Right. But I'm jumping. Like there are three people in there. One person's got the job to protect both of us. Neither of us have a responsibility to protect each other. Right. We don't have a responsibility to pull a punch after a knockdown. We don't have a responsibility to stop when the bell rings. Right. Who was the referee with Anderson Silva and Michael Bisping? Oh, that's a good question. Because that was a weird one. That fight should have been over. Yeah. Now, Anderson hits him with a flying knee and then hops on top of the cage. And they didn't stop the fight. Was that her? It might have been. It might have been. The thing is, I mean, I don't change my place. It was refereeed me a bunch of times. And I like her. But that obviously was Anderson's beef. That was Anderson's issue. Anderson should have followed up until the referee stops. Absolutely. But you could have easily said this fight's over. Yeah. Yeah. That's a crazy situation. So Michael, I think, had lost his mouthpiece. Yes. And this is also when Michael was blind in his right eye. Right. So you have to take this to the consideration. So Michael loses his mouthpiece. And at some point in time, he points like that he wants his mouthpiece back. And look at the time. We're into the last 20 seconds. And he's a beautiful knee that Anderson lands as well. So he says the master's mouthpiece. That's you, buddy. One of my favorite fights to have called Bang. Right on the bell. The buzzer has salvation over. OK, the fight's gone over. You're saying the fight's gone over. But in this situation, that actually makes sense because he was still conscious. And he was still up. And he had his hand down. Yeah. But that was Anderson's fault. Oh, for sure it was. For sure it was. And unfortunately, if Anderson, he had the adrenaline dump of thinking it won the fight. Got up on the cage start celebrating. And now, another 10 minutes. And this is where Michael Bisping is. It's just a guy's point. He's pointing to his mouthpiece. And he's communicating with her. But her didn't stop the fight. I mean, the thing is, this second's left. Anderson Silva's got no responsibility to pull any punches. What a perfect fucking fool. He was not alone. God, he was a master in his prime. And this is post-legbreak too. Yeah. This was an even prime Anderson. This episode is brought to you by Zippra Cruder. It's good to be passionate about something, exploring what interests you as more color to your life. Makes it more fulfilling in a way. And that's not just limited to your personal life. If you run a business, you know how much of a difference it can make when the people on your team are excited about what they're doing. And if you don't, well, it's time to find out with Zippra Cruder. Try it for free at zippracruder.com slash Rogan. It's been rated the number one hiring site based on G2. And that's because Zippra Cruder is always looking for ways to improve the hiring process, including its newest feature that lets you see the most qualified and more importantly, most interested people for your role to make sure there's some of the first you start talking to. Find candidates who really want your job on Zippra Cruder. Four out of five employers who post on Zippra Cruder get a quality candidate within the first day. Try it for free at zippracruder.com slash Rogan. That's zippracruder.com slash Rogan. Meet your match at Zippra Cruder. Still one of the best fights I've ever called. This Max Holloway Calvin Keater, one of the best fights I've ever called. It was a privilege to be set cage side for it. But like, Bispings coming out now with 10 minutes left and stamps his authority on this fight, which was very, very impressive. But it was just, this was just a messy situation. I kind of didn't really mind this because of the circumstance that played out. I mean, Herb was very clear in him saying, he didn't stop the fight. Right, right, right. But then if you remember the cowboy Soroni Masviddell fight, I do remember that one. He goes to the bad. And Herb's bad habit at the end of the round, if there's an engagement, he steps in, he waves his arm. That's a signal that fights off. You don't wave off the round, you wave off the fight. So at the end of the round, the referee's job is to get in between the fighters. Right. Right. So cowboy was on the floor. Masviddell's already wandering off. I mean, this is like, that's, and watch this. So this is the problem, right? You have to leave the fighter to get back to their stall. You can't touch him. Herb's holding him up there. Right. And then they come over, they put the seat down, the stall down. He sits down and then Greg Jackson's saying, hey, cowboy, it's okay. This always happens to us. He's just not conscious for this whole minute. He goes back out and gets TKOed almost immediately afterwards. But Herb has a habit of waving the fight off. Yeah, but that didn't look like he was waving the fight off. That looked like he was signaling the end of the round. He didn't do this. Potentially. But then if you've got one arm in between and you wave him with the other one, you know, I just don't need to wave at the end of the round. I think by his hand movements there, I don't think that qualify. No, I think he's saying stop, stop, stop. I think he's putting his hands out. He's got a hand on and a hand up. Now the other hand's waving. That right hand's waving. Yeah, but I think he's... And then stops the fight. Well, yeah. It's just, it's an unnecessary motion. And I'm okay with the debate about it. Like doing the breakdown of the Jai Herber finish, I learned something really important, which I don't know is I've asked a lot of referees and most of them have not heard about it. Fencing response, right? Have you heard of this? No. It's a concussion symptom. And it's a weird thing, in a newborn baby, when you turn the head to the side, their arms come up like a boxer. Really? Right. It's a weird, I don't know exactly where it comes from, but it's something that happens when people get concussed. Like you will have seen this before in K1. There was a really famous one where a guy gets kicked in the head and as he's going down, you see it in football. Yeah, she's seen in football a lot. So there's one with Marlon Morrite. Yeah. Yeah, look, see, arms go out straight. But it's interesting that, yeah. But seeing a lot of that, you want the judges, you want the referees to know about Fencing response, to be able to recognize all of the different tells of a concussion, right? So, and I didn't know about Fencing response until after the Jai Herbert fight, but I had in my video that was taken down, I had lots and lots of different versions of Fencing response from K1 to football to rugby, all kinds of stuff. It's a tell of concussion, right? Like, consciousness is not removed immediately with every punch is it. Like, you've got everything's on a spectrum. You're either completely conscious or completely unconscious, but the window in which the fight needs to be stopped is probably five or 10% towards the end of that spectrum, right? The point where someone's unable to defend themselves or not intelligently defend themselves. It's very subjective. It's very, very sensitive. The problem is like when a referee stops too early, it's very frustrating. And we have seen many instances. And then we've also seen some instances where it looked like a fight could easily be stopped and the fighter comes back and wins. Frankie Edgar Gray Maynard, what a fight. What great fight. Crazy fights. Yeah. Crazy fights. But in the one where Frankie won where he KOed him, that it looked like he was out before three times in the first time. Oh my goodness. I mean, Gray Maynard was a beast. He was a big, strong, powerful wrestler, really big for 155. And Frankie famously did not cut weight. Frankie was one of the rare guys that fought at 155 essentially weighed like maybe 160 if that. And he was just fast. And because of that, he was very durable. And this is a thing that we need to, I mean, I fucking hate weight cutting. I hate it so bad. I really do. I think it's sanctioned cheating. I think we should have figured out a way to eliminate it a long time ago. But honestly, when I watch one FC, I don't think they figured out a way to do it either. Like it's almost like it's ingrained in the culture to the point where I don't know other than like random, you saw to style weigh ins. You know what I mean? Instead of a drug test, like, hey, Dan, get on the scale. Oh, but I've been eating it. I don't get a fuck, get on the scale. What do you weigh? You're fighting 155. You weighed 190. This is crazy. Oh, no, I'm just four weeks into camp. You know, the next five weeks, I really tightened up my diet, the fuck out of here, bitch. You're huge. You're way too big for 155. Yeah. I mean, look at Anthony Johnson, you know, one of the rest is rumble. Like he was 214 on the night when we fought. We both weighed in at 171. He was 214. And this was before the days of IVs. Yeah. But like, that's crazy. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's crazy. It probably had some sort of an impact on his health problems that he had, because he was an enormous guy. I ran into him one time at a lobby at the hotel. And I go, how much do you weigh? And he goes 230. I'm like, look at the fuck, Adam. That's crazy. You're going to lose 60 pounds. 60 is nuts. That's, and he was, he was 230 built like a house. I mean, he was a fucking stacked dude. It was crazy. And unfortunately, those big muscular guys can cut more weight because muscle is more water. Yeah. But it's horrible. Like, I mean, look, Izzy landed a perfect punch on Pereira, but I feel like Pereira at middleweight just could not take the same kind of shots that Pereira can take it like heavyweight. It's just, you're dehydrating the shed out yourself. He would weigh in 40 pounds more than he weighed than like on fight night. Fight night, he would be 40 pounds heavier. That's crazy. I mean, it was 41. I think he was 226, which is bananas. That's just bananas. I mean, even if I think about it, I was getting up to like, like 186, 188. And that felt like a lot for me cutting down to 170. And yeah, I mean, at the time, I was fairly big for the weight class. You know what I mean, compared to some of the other guys around, but it just didn't work for me. You know what I mean? Like I invested too much in getting bigger and stronger. And, because when I was fighting before the UFC, I mean, I was fighting, you know, 10, 12 times a year. And I needed to stay close to weight. So I was always, I was always within about 10 pounds. There were very few fights before the UFC that I cut a lot of weight. And even, and then when I was fighting out in Japan, because I couldn't use sauna, like I just didn't want to, you know, put myself in a position where I was having to trash bag and, you know, sweat out in the streets of Tokyo. So my weight is on in Japan. That's my tattoos. Isn't that crazy? I got kicked out of a gym in Japan. Did you really? I had to go back up to my room, put a long sleeve shirt on. That's crazy. That's nuts. The gym in the hotel, I'm like, I'm staying here. Yeah. I said, no, you can't have exposed tattoos. I'm like, oh my God, that's so wild. Do you have any acoustic gym that I could go to? Yeah, right. That's how many things I could do that. It's all about your kuzotatos. Like, look at me. Do you think I'm your kuzot? I never run. It's crazy. I mean, I think it's changed the bit now, but I don't know, man. This is not that long ago. I mean, I guess it was. Maybe it was 15 years ago. Most of the last time the UFC was in Tokyo. I'm not sure. I think it was more than 15 years ago, I believe. I want to say it was like, shit. It might have been like 2009. Yeah. Like, 2007, I was out there fighting for cage force. Yeah. Yeah. But crazy. Yeah. I mean, that was back when they didn't have those options, like those small portable sauna options that they have now. Like, there's some of them, they have these hot boxes where they're a little tiny heater in there and you zip it up and you're in this little thing and you can kind of carry it with you on the road. You can check it with your bags. Yeah. The blankets are really good. Veronica used that for the last couple of cuts. They really look great. But people use hot bass now. No one was hot bass in my day. Right. Like, if you were sweating, you were working out. You were running. You were in a sauna. They were the only ways people were cutting weight. Hot bass in came in kind of towards the end of my career. What? What better. I don't know. I mean, for me, I never used the hot bass. I tried it one time. I didn't really like it. And that's partly a psychological thing, I think, because for me, the hot bath was the reward after the fight. You know, so interesting. I didn't want to feel like I was relaxing the day before the fight. I was cold-shoured. I wanted to feel like a feral animal, to be honest. So I would cut weight on my own. I would, like, it was a process of me preparing for the fight. I always imagined it like, it's like, you know, you grab your shield and you spear and it's the march to the battlefield. You don't walk out of your tent and you're on the battlefield. There's a process of getting there. And the wake up for me was a part of that. It was the suffering to get to the fight. So like, for me, it was hot-sawn, a cold shower, you know, treadmill pads if I needed it. I mean, Tokyo, I didn't even have a treadmill. I just put trash bags on, cut the corners off. The old school tie-box in way. How much did you wear before that, by... I cut seven pounds. And that was, and that was one of the reasons why I changed the way that I was doing it, because I should have stopped that guy in the first round. And I didn't have the power to it. And that was his last fight. Like, he went, he passed out after the fight, went to the hospital, he had a bleed on his brain. And he retired completely after that. He was... Who was that? His name was Diza-Wishighe. Oh, I remember. He was the king of pancreas. He was like, it was the favorite to win the Cage Force tournament. And I pulled him in the first round. And I went out there just with the intention of doing a normal wake cut, you know, six or seven pounds. Exactly what I would normally... I pulled him in the first round. I went out there just with the intention of doing a normal weight cut, you know, six or seven pounds, exactly what I would normally do. I had a little bit more to cut because of the flight. But I honestly hand on heart believes that if I'd either not cut the weight or I'd cut the weight in a better way and rehydrated, I would have been able to stop him and he wouldn't have had to down the brain damage that he ended up with. Because I look back to that third round and I just didn't have the power. It was like a bad dream where I'm just punching him and he's just bouncing around. He's a blue man. So he just took repeated subconcussive blows. Way more than he needed to. Oh, yeah. And I don't know whether he cut weight as well, but certainly the thing that played into the damage that was done to him was my weight cut. And that's crazy. I just don't know what crazy to think of. I just didn't want to... I mean, but again, like, I have no guilt associated with that because we knew what we were doing when we got in there. And I would not hold it against him if that would have happened to me. You know what I mean? But in hindsight, pulling the whole thing apart, like I could have been a better version of myself as a martial artist and it would have actually probably saved him some of the damage that he ended up taking in the third. My position is that the UFC and I think the MMA in general, PFL, all of them, we need more weight classes. I don't think there's nearly enough weight classes. I think the gaps are enormous. I think the names are stupid. It's very stupid to have welterweight 170 when welterweight has been with boxing at 147 forever. For 100 years. And also, the UFC comes along and decides welterweight is 170. Like, why is it called welterweight then? You know, imagine if you go to another country and you buy a hammer and it's a sandwich. No, I wanted a hammer. I need to build a house. The fuck is this? It's like a totally different thing. Like, why is it 170 welterweight? Why not just call it the 170 pound division? That's what wrestling does. They just said they have divisions. It doesn't need to be like a name. The name seems silly. That's a good point actually. I've not thought about that. I've actually developed a system of introducing weight classes over the next several years for the PFL. I mean, obviously the problem that we have is that some weight classes are just not filling out because the fighters are just not there unfortunately. Right. But I also think that's a bit of a, that's a result of the monopolization and the kind of killing off of the grassroots of the sport. Because the sport's not growing like it was in my day. You know what I mean? It's very, very different now. What do you think is the cars in that? I think the control and the monopolization of the sport by the UFC unfortunately. Has that stopped small organizations? Well, because anything that starts to gather some momentum, they buy them out and they got rid of them. Well, they certainly did buy out a bunch of organizations back in the day. Right. They bought out strike force. They bought out pride. But they sort of bought out pride. They got fucked. Yeah. Like they thought they were buying out pride. Do you know the whole deal behind that? They, all the contracts are bad. Is that right? Yeah, they got a fucking DVD library. Look, over time, I'm sure it's been worth it. Right. But I believe they paid $60 million for pride. I might be wrong about that number. But that's what I recall. And they didn't have any contracts. Like, you know, the contracts were all fucked up. So like they thought they were going to get paid or they thought they were going to get everybody. And so they got a lot of the guys to come over and sign new contracts with the UFC, like Crocop and Nogara and a bunch of other people. But I don't think they got nearly what they thought they were getting. Yeah. That's interesting. I mean, obviously, you know, I love the USA and I've always held Dana and the USC and what they've created for us in very, very high regard. But there has, in my opinion, with past the tipping point now, we're now starting to see some of the negative effects of them kind of locking down everything. Because like there are certain organizations that are, they are connected with the UFC and they're enabled by the UFC through fight pass. And then they become almost like the feeder. Like, they'll effect exactly. Right. But then a lot of these, a lot of those shows are now starting to get dropped off of fight pass. Right. And the reason for that is because contender series is replacing them. So which shows have been dropped off by a pass? I think LFA's just been dropped, doesn't it? Well, it has a bit. I think so. I mean, Invictor was on there a long time ago. I think they moved away themselves. But like, there are areas was dropped to period, you know, my wife's commentator on areas. They would drop to a while ago. What was Ares? It's a French promotion. Arris, I always say it wrong. Arris is there. And they were dropped from five past? Yeah. Yeah. I think they've been picked up again now, but you know, but this is my thinking behind it, right. And I remember back in the day when I was fighting on Cage Warriors in the UK, and the UFC were coming over once or twice. Like, it started to kill off all the other shows because everyone was like, I'll just save my money. I'll wait for the UFC to come. Before the UFC came over and starting like, the state's a claim in the UK, we had a lot of shows that were kind of, you know, popping up on weekends. I was up and down the country and across Europe all the time. But then when we started having two or three UFC events a year, a lot of the smaller shows just dropped off, died off. Do you think, so you think you're saying your money, meaning as the audience member? Yeah. Yeah, but you can't fault the UFC for that. Oh, no, absolutely not. And what they did when the UFC landed in Europe, they legitimized the sport. And then, you know, so the perspective started to change very quickly. Like, when I was doing, when I had my title fight in 2010, I would say at least half of the interviews that I did was trying to justify the sport and why I was allowed to do what I did. Right? That was 2010. So this is back when everybody thought it was human cockfighting still. And I was getting into debates with journalists about the human cockfighting thing. And trying to... Yeah, I know. It was just a beta so ill. But like, and imagine trying to like attach power slap onto the side of UFC when it was then. Oh. It was just buried us, you know? I did not like power. So I hate it. I hate it. I do not like it. And the thing is, and I'm very much, you know, as long as you're not hurting anybody else. Or you're angry at all. I'm not always for your ability to power slap each other. And I've watched a bunch of clips. I've watched a bunch of people get flatlined and bounce their head off the podium and fall backwards. And I don't like it. My whole thing about martial arts is it's human chess. It's high-level problem solving. It's, you know, you're working up to a moment. And you're doing your very best to not get hit and hit them. And a flawless performance. Like, it's one of the things that was most impressive about Homsaw. During his first few UFC fights, I think he fought like three or four fights where he took like three punches. Yeah, Reese McKee, John Phillips. I can't remember the other one. I called a couple of those. Gerald Mearshari took nothing. That was one punch. That was flatlined, a worm punch. I mean, that was the craziest thing about him. So I look at this guy. He's not even getting hit. Like, this is nuts. And when you grab guys, they'd be helpless. I like skill. There's no skill in having a big hand and a fat face. And putting, and I don't even understand why you have chalk on your face. Why do you have, are you hand? Why rip? I don't know. Is that what it is? Is it just to like the powder fly to the air? Or the water? And, you know, I don't get it. Maybe dunk your head in water. I don't know. Hey, they used to it in the Kung Fu movies. They used to put talc on people. So when you hit them, you get a cloud of. Do they do that? Yeah, yeah. And the watermelons with the mallets to make the noises. But again, like power slap can be. It's thing and exist. Just away from MMA. And what I hate to see is the likes of Herzog and Mark Smith and Forrest, like catching these unconscious guys as they're falling. It just attaches the sport that we've worked so hard to develop to something that is going to, it doesn't ingest this to the MMA fighters and how hard they work. And how much of a human chest MMA is. Yeah, it's literally like taking what are those fucking smash them up derby racing events where they crash at your demolition. Demolition derby. Yeah. It's like a Formula One driver and being involved in demolition derby. Like that's fucking crazy. There's actually a reason for the chalk. Oh. So that they can see where the hit was made. Oh, indication of where the position strike lands. Well, can't you see that though? They're not like moving at the speed of light. Also not allowed to have excessive chalk and they can't use water. There's no excessive water. You said put your head in water. The idea is that they have rules. The idea they have rules is so crazy. Yeah. It's so crazy. But it is a reflection of how solid the UFC is right now. Right now. Right. Because you go back to 2010. They couldn't have done that without having a real negative effect on the sport. I think it has a negative effect on the sport now. I agree with you. I just think it's not the UFC so powerful and so strong now that it like they can even take a liberty and advertise power slip off the back of it. Well, get away with it. It's that. And then it's also we're in the TikTok era where it's just really all about clips. I mean, is this power slap? Does it air anywhere? Because it aired on television for a while. Right. Then they force it into the Paramount deal in some way. Did they? I don't know. I don't know. I think it's much more digestible in these very short clips. I don't think there's a person. Like, there's some fucking hardcore MMA fans who can tell you about guys that are competing in the amateurs and tough enough and they're making their way to the UFC and they're fighting in the LFA. There's this guys are coming in their debuts and you can watch YouTube videos of guys breaking down these guys' skill sets. And you never even heard of these cats. Guys you're fighting in Russia. Guys you're fighting in Brazil and there's no power slap. hardcore fans. There's no, this guy fucking, you gotta see him slap. You gotta see him take a slap. You gotta see the way she stares down her opponent before she gets slapped. Like, yeah. It's not the same man. It's not, I mean you can watch it. You can do it. I don't have a problem with it. This is America. I believe in freedom. Don't do it. That's what I'd say. Don't do it. You come to me. I don't do it. As a recommendation, you can do it, right? Like, you know, whatever you would recommend. But like, why'd also say don't do jackass. And you have, those guys on my show all the time. Yeah. Every time I talk to Steve, I'm like, fuck, I can do it man. What are you doing that? Especially with type man. He's especially with type. Johnny Knoxville told me he's been knocked out 16 times, out cold. Like, that's way too many. That's way too many. That's nuts. Absolutely. I mean, he has zero fights on your record. He's been KOed 16 times. That's, that's real bad. Hey, he's got well paid out of it though. He's, you know, you find someone else that got knocked out 16 times. And yeah, right. That's a good point. I mean, that's the other thing with these powers, like guys, he's like, they're making pocket money. How much do they make? I know. Three and three, five and four. Three? Yeah. I was chatting to someone in Vegas and she didn't want to do it. But she was like, I don't have a choice. I can't get MMA fights. Why? She just couldn't get MMA fights. She was too big for most of the weight classes. Oh, yeah. You know. That's a problem. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm going to make 135. Every time I see her in between fights, I'm like, how? How do you get to 135? Yeah. She's as big as me. This is crazy. Yeah. I saw her the other week in Pittsburgh. And she's, I mean, she's huge. She's gigantic. Yeah. She's got phenomenal genetics. Yeah. She's got that next car. Yeah. She got an artificial disc. Yeah. Which is, it's really interesting. They could do that now. And guys go, look, Alchiman did it and came back better than ever. I mean, that was, I mean, everybody was so upset at him the way he was. he won the title of Puyo de Yann. But he had a legitimate neck issue going into that fight. And that illegal knee that he took to the head really did fuck him up. Yeah. And then he went and got an artificial disc, putting his neck and then came back and dominated in the rematch. And then did you see him in his last fight? Yeah. Fuckin dude, man. That guy has the best back control in the game. His back control is so elite. It's, it's really incredible. He gets a hold of your back, man. It's like my God. Yeah. Absolutely. I don't, I don't mean to keep picking on officials, but that is, that's another situation where I actually feel quite bad for Aljo that he had to put on that performance and damage his brand in such a way because he didn't want to continue fighting. Right. Right. And the officials are putting a circumstance where they don't have the confidence to just go, no hang on a minute. That was bad fights over. Fights done. Right. Right. Right. Well, you want to give a guy the opportunity to fight still. You don't, this is the thing about damage. You don't know looking. Some guys can take a shot like that and then they bounce back and they're fine. Look, this big, this thing came back and won that fight after that flying knee. You know, and you really got him kind of like let the fighter, if the fighters conscious, you got to let them decide whether or not they can, because you don't know. It's not possible to tell by looking at someone what kind of damage they've got, especially Aljo with the neck. These situations are so bad, man. But the crazy thing is that with these artificial discs now, like wideman got one, there's a few quite a few guys that have gotten artificial discs in their neck now. And then they go back to finding, which is crazy. I wonder how that changes the way the head twists. I don't know. One thing I noticed on Yell Romero, who's head just doesn't twist, but he's got, he's next fused, right? His neck is fused the base of his skull. How do you turn his head to cause concussion? I don't know. Well, there's a good argument that it makes him more durable. Do you remember when Derek Bronson head kicked him? Yeah. He hit him on the neck kick, like right here, he didn't even budge, because you're hitting a steel bar. So then, so then think, didn't Tiger Woods have some kind of ice surgery. So he's I was 2010. So he has better edge and better depth perception for God. I'm pretty sure he did. Really? Yeah. And so our sponsor perplexity, Jayden. What did they do? He could do that. He got laces. So did he have bad eyes and he got him better or did he have good eyes and said, what can you do? Can you make him have fucking superhuman eyes? It's correct near sightedness that improved him to 2015 vision. Okay. So he wasn't improved to 2020. The problem with that is with these surgeries, if you have macular degeneration and it continues to progress, you are going to need it again. Or it's going to get worked like Ari Schafir got laces and he's like, oh, it's me as an electronic 20 20 vision, because he had terrible vision before. And then it started going to shit after a while because it just kept deteriorating. And now as I suck, the thing is that you know athletes, like, I mean, I think it was a poll done a while ago with Olympians. Like if you can win a gold medal, but you're going to lift to 30 or 35, would you take the gold medal and a good portion of them said yes, they absolutely would most athletes in order to achieve their goals would do absolutely anything. So if I, if I all of a sudden discovered that having your neck fuse like your Romero means that you've got a 30% chance of, you know, less chance of getting knocked out, how many fighters do you think without their neck fuse just to be on their advantage, right? How about that Tommy John surgery that people get electively so they get pitch better? For surgery, he was extremely nearsighted. He had an 11 prescription. I don't know what that is minus 11. Essentially legally blind without glasses or contacts. Whoa. And one of the greatest golfers of all time, if not the greatest. First LASIC was done after his 1999 PJ Championship win. Yeah. There you go. Results and impacts on his golf would report that he achieved about 20 15 vision better than the standard 2020. Meaning he could see more detail at distance than the average person. Interesting. He described the cup and ball as looking larger and said his ability to read greens improved and he went on a notable win streak winning five PJ tour events in a row right after the surgery. Wow. That links into the stone date theory though if we're going in a massive circle, right? Because microdosing mushrooms gives you better edge and depth perception. Yes. So then the theory was that you would have better chance of surviving either as not becoming prey or finding prey. Yes. Better vision would make you hornier so it would make you more likely to breed and it also makes you more creative. And you know, Terrence McKenna and Dennis McKenna link it to the creation of language. Fascinating. Oh, it's very fascinating. I used to remember when I was in Vegas, I had a room in my house which I think we talked about it before which was the mushroom. And I would like once a week, I would like clear the day and I would have ceremony on the Saturday in the evening. They'd get up on Sunday morning and go out into Red Rock and I'd do trail running. But like at the point where you know, I took six or seven grams the night before so now I've probably got the equivalent of two, three grams in my system. But I'm running in Vibram's downhill and I'm like a cat. I can see the ground in a much different way to how I would if I was completely straight. So, you know, and I know there are some fights that have been microdosing through fights as well. I went through them under the bus because... Oh, I know a few. Yeah. Joe Schilling talked pretty openly about it. He's got a fight coming up. Does he Joe's back? Fighting in Brussels. Is he doing PFL? Yeah. Interesting. Interesting. How old's Joe now? I'm not sure. I spied with him at Frank Meers, Jim in Vegas a few years ago. Soffa. Obviously I knew Joe Schilling who he was and the gym that he created in LA had a real reputation and all that kind of stuff. 42. Wow. But he was just... He was standing outside the back just smoking a cigarette, came in, put his gloves on and just beat the snot out of me. You know what I mean? Such a good fight to... Yeah, he's a beast kick boxer man. I was at the last man standing event in LA when he fought. Like that was really crazy because you had to fight multiple kickboxing fights in a day. And you know, this was glory. This was like who used to run Bellator? Was the guy who ran Bellator? Not Scott Koko. No. Yeah, no, it is Scott Koko. There was a guy before Scott, right? Yeah. Be on rip? Right. So he left and then Scott was also involved in Bellator. Yeah. Excuse me. At least it's glory. Right? It's Scott Koko ran Strike Force? Founded Strike Force. So who ran Bellator? Yeah, you're founded it and then Scott Koko. Right. So that is correct. Okay. I think he was involved in glory too. Right. And I think I remember I waned up to him and I said this is awesome, but don't do this. Don't have people fight multiple times in a night. It's just like, because you get a concussion and no one even knows about it. Like there's been a lot of fights where guys got concussions and they didn't get knocked out. And then you have to fight again in an hour and then you fight again 45 minutes after that. Like man, that's a recipe for people getting fucked up. I know they did it back in the old days and hardcore and all that stuff. It's all great. But man, don't do that. But you look at some of those first round matchups when they were doing that. You're like, okay, I can see what you're doing here. You know what I mean? Give people easier fighting in the beginning. Sometimes. But I think it's kind of random, you know, sometimes special. I have you wait K1. I mean, you know? You fight Hong Man Choi or Bob Satin. No matter how confident you are in your skill set, just the sheer size of them is a problem. Yes. Those hit the fucking K1 tournaments were bananas. Oh, there was so good. Special mastermind in Canada that used to get me VHS tapes back in the day. I don't know. I think he had like a satellite dish or some shit. I forget how he was getting them. But he was getting them and he was sending him to me K1 heroes. All these like real obscure events he was sending me. Awesome. Oh, I had a, I don't know where the fuck they are now. I think they might even be in my LA house. But I had a giant box filled with VHS tapes. They were all kinds of old school fights. I used to have a, I used to have a like a CD, like a zip CD thing that used to take with me. And I had a guy at my gym and he would five pounds. He would burn me pride or K1 heroes or whatever. And he was finding them online and just ripping it and, you know, selling them in the gym. But I had a whole database of stuff. IFL and all those old shows. K1 heroes are loved. You know, that's kind of partially how I got the job with the UFC. When I first met Dana, like he just, he got me tickets because it was the, I was on fear factor. And the UFC, they just purchased it. So this is 2001. This is right post 911 when T to RT's fought Vladimir Matushenko came out with a American flag. Everybody went crazy. And I started talking to him about like Japan Valley 2doh and you know about this guy. You know about that guy. And I was, I was just like rattling off all these fighters that he had never heard of before. What I was talking about is guys that are fighting out of Russia. All these guys in Japan. And then we started talking and then next thing you know, he's like, do you want to do commentaries? I just want to watch. I just want to watch. Do you know the thoughts about it before a commentary? No. No. Now, while I worked for the UFC before that as the post fight interviewer, but that was in 97 UFC 12. And so I did it for 97 and 98. And then it was costing me money because I would make way more money if I'd go work out at a comedy club for the weekend that I would doing this. But it was fun. So I did it for a little while, but then it was like, I think it was UFC Japan. They wanted me to fly to Japan. And Frank Shamrock was fighting Kevin Jackson. Is that who it was? I think he won my first round arm bar. And I was like, I'm not going to fuck it. Japan man. I can't. No. I'm done. So I just quit. I was like, I love you guys. It was fun. Good time. I feel like it was going to go where it went. No, I thought they were fucked. Really? It was funny because Eddie Bravo and I were backstage at one of these events. Like, wait, you know, I met Eddie Wade back in the day. So it was like, this was like 97, 98, 80, and I were backstage. We were like, you know what this fucking support needs? Some crazy billionaires with a ton of money. Who love the sport? Because we know it's so exciting. And we know people would think it's so exciting. It just needs to be in everybody's face. And then who comes along with fratitas? It's like we manifested them. Yeah. It was crazy because like, you know, one of the first events that I did for the U.S. I did for free. I did like the first 15 events for free. And I just said, just get my friends tickets. So it's like Eddie and I would go. And you know, we were like, bro, it's hot. It's fucking happening. It's actually happening. But even back then, it wasn't famous. It was just, it was in Vegas. And it was, you know, it was kind of getting a little bit of attention. It wasn't until 2005 that that Forrest Whitaker, that the main event of, um, rather excuse me, Forrest Griffin and Stefan Bonner main event of the ultimate fighter, that one fight changed everything. It's really crazy where like the stars align with one fight. The whole sport takes off. Yeah. Because it really was that. I can't believe I called them Forrest Whitaker. But yeah, I did the commentary. I call it Robert Whitaker, Forrest Whitaker. I'm called people. I fucked up Julianna Penya's name. Well, I fucked people's names up. It's like you have so many names in your head. Those are people who understand like we, you and I between you and I, we probably have 500 fighters names in our head. And then plus jujitsu guys, plus wrestlers, plus boxers. Like, oh my God, there's so many names in your head. Yeah. And I project that into the history of the sport. Right. And the history of the sport and the history of box in on top of that is what I described. My memory is like I have a whole bunch of boxes of folders. And if I find that box, I can open that bitch up and talk to you about Marvin Hagler versus Juan Roll Dan and I'll tell you like the doc down was fake and this and that and Hagler went on to stop him. Oh, I'll tell you details. But if I don't have that folder in front of me, I'm like, I don't know why. I don't know why. I can't like immediately remember sometimes. And sometimes I could pull out box out and it's right there. And I can just get that folder out and boom. Do you remember the first time you sat down at the commentary booth and pulled the head sound? Yes. Yes. That was UFC 37 and a half London. No. Oh, no. It was, it was just after that. Right. Yeah. He's 38 with London. Well, it was 37 and a half because it was like a, it was an event they put together for best damn sports show. So remember best damn sports show, which was on Fox Sports, I think Fox Sports net. And so what it was was they had this opportunity to do a show and this is when Dana asked me to do commentary and I just did it as a favor. He goes, it'd be great if you did it because it was the fear of actor days and it was Chuck Liddell versus Vitor Belfort and I'm sorry. Oh, fuck yeah, I'll do it. And I think, I don't remember who else. I think Robbie Lawler might have made his debut. Very nervous, Robbie Lawler. That's right. Yeah. Um, so it was, uh, it was fun and I did it once and then they asked me, would you do it again? Like, okay, I'll do it again. But it was really just, I just kept doing it. It wasn't a job. Like I said, I didn't even ask for money. Yeah. I did like 15 of them and then finally Dana says, like, I want to sign you to a contract. I want to pay you. It was like, okay. All right. It was like reluctantly got dragged into being a commentator. Yeah. So it was brought to you by visible. Ah, spring is in the air, which means time for some spring cleaning. We're cleaning out the garage and finally tossing those mystery cords. But while you're cleaning out your junk drawer, take a look at your wireless bill. Don't fall for wireless traps, tacked on fees, confusing bills and empty promises, join visible and cut out the nonsense with visible. You get unlimited 5G data and hotspot on Verizon's network for one flat cost, just $25 a month, taxes and fees included. It's everything you need and nothing you don't. Plus, for a limited time, new members can get the visible plan for just $20 a month for one year using code fresh start, refresh your wireless with visible head to visible.com to get started. Terms apply limited time offer subject to change. See visible.com for plan features and network management details. That's kind of cool. Yeah. Similar to me, though, really. I mean, I was because I've been sidelined because, you know, because of my heart situation and they wouldn't claim me in California. So then the UFC just wouldn't match me anywhere. And I don't know, like a month or two, I've just kind of wallow in and be depressed and, you know, avoid it in my mediums. Lorenzo really invited me into the offices on Sahara and I got on sat with him and we were chatting through and he said, hey, you know, I'm going to send you out to California. I want you to go and see my specialist, you know, my family specialist and get a second opinion, et cetera. But he said it also, we've got another plan for you. He said, I won't spoil it, but at some point you'll see Dana and Dana will tell you what the plan is. And as I was, it was like a movie. As I was walking out of the officers, a stretch monster, humber pulled up. But literally, I'm like, what's going on here and Dana got out and he was like, oh, just a fucking blah, blah, blah, blah. I just wanted to see. He was like, I want you to go to the UK. I want you to be an ambassador. I want you to do commentary and I said, that's great. You know, let me know what I need media training. He's like, no, none of that. I just want you to be used sit and cage side. And I remember getting into the first UFC London event sat down at the desk, just fighting in post-asindrome bad and seeing all the, all the fans starting to trickle into the arena. And then someone on the, on the, from the truck came to any end said, oh, I've just realized we've not practiced any post fight interviews. I said, I had not really thought about it, but it's just talking to fighters. I'll be fine. He said, no, no, no, I would feel better if we practiced. I said, okay. He said, okay, Brad pick it wins by knockout. Go. What? How did you knock him out? We're not the first question. And it was weird because it was like, I'd not even thought about it up until that point. But when they raised the, when they, when they, they asked me to do the kind of practice rehearsal with not any scenario that was realistic, then all of a sudden I started to panic. Because I, I, I, I remember sitting there feeling like a, like a 14 year old, like someone's going to tap me on the shoulder in a minute and throw me out. Really? Really? That's funny. So really weird. That's interesting. I don't remember if I felt imposter syndrome. I think because I wasn't getting paid, I probably thought it was just fun. Yeah. I probably didn't think it was a job. So I probably thought like, oh, they just want me to do this because I'm famous and it would be good to, for the sport. If the fear factor guy isn't enthusiastic about the sport. So that's how I thought about it. And so like I would go on like the Howard Stern show and stuff and we wind up just talking about the UFC. And this was, again, I wasn't even working for the UFC. I was there to promote fear factor. But I was talking about how much I loved UFC. And I just, I think it's awesome. And back when I was competing, no one knew what the best sport, it's so hard for people to recognize that today because it's not that long ago, you know, like when I was last time I thought it was like 88 or 89, you would think like we kind of had it sorted out back then, but you didn't. No one knew. No one knew. You know like when I was last time I thought was like 88 or 89 You would think like we kind of had it sorted out back then, but you didn't no one knew No one knew like what was the best thing to study? I remember I went to this gym A friend of mine was teaching at this University and I would go and train with him and his students sometime and I would go there and they had a judo program there And I'd be like oh these suckers practicing the stupid judo like this is useless. You can't even kick anybody Well, those guys would have killed me. They would just grab me and fucking thrown me on my head But I didn't think that I was totally delusional. I thought I was gonna kick them into the fucking shadow realm and No one knew what the right thing to study was if you took Kung Fu you thought Kung Fu was the shit Bruce Lee Right more in Bruce Lee shirt He was really the only guy that was wise enough to realize you just got to take a little bit from everything and Having one style whether it was his initial style which was Wing Chun or you know, whatever it is karate That's not the way the way is The right way to win in close quarter combat you need to learn how to grapple you need to learn boxing You need to learn how to block correctly. You need to learn how to kick correctly back time we didn't know and we always wondered like what would happen if they did like a fucking But a bunch of guys together and I knew Benny the jet had competed in some weird stuff in Hawaii But no one really knew so when it was finally happening to me. I was like a little kid I was like oh my god. It's happening It's really happening. Yeah, and I was like please let this work Please let this work and then to watch the evolution of it from the beginning Which is just hoist going in there and dominating everybody because no one knew Jiu Jitsu And he had the Gee-on so he had all his friction It was amazing and then everybody took Jiu Jitsu including me. I'm like I gotta learn Jiu Jitsu And then to watch the evolution like these giant juice-dub fucking wrestlers come along like Mark Coleman Smat and Mark her smashing everybody. You're like oh my god You've got to get on the sauce and so everybody you know beat to our got up like 240 pounds and it's fucking next Oh, yeah, bro. I was training the same Jim as him when he made his UFC debut So I was training at Carlson Gracie's gym. So you kind of knew what was coming then why didn't I knew he was awesome But I didn't know how good his hands were because I only saw him doing Jiu Jitsu, right? I knew he was a beast like and he was a black belt in Jiu Jitsu at the time and You know a phenomenal athlete just so fast But then I saw a video of him he fought John Hess in Hawaii You remember John has a saffta fighting. Yeah, so John Hess was this giant guy He's like six seven or something like that and Vito just Fuckin took him to the ground BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG hit him with like 30 fucking unanswered punches in a road like in three seconds like And put him away and then they're screaming Jiu Jitsu Jitsu Jitsu Like we did it. Yeah, this is not I mean I get it. You know Jiu Jitsu with that was boxing Yeah, you used you used striking But it was like to be there at the very beginning and watch this evolution There it is there's Vito. Look at this. Oh, boom. Oh, boom. Oh, boom. Oh my god And look how thin Vito or was back then. Yeah, that was Vito or I had like, you know 199 pounds maybe 190 oh he was so fast and so that was there for his UFC debut so that was UFC 12 so He fought Trey Telegman and Trey Telegman like had no idea that this guy could box that way Like no one did they thought he's a cross and Gracie Jiu Jitsu black belt There was like okay, you know boy to take down this guy's really going on the ground And he just starts tuning people up with his hands And Telegman was lines them wasn't he was one of Ken Shamos guys, did he ever miss in Peck? Yes, he was in a car accident. I believe when he was a child. Oh, is that right? Yeah, and he his peck was not attached on one side. He was fucking Jack dude And then he fought Scott Furozo after that who's like giant fat guy Who's also like a tank, you know like a huge fucking knockout artist and We tore tuned him up to just the speed he had so this is like, you know 1997 and it was it was wild and that was in like a high school auditorium and Dothin Alabama Who was like really weird crazy like this is so these play these are so strange these events were so bizarre You know was hanging out with the lines then guys we go drinking together and stuff it was fun But it was just weird it was like what is this thing that we're doing? This is it The Dothin Civic Center. That's what it was. They got small. It is like a little that place is 97 yeah, so that would have been the time when I was I was at art college. Yeah, and I would I went to I went to virgin Megastore there you are look Jeff Blackneck. There's the fucking man. Oh, it's a virgin megastore and Look how beautiful. Oh, okay. I was pretty and No one taught no one told me what to do no one gave me any instruction nothing they gave me a microphone and then said we're gonna come to you backstage like we want me say It was fucking nothing it was nothing you put a new bet than everybody else though Well luckily I was a huge fan so it was pretty easy I got the job because They had a guy that was doing it before and they got rid of him and Cambo McLaren Who was one of the producers was good friends with my comedy manager and they were he was just casually talking It's like we're looking for someone to do post fight interviews and then he's like Joe loves the UFC He's like you think you do it and so they call me up. I was like fuck. Yeah, let's go It was like this is and this is so it's like 97 I guess I was 30. Yeah, this is how the judges used to announce their picks They just how I guess so I There's a bunch of those at the beginning that seemed very strange I saw they had overtime rules. Oh I forgot about that The laws of the octagon. Valeeji Valeedish man. He was a lunatic. Oh, he's a mad. Oh, intense mad dog. Yeah, it says nobody No, I gouging no fish hooking. That was it. You could hit people and nuts That's it. I'm gonna I tell you what I've got a piece of my gum missing from someone trying to fish hook me Oh, they took they took a piece of the gum away with their fingernail I'm gonna have to get something done. I've got some teeth that need fixing it. Oh, I'm just Christ Yeah, yeah, yeah fish are contagious. Yeah. It's nasty if there's someone's fish hook you should bite their fucking fingers Oh, I think so she'd be able to bite them like fuck you get your fucking fingers out of my mouth motherfucker You know, that's that's interesting about commentary. I've always wondered because You everybody came after you right when it can when it comes to MMA commentary So like like in the early days when I was first doing the job No one knows what a color commentator or a play by play commentator is back in the day There's more of an understanding now so so My my response to everybody's I'm gonna try and do Joe's job You know what I mean, but you'd set the bar so high. I think partly that's what fed into my imposter syndrome I'm sitting then but I know the podcast that you did with with Dustin I appreciate all the kind words you did I want to throw it back to you though because you were the person that raised the bar for everybody else to reach You know, so and I didn't realize because I had never had an intention of being a commentator Like it just came out of the back of my career because my career was ended abruptly So then Anyone ever says are you you're actually pretty good at this the reason why he's just because I listened to you Religiously like a lot of people watch the fights don't pay attention to the commentary Like I tuned in I was paying attention to everything that you said So even even the delivery and the cadence and stuff what you did laid the foundation for me to learn So I'm very very much appreciate that. Oh, thank you. Thank you. It was accidental same for me But but it could have been accidental because I had somebody to learn from you know That's why I asked you because you didn't have anybody that kind of kind of you know Well, it was weird because I think I was one of the first people to do it that had a real understanding of jujitsu So when the fights would go to the ground the play-by-play guy would have you know like Goldberg great guy didn't train didn't know what the fuck was happening So I would have to and also people at home. What's going on? So I'd have to walk them through Exactly when someone's in danger and why they're in danger and how they can get out of it and when they're free Okay, see his elbow. He's free now. He's good and so My mind is spinning like a hundred miles an hour I'm like now I don't have to do that as much because people kind of understand things much more But there's certain situations and certain positions where I would have to say no This is the submission like he's very close here like okay now He's got a cinch it up. He's got to put his ankle behind. It's like that's got it And you'd have to like talk people through it. So it was it was different than any other sport because it was You kind of like educating people on what's happening like I couldn't use obscure I even though I used obscure term like you know crackhead controller So like weird stuff like that that Eddie comes up with these fucking ridiculous names for submissions and positions But I would have to explain why this works and what's happening and what's going on and what's what's in danger You know, and it was weird because I felt like this obligation to jujitsu that There was a one thing like you could someone kicks you in the head you get it someone knee someone in the head. Oh, you didn't want to find me you get it but explaining someone like what like a You know a calf crusher is like that's that's a weird fucking position Yeah, like what is going on there? You know explaining to someone You know why a triangle works and why it doesn't work and why someone's safe You know with a head and arm choke. Why okay? He's okay. He's got his hand over his ear There's it was all this weird stuff where it was partially trying to be entertaining But also trying to educate and I had to kind of figure it out as I did it You know, it's like called I don't know how many fights are called Thousands yeah, I mean, I've called a lot you've you've been doing a lot longer than me What I'll do is many now, you know, I only do North American paper views and I don't even do I don't even go to Canada anymore So fuck them. I love Canadians. It's like government. The fucking creeps me out, but the The amount I was doing back then I was doing like 20 shows plus a year 22 shows a year Yeah, so I was doing a show almost every other weekend. I was flying somewhere Yeah, and it was exhausting. It was a really it was a problem but it was in at one point in time it became really my main job after fear factor was over and I loved it, but the the traveling was brutal. You'd go to Australia. You come back from Australia Now you go to Dallas. You're going to Dallas. You go to New York. It's like Oh, yeah, I was in us first time I went to Australia with the UFC Yeah, it was a 56 hour round trip and I was on the ground for 30 hours. I feel like you're on drugs It's feeling like like someone gave me a drug. I don't even know where I am. Yeah, I loved it though I love being there. I'm saying yeah, what a crazy country you guys are on the other side of a planet and you're all cool and the food's great Yeah, and I got all the I got all the gigs that most people didn't want to do Like I was I was being sent to all of the farthest reaches You know, I mean like I did I mean Singapore. I loved Japan. I love yeah, you know going out to Australia to do those events I did a lot of the Russian events, you know, I was even back at one time in case Bruce Buffet didn't make it I was gonna be the really see as well. Yeah. Oh wow. That's crazy. That's a hard job Absolutely that guy set the bar right he almost dies every event Really we were we're looking at him like one day is gonna be loud cuz he you know Bruce has got to be like 70 years old now Right yeah, it's like one day that motherfucker's gonna stroke out in the middle Fuckin pop Blood starts leaking that's it if you ask Bruce. That's the way we like to go. Yeah, that's I want to go One of my crazies like sweet shoes on I remember I remember coming down a Slide and like a metal slide from the Great Wall of China With Bruce buffering in front of me and you're by a favor behind me and we're going down on these like rugs on the way down from Just weird experiences that you have on the road with oh wow Yeah, it was good. I've always always loved Bruce. Yeah, he's great You know that's another thing as well is like and you'll remember this from but you know back when I made by debut Like I would get into it with Bruce like I'd be like calling Bruce on and He always she loved him. I loved it because it was just the idea of of hearing Bruce buffers say my name was just wild to me The yep Oh Hardy, I'll get goosebumps. We always talk about like whether or not it's a Jinks to fist bump buffer You know like me and Anna we're talking about it, but I was like no could be fist bump them every time so it can't be a jinx Good to get you look for jinxes You look for things that are a bad omen or a bad sign, you know Yeah, weirdly superstitious on we like to like to hang stuff on things that on our Responsibilities in that weird it is especially special with fighters fighters are super superstitious They get real weird about the the things they do their rituals before fights what they what they eat where they like What they wear yeah? Yeah, and like some of the things that do like I mean like Ben Henderson with the toothpick Like crazy. Yeah. I was interviewing him post-fire my job toothpick in your mouth And he got in trouble for that. Yeah dangerous though Especially if you know you get knocked out and that toothpick's going down your throat. I just didn't understand why you did Like always it's like a bit of a bit of a safety blanket almost it's like a familiarity that it's there. It's the weirdest one of all time Yeah toothpick in your mouth. Yeah. Okay. Yeah very strange. I like a toothpick, but not during a fight. I did still add it Yeah, crazy. It's got a fight coming up in Brussels Wow, it's a rough fight as well. How old is he now? 44 Yeah Fight in a kid called Patrick Haberora Good Belgian fighter. Mmm. Yeah, it's interesting. I mean, you know, you got a former champ with all that experience Oh, yeah, I mean he's still in great shape. Yeah, he's still can compete at a high level It's just wow these guys when they're they're competing for that long. It's so nuts Yeah, you know what I what I've and I suggested as well as a thousand other things that I've suggested to the PFL But a masters division Mm-hmm, right, you know the likes of cowboy and Tony Ferguson Uh-huh. You know the guys that you you want to keep fighting that you don't want to see and just get smashed by a chair Sure, you know, sure I would love to see some of those fairly matched fights You know like like when we had it was Nate Diaz against Chime of wasn't it and then then Chime I was taking out the fight and Tony Ferguson was put in the place and Nate won the fight That to me was the perfect matchup like the Chime of one would have made me feel really uncomfortable. Yes Yeah, I would love to see a master's division especially now we could accommodate it with some of the older fighters around Yeah, most of them they just kind of bounce over on to you know being a colore Whatever else is out there as options Whereas like there's still got so much to offer and if the fights are fairly matched I think we're getting more ready real good ones. Yeah, that it is a problem when you see those old Veterans that still have something to offer and then you see them getting thrown in there with some 27 year-old assassin And you know like good Lord don't do this. I mean what 43 I'd fight someone this weekend Like I love it still in me, but I know I'm physically like I mean Even if I was my athletic peak I won't be competing with these guys now. They're terrifying, but you know like To know that I'm getting into a fight with someone that's as game as me right But has also had the experience as well as the wear and tear you know what I mean like yeah Evenly matched yeah, like look at Pac-Yow's about to fight Mayweather. Yeah, make sense. Yeah, right You know like fighting Terrence Crawford you be like Don't do that exactly. Yeah, I don't want to say you get stretched You know what I mean? But like you guys are bolting your late 40s like okay. Yeah, all right. I'll pay for that Yeah, it's as long as they're not gone, you know There's some guys that they get to a certain point and like why Why is their family letting them compete? Why isn't anybody stepped in? Doesn't anybody recognize their skills are gone? Doesn't anybody recognize they get knocked out way too easily now? There's a bunch of fighters like that that I just really wish would not be doing it anymore. Yeah And the thing is it's sad about it as well is and this is where I feel like the like the the community around MMA has probably changed in the last decade or two is Like the old the veteran fighters were just carrying such high regard Whereas now you're the highlight of somebody else's the start of somebody else's career, right and A lot of the fans I mean certainly what I see online they're very dismissive of fighters that at one point were great And they're now not quite where they used to be and you know the start throwing around words like wash and stuff Oh, yeah, you got you got a respect where these guys came from like no one lives forever No one is that they're athletic athletic peak forever But we also should still be celebrating what people have achieved, you know and I feel like that's something that we're not We don't get as much in the sport And that's partly because the young fighters get matched with the veterans to you know like You know bring Ken Shamrock back out of retirement and dust him off for rich Franklin to fight him because no one knew who rich Was and he was so close to a title shot. Do you know what I mean? Like that was one of those moments where I'm like That's kind of a I don't like that fight, you know I mean because because I can see what's being done there, right and I mean not that Chima have needed it but the boost that he would have got from smashing the hell out of nadias You know that that was kind of part of the benefit of throwing Nate into that fight, you know And that they're there they're the fights that I would like to not see anymore because I think we get more fights out of some of these guys towards the end of their career where they Maybe their athleticism is not where it was but their knowledge is Way ahead of where it used to be right we go back, you know We were talking about about the old days and when we first getting into it and when MMA first became a thing Like me as a 17 year old sitting I wheeled the TV in with the VHS and I put the tape in and I watch USU 2 and 3 And I had this feeling of I'm like now I'm questioning myself and everything that everything about me as a martial artist I have to do this and if I don't do this I'm gonna be questioning myself my whole life But at the same time I'm looking at this going well I know one martial art really well take wonder and I know Probably four or five other martial arts. All right, you know Wing Chun I'd done some traditional Jiu Jitsu at boxed quite a lot, you know what I mean So like I had a decent handle but I also have a library of martial arts books And I would sit in front of that that library and think to myself like how am I gonna consume all of this information And it wasn't like okay, I need this bit of information and this and it wasn't a case of absorbing what is useful and rejecting What's useless I had to absorb everything in order to go through that shedding process And it just felt so overwhelming Like I remember going into fights feeding like I have no idea how this is gonna play out Like I don't I don't know half of this guy's skill set just purely because I'm at the time to learn all of this stuff And it's like the more you pick at it the more it, you know It's like it's like you're hitting a rock and all of a sudden it falls in and it's a massive cave inside and it's just full of information And I'm like how am I gonna consume all of this knowledge? You know, I mean it was I remember feeding very very overwhelmed by all and and It that fed into a lot of anxiety during fight week which was you know something that everybody always manages but if I Look back that was where my anxiety came from it was the it was the over analysis of the sport and the feeding like I Was never gonna be able to learn all of this information where is now in actuality I feel very very opposite I feel like now if I was going back my training would be very very focused and very very streamlined But that's because I've had years and years of experience of watching the sport and know what works and what doesn't and Pulling things apart, you know what I mean. So it was almost like and I said this I've said this to a lot of young fighters If I if I in my career at one point could have stopped and taken six months out or a year out Just to be a student and just to learn and absorb that would have been a real benefit for me When I stopped fighting and I was doing commentary and work doing inside the octagon and stuff Like my knowledge was growing on a daily basis. I felt it and I just I thought to myself man I could have done this when I was in my career But I didn't because I was I was partly scared of the of the the over analysis of it You know and partly partly concerned that I was gonna show myself so much that I didn't know that I was just gonna feel like it Was endless. It was a bottomless pit of knowledge, right? You know Whereas when I started doing inside the octagon and I was I was watching fights in chronological order from the beginnings of people's careers all the way through And then I was going back and I was watching in pre-limbs of fights that I wouldn't have watched in my career because I only want to watch this guy and this guy because I Don't want all of this Sometimes I watch somebody and feel like I'm getting worse when I'm watching them. You know what I mean? So I'd be very very specific about who I would watch Whereas in actuality if you watch the whole card start to finish The fight IQ increases generally as the card goes on so the guys at the top make far less mistakes and they're the guys that I'm watching So I'm watching people that are you know way closer to flawless than I am But if I watch the prelims I can see the same people the same mistakes that people are making they're just making them far more regularly on the prelims So it was almost like watching the prelims was uncovering problems and and bad decisions much quicker than it was when I was watching the few specific guys that I was trying to learn from So there was a real benefit and just absorbing all of it and then the next stage was and it was specifically Robby Lawler against Roy Mcdonald It was the first time I realized I was watching a fight without putting myself in the cage and And it was it was like an epiphany. I was like I'm just watching these two guys as a fan. I'm not comparing Robby Lawler to me I'm going with Donald to me. I'm my process of preparing for an opponent was very similar to what I would do for an analysis I would that get into him. I would watch it as much as I could of that person But then I would go back and watch my fights that I knew were available to them So I'm now watching my fights with their skill setting mind Right, so I'm now I'm I'm almost I'm almost pretending to be that person To watch me and go, okay, well I can do this to him and I can do this to him But there's always a bit of ego involved there So like say with Carlos Condit an incredible fighter Right, he's greater everything, but he's not be able to take me down and there's no way in hell He's gonna be able to knock me out You know, Mohawk flapping in the wind, you know, and it was like and that was that was my ego getting in the way Right, because if I was looking at Carlos Condit versus Robby Lawler or Carlos Condit versus GSP I would have respected his counter punching Right, but my ego was a block in that scenario So by watching two fighters and being able to remove myself entirely I just saw things differently and it took my my shit out of it took my drama out of the way That's interesting you you really can get in the way And it really makes you make terrible decisions like how many people have taken fights they shouldn't have taken Just because there ego there you go just gave him a distorted perception Absolutely, there's this guy that was training with us. It was really good at Jiu Jitsu and he had no striking and he was gonna take an MMA fight and I remember saying to him You you have to understand that like what you can do to people on the ground Right, you could you could do make a person feel helpless, right? Someone could do that to you standing up and it's waist carrier It's waist carrier like you have no idea like you have no you think it's this Just weird done in Kruger effect, right? Like you think you're really good So you think you're good at that like you've this distorted You don't know anything about striking. Yeah, like his striking was like Papap like rudimentary like nothing. I'm like someone's gonna set you up and boom Right and head kick you they're gonna you got TKO'd he got beat up badly No, I think it really fucked him up too early. Yeah Yeah, it's almost like you pull the curtain back and you realize there's a hole of the world behind the curtain that you Not anticipated was there, but the scariest world to not be good at it They're striking or absolutely. That's the scariest world and I've tried to quantify this myself because it because It is an interesting thing because often I find myself Explaining the nuances of faints and movements that are opening doors for other things to land I mean I'd assign you as a master at this conama Greg. I was a master at this Yes, you know and and the way that they deliver their techniques this such a They're such an elite level of intelligence to it that it's easy to just think that it's chance What they're doing right like like take color to take a conama Greg cowboy for example, right? And the beauty of inside the octagon is I would download all the angles of the fight I would watch every angle the full fight from the whole whole hole angle so I'd see different things and There's a moment in that fight and this is this is the benefit of of Say conama Gregor say his brand is the left hand right conama Gregor's left hand brand Was a very very powerful weapon for him to take into fight against cowboy because cowboy was so focused on it and there's an angle From from cowboy's back to against the fence and he sees conna close his left hand Straight away cowboy goes left-hand's coming And he moves on to the headkick. It was that it was the threat of the left-hand coming third force cowboy to make that mistake Anderson silver veto a bow for it when he looked at his leg and kicked him in the face Yeah, like the idea of him being able to sell and you look at that fight Vtor's checking the inside low kick while the wide he's got Anderson's toes in his mouth You know what I mean? It's like he was able to sell a technique purely with his eye line purely with a faint and At a stand years another master at it as well and that to me then shows that there are We've got ranges in MMA, but in each one of those ranges this dimensions as well Right these dimensions of understanding like you could be a button-mashing fighter and a lot people have success with button-mashing Right they throw the technique that they worked in the changing room warming up on the pads But then there are people that understand that each one of these techniques and each each thing that they do or Peace that they have in their arsenal is a setup for something else, right? You know, well, that's what's interesting about people that have a real system Yeah, doing bang blood work have you ever trained with him? I haven't but we fought didn't we? So I mean I was a huge fan of him back in the day I remember him TK in somebody in cage King of the cage up against the fence. Oh, yeah, he did that in love with him. Yeah That was thank you pseudo wasn't it. Yeah Great great system of footwork though, isn't it? Oh, he has an amazing system and his system is like he has a giant notebook filled with like techniques where everything his system is like very Well thought out and it's really interesting because he didn't fight the way he teaches now That's what's really interesting like TJ Dilla Shaw is probably his greatest student and TJ Completely different than Dwayne he constantly switched dances constantly. He was like he was giving you so many looks and You know It's it's wild watching when you know you watch like Dwayne style Versus what he would teach because it was just like oh if I had only known this while I was fighting If I only known this while I was coming up if I only known this early early on in my career Yeah, and this is where I don't think we get enough people crossing over to coaching afterwards like whenever I see former fighter in the corner Mike Brown Robbie Lola whoever it is Like I'm filled with confidence that the sport is moving on because they're gonna pass on Information that they've taken on from somebody else and refined, you know like might take one of those YouTube told me when I was a kid If you're not better than me at my age. I've failed as a teacher and like and he always McRoleys name is he always Gave me everything there was never any restriction because you wanted to see what I would do with it and where I would take it because then same with Eddie Bravo Who's right we were just chatting about it back stage? Remember Sean Bollinger sure you used to be able to heal hook himself and he created the double bag on there's a Few different things, but I remember being on the mats and watching Eddie Bravo Listen to one of his 16 17-year-old students to see what he could learn from him That's that's such an unusual thing in a lot of martial arts schools is the teacher being a student right and That's something that always stood out to me about particular people Like I would never want to train a fighter and hold anything back from them because I always want to be just a little bit better You know, I want to I want to give you everything throw everything I've got on the table and then see what you pick up see what you're run with and see what you can teach me from it Yeah, I know make you better too And that's the thing But you have to have An honest ego. Yes, you have to be able to really say okay, this is how good I am I can't pretend I'm better than I am for these people This is how good I am and you have to be able to show it. Yeah, and that's one of the beautiful things about you jits It was like you have to roll like give your a teacher you're rolling with people But if any gets caught in something you'll tell people yeah, I'll show you show me what you did And all everybody look what he did and he'll bring people around he's like he's like he'll let you know I'm just a human being I just happen to be really good at this and Even if I'm really good at this there's openings There's holes there's things that I don't know and this is a constantly changing and evolving game Where people are bringing in new things and some of these new things You know you analyze it and you go well Here's a simple way to stop this and as soon as someone knows this that that submission is gone And so then you kill it and you put it aside. Well, we tried that one No, you analyze it and you go, well, here's a simple way to stop this. And as soon as someone knows this, that, that submission's gone. And so then you kill it and you put it aside. Well, we tried that one. It didn't work. Sometimes you like, try to stop this. And you're like, I don't know. I think that's legit. And then guys would get down. They'll go, what if you do this? What if you do that? And you'll, you'll have classes. Well, I've like 15 guys come up with different solutions to these problems. And say, okay, get him in it and put him in it. All right. Now, how do you finish it and you grab here? Okay. What would you do here? And then like you have guys like break things down and that's, that honest approach. Someone told me that, remember when, um, hoist gracey tap Dan Severn with a triangle? Mm-hmm. They were training at one of the gracey schools, um, friend of mine. And he saw that and he said, can you show us that? He said, you're not ready for that yet. I can't show you that. And he's like, what the fuck are you talking about? Like the cat, it's, it's a technique. Like show me the technique. Like he just did it and he's like, no, we're not going to, like they were holding back. Yeah. So in the early days, there was a lot of holding back. You know, this is like, what was that? What year was that? That had to be like 94 or something. So that's like that. Right. But then, you know, but then like everyone's reputation as a coach back in those days couldn't really be questioned too much. You know what I mean? Right. Because there was no way of improving it. Oh, I just, I can't, it's too deadly. Right. You know what I mean? Whereas, you know, like the people that and those, those people stand out in my mind, you know, Eddie was one of those people we stood out in my mind because, because of how he approached the sessions, he was always a student even when he was the teacher. Yeah. And the other thing as well, that, you know, everybody wanted to name something in the 10th planet system. Right. So everyone was trying to create something and make it stick. So it like, it created this really like, it was a, it was a, a thriving environment to be in, I loved being at legends back in the day at the end. And I, you know, obviously, bomb squad as well before that. Yeah, what year did you start training with us? It was legends. It was after the bomb squad had closed. I went back to the bomb squad. Well, what was the bomb squad to train with Paolo Tolta? Of blood sport fame. Yeah. But, yeah, legends, it was, and it just opened when I arrived at it. So what year was that? 2005? Six. Uh, probably 2006. Yeah. Yeah. Because before that I've been training for 20 years ago, they're crazy. I know. Two decades on that. That's when we met 20 fucking years ago. Yeah. And a lot's changed. Not. Yeah. It's not. It's how time just fucking waits for no one. I was, I was just saying to the guys, the guys here, like, it's funny. Like the Joe Rogan experience, if you'd have asked me what the Joe Rogan experience was 20 years ago, it was getting crushed inside control. That was my experience of Joe Rogan being on the match during the class and watching you smash the bag with your back kick and then stepping onto the mats and just, and you had, you almost had like the opposite game to most of the guys on the mat. Because all the 10th planet guys were like pulling you into half guard or into guard and trying to wrap you up. Whereas you were very much a top game player. Yeah. That's at least how it felt to me. It was like you were the different role on the mat to everybody else. Well, I got obsessed with head and arm chokes. Yeah. You know, felt it. You know, I, it fucked my neck up, I think. I wonder if I'm having bulging disc in my neck. It was either that or not tapping the guillotine. But I, I got a head and arm chide to develop it where it was like, if I locked it on, you were pretty much done. You know, and when I started tapping like brown belts and higher level guys of that, and then I just really concentrated on it. And it's one of those things where it's like, you know how it is, just like with a kick, like everyone has strong legs, you know, you can lift weights or your legs, but like how come some people can kick harder than other people? Well, the, the coordination, the technique, the refinement of it where it just, and there's something like that in a squeeze like Marcelo, like Marcelo would get your back and his rear naked choke. Marcelo Garcia was just like a master. It's not a big, strong guy. Like, so what is it? And so I, that was like my number one go to was the head and arm choke. If I could get that shit, I was pretty sure I could lock it up. So I just developed this style of just crushing where I would just have my whole body with just like a, like a pit ball. Yeah. Yeah. It is, but that's interesting. The difference between striking and grappling and going back to what we're talking about a minute ago, like there's something mechanical about grappling. Right. If you pull on somebody's head, the head's going to come down or they're going to force back and the head's going to go back. And there's a, there's a, a cause and reaction in grappling almost all the time that even a person that doesn't fight can see the basics of. Yes. Where if I pick one leg up and I throw you around, you're going to lose your balance, right? Even something as simple as that. But with striking, there's so many, so many things that happen with striking. We're no one touches anybody. Right. Especially when you've gotten, then this is where the dimensions come in. You know, you've got the button mashes at the bottom. You've got the guys that have refined their button, mashing skillsets and now they've got two or three combos that work well for them or they've got a particular technique that they refine to a point where they can deliver it in 10 different ways. But then you've got people that understand that each one of their weapons, is a different thing at a different time and so is a different purpose at a different time. You know, like with a jab, for example, everybody in their game has got a jab. But if you strip that jab down into its core components and you go, you know, you look at like a, like a secondary identifier, right, of that technique, they're going to be differences. Right. If I, if I throw my right hand straight and I throw it over your jab or throw it when I split your cross, that to me is three different techniques. Yes. Right. It's the same, the same weapon that you use in, but the delivery systems different, right. But then on top of that complexity, you've got all of the, the, the, the, the, the damage that you can inflict that draws responses to people, right. And like the calf kick, now you can faint the calf kick and get someone to pick their leg up and like that's a very, very basic example. Or when someone, you know, been hit with a body shot, you've faint a body shot and their heads almost always open. There are, there are certain things, I mean, head shot dead is a good, another good example. Yeah. Often do you see someone throw a punch, followed by a kick and, and not the reponed. Just group was used to teach that. Is that right? Yeah. He taught me that. That was, that was this thing. He really liked the, the shield, the vision with a punch. Okay. And have the kick come behind it. See that's, that's, that's, that's, that's one delivery mechanism of one particular technique. Mm hmm. Right. And there are lots and lots of those. Lots of, lots of them. But that's where it find, I find it really interesting is and how, how, I, I sat one day and I thought to myself, I'm going to, I'm going to now down the jab. I'm going to start with that because I, I have intended on writing a book or to about this at some point. And I started with the jab and I got to like 20,000 words. And I thought to myself, no one's going to read this shit. Like, I'm going to, I'm going to sell one copy and it's going to myself so I can criticize it. So you know what I mean? So it's like, well, you've always been a very thorough guy in the way you analyze things, which makes you a perfect candidate for someone who's a commentator because you, you really have a very complex understanding of the mechanics of movement. You're going to have all the different things that are happening. You're not just like, you know, I always hit them hard. Like you, you're looking at all the different layers and you're, you analyze things on multi levels, which I always find fascinating. Like you have a great commentary style. It's really excellent. You're absolutely one of the best out there. That means a lot to me. Thank you. Yeah. You're great. Unfortunately, you know, so I'm a bit of the tourism you see. So it's like, I see the patterns. That's a good thing. Yeah. I'm touching the Tism is good. Yeah. Oh my God. Yeah. I don't think I have that. No. I don't know. When you had ADHD, I was going to say, yeah, I might not. That's ADHD. My mom's, my mom's Tism for sure. You know, the main way. Yeah. I don't have the Tism. I have this weird ability to lock in on things where the world goes away. And I don't need food. Yeah. I can just like do something for like 12 hours in a row. 100%. Yeah. I forget to eat all the time. Yeah. In fact, Tom Hardy is just an answer that he's autistic. He's just collaborated with a brand and the, the create a whole line of, you know, no eye contact. How convenient. Yeah. How convenient. He's autistic. Come on. You know, it was really interesting. It's really interesting. You're not really interested in this. Unless you're coding and you're sleep shut the fuck up. You know, it was really interesting. I have a friend called Scrubius Pip. He's a rapper in the, in the, in the, in the scrubius. Yeah. So he was in, he was in taboo with Tom Hardy. And he told me a story when they were driving from LA to Vegas and Scrubius Pip, his, his record labels called speech development records. He has a stammer. Um, he has a speech impediment. And on this drive between LA and Vegas, he's driving Tom Hardy's in the passenger seat and Tom started to mimic his stammer. But apologize for it. He's like, I can't, can't help it. Like he's like absorbing parts of his character. So why are you still doing that? Very similar to like it happened to his, with Johnny Depp and Bill Murray when they played Hunter Thompson, right? Like, like you, like you watched Jack Sparrow and Jack Sparrow's got a Hunter Thompson kind of move to him. And even Johnny Depp said himself, he'd done, he was ever the same after he played Hunter Thompson in Fair and Low then. Well, it was such a giant, 100 Thompson fan. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's interesting about like, like certainly method actors, people that, that can play a role to like Jim Carey is another good example. Christian Bale, right? Daniel Day Lewis on my fingers, maybe the best. Like their ability to up to like almost like Shang Tung out of a mortal combat, they can absorb a bit of the person's character. Yeah. And then kind of become that character. Like I met Tom a couple of times in, at Henzo's in New York. And he's a, I mean, he's a, he's a lovely guy, but he's like kind of hunched over no eye contact and you know. Oh, yeah. Well, I think a little bit of that is famous. Well, I think so. There's a little bit of fame that just weirds you out. Like if I go places, I try not to make eye contact sometimes. Yeah. Just too odd. I just like, hi, you know, like you, you might think I'm artistic, but I'm just fucking weirding it out. Like too many people. I totally get that. You know, one of my favorite shows that you ever did was with Henry Rollins, the first one. And he said something that always stuck in my mind. He said, I'm very good being the party. I'm not very good being at the party. Yeah. Stuck in my mind. I feel like that all the time. But I'm, I go the opposite way. I, I realized recently I, I hold too much eye contact. I, and I find it exhausting. I was walking through the park. The next to the hotel last night. And I'm, I'm like having a conversation in my head. Like stop it looking at people, stop looking people in the eye. Stop making eye contact. I don't all the time. I like looking, but I'm even doing it now. Like we're talking. I'm kind of locked into you. And I, even in your conversation, you, you like have a look away. I, I struggle to do that. I'm actually trying to come have to do some times. I have to sometimes if I'm thinking of an idea. Yeah, I look away. My wife said that I wonder if that's autism. Because it's just like one of my daughters has my recall, my ability to like, she'll talk about like, you know, whatever it is. Like she, she can rattle off like information about the Titanic. Like it's, it's, she's like, you have your fucking dad's brain. Like that's nuts. But I do, when I do it, I look away sometimes. I look up like I'm talking about things. But I really want to be clear about what I'm saying. I look up. And it's because I want to, I think it's because I want to take out the element of eye to eye and communicating with someone, looking away while thinking, known as gaze aversion, common cognitive behavior that helps people process information by reducing external strategies. Yeah. That's what I'm doing. But looking at an empty space or upward, the brain shifts from environmental input to internal cognitive tasks, such as memory, retrieval or complex. Thinking. Yeah. That's what I do. I don't even, I didn't know it was a similar like when people turned on the radio when you're trying to find where you're going. Oh, yeah. You have to like flock you, whatever it is. Right. Still see, but you have to like, you know, or someone's yapping at you where you're trying to figure out where you're going. And they're telling you, and I tell her and they're like, we shut the fuck up. I don't know where I am. Yeah. We have to figure out where we're going. You know, I find myself doing it when I'm walking through airports when I'm traveling. I've got my wife with me Veronica. Like I notice I, I constantly don't make eye contact with her when we're traveling. And I don't know why that is. It's like I feel a little bit like there's enough to be dealing with right now. Yeah. And I open a conversation with you by looking at you. That's another layer of yes. Let me just deal with the airport. Yes. But you know, people don't think about that. But when you're involved in multiple tasks at the same time, you know, you're taking away your ability to concentrate and do a great job at any one of those things. If there's multiple things going on at the same time, that's why like I used to do interviews in my car. And I stopped doing them because I sound like a moron. And I realized this because I'm thinking about cars. Right. I'm going 60 miles an hour. This is a car to the left. It's a car to the right. It's a car in front of me. Car behind this guy. This fucking asshole. Oh, he's a guy in a motorcycle. He's going to get killed. Look at him zipping in between the lights. And so I'm thinking all these different things. And then I'm trying to explain different stuff. I thought it would be a great way to multitask. Let me do this fucking stupid interview that I don't want to do anyway. And let me do it while I'm on the phone. It'll be kind of fun. But me, just sounded like a moron because like I can't articulate well. Because I'm thinking about too many different things simultaneously. Well, you're already multitasking. Yeah. Well, that's why I like the sensory deprivation tanks. Yes. There's nothing. There's no tasks. Is that still regular thing for you? I got it right here. Have you really? Yeah. You got it right here. I've only done it a couple of times. But I'll find it for you. Well, you live in these days. I'm in the UK. I'm writing the Midlands in the UK. But I mean, I'm getting a little cookie over there in it. Yes. Not want to be able for it. Like you up for a thought crime. I know, right? I know. For real. It's like I'm conscious and cautious all the time. I feel right now like I'm kind of holding my tongue on a lot of things. Just purely because I kind of, I know that when I, when I start talking, I'm just, you know, because that's how I am, you know, I, I'm very opinionated. Unfortunately, and that's good thing. Well, if I decide to start talking, then I won't, I won't shut up. And I'm not, I'm not open that floodgate yet. But I do feel like it's coming. But I also feel like I need to, I need to feel like I need to prepare for it a little bit. You know what I mean? Like there's a bunch of books I need to consume before I'm, I mean, the right place where I can open up and fully express yourself. I'm certain. Yeah. Yeah. It's just where it's going right now is not in a good direction. It's going, it's tightening down on people's ability to express themselves. Yeah. And you got so many issues. It's happening everywhere though, isn't it? I mean, even like, you know, like, I mean, as a, as a comedian, you know, freedom of speech is so important to you and to your industry, you know what I mean? And I feel like that's changed a lot. You know, across across the world is the same in Europe as well in a lot of places. I think in America and comedy, it was closing down. And then people realize we can't have this and it's open right back up. Right. Okay. You know, there was a bunch of people that were trying to, um, conflate jokes with your actual opinions. Yeah. And I talked about on stage one. So I'm like, you know, Bob Marley didn't really shoot the sheriff. You know, just when Quentin Tarantino's film, no, he's dying. Okay. Yeah. This is entertainment. And you say things that you don't really believe because it's an outrageous thing to say because it's funny. And there's this understanding of that as an audience member. You're supposed to be able to accept that. But then you have these cuts out there in the world that are just looking to find words that someone said and ascribe them as if they, you know, put it, put it down on paper as if this is a statement. Like this is what this person actually thinks. It believes like no, that's not what we're fucking around. We're talking shit. Like you can't pretend. Yeah. And then take a small clip. I'm pretty completely out of context. Take talk or all the time. Yeah. All the time about all kinds of things. People, which is part of the game. You know, people love to do that. It's like, it's fine. So it's okay. You know, what you, it's fine for TikTok minded people. The real problem is people that don't know you and don't understand you and then they get an impression of you based off of that. This is their first introduction to you and it's based off, well, the fuck that guy. But, you know, that's just part of the game. Yeah. It's going to happen. I think comedians in satire is one of the last lines of defense against tyranny. I really do. Like I watch prime minister's questions every Wednesday and I listen to just the nonsense that comes out of it. And we've got Kia, stammer and chemi, bade and not just going at each other over just nonsense. It's it's not nothing real. Not no real. No real quality of conversation is coming out of that. But what I feel like is if we had a panel of comedians sitting in the gallery somewhere, you know, you've got a Robert Mitchell and Ricky Gervais and James A. Castor and a few others just sitting there just going, well, that sounds like nonsense. And then poke in fun at it and make it a joke out of it. It brings a reality to things that I don't think I think we're lacking in a lot of ways. Well, the Dakota had that in their tribes. They had a thing called the Hayoka, which they call the sacred clown. And the Hayoka would be able to make fun of everything. And as soon as you couldn't make fun of something, you knew it was bullshit. So it's like you couldn't make fun of the chief's wife or you couldn't make fun of, you know, someone, some warrior couldn't make fun of something. As soon as you couldn't make fun of something like, hey, why is it defensive? How can I make fun of that? That's interesting. Yeah. What's it called? It had to actually be funny. Hayoka. Hayoka. It had to actually be funny, of course, or you'd probably get killed. That's your new move. That's your new move, Joey. You need to sell my hocha for the world. Well, I think that's what comedy is in many ways. It's a test. You test things. It doesn't mean it always works. And it doesn't mean that jokes are always funny. And it doesn't mean that sometimes people don't overreach. You know, Patrese O'Neill had a great statement about that, where he was talking about something that happened on the Opian Anthony show. And he was on Fox News and they were criticizing it and he was saying, you got to understand that all jokes come from the same place. They all come from the place of tried to be funny. And some of them, you might find offensive and some of them you might laugh at really hard, but it's the mindset, the place that it's coming from is all the same. And I was like, that's so wise. Because that's really the best way to describe it. Because that's really what everyone's trying to do. They're just trying to make people laugh. It's just sometimes it doesn't come outright or sometimes it's a miss. Like, especially if it's an ad lib, like at any moment in time, you generally don't know what the next word out of your mouth is going to be like right now. Right? I don't know. I don't know. I'm just pretty bald. And sometimes you'll say something really hilarious. And sometimes you say something like, cut that out, Jamie. You know, it's like, you try swinging this. You know, you don't know. And people want to take these things that you're free-balling with and just trying to make laughs and call them a statement and think of that as like this well thought out, you know, like you sat down, you wrote this out, you went over it with a fine tooth comb. This is my press release. Like that's not what comedy is. It's jokes. You're just fucking around. And if you can't take a joke, you're probably annoying. Yeah. You really shouldn't be in any position to regulate discourse because you're not a fun person, right? You're a person that's looking to take things very seriously. Yeah. We know a lot of people like that. They're bad faith actors and, you know, they play gotcha. You just said this, like you really mean that. So tell your position on that. Like, oh, fuck off. Yeah. Like you're not, I'm not interested in engaging with you because you're not real. You know, like this is not a real. You're playing a stupid game. I'm playing a game of where two human beings communicating with each other. And we're going to overstep sometimes. We're going to slip up. We're going to, and every now and then you're going to nail it, knock it out of the park. And even if I don't like you, if you fucking make me laugh, I'll clap. Yeah. You know, it's kind of similar trash token, isn't it? You're amazing. And if somebody, like one of the funniest lines ever was, and I remember Connor, as he was saying, it was laughing at himself. And it was the back and forth with Chad Mendez. And he was Chad was saying, you can't wrestle and Connor, he was on a live feed at BT Sports Studio. And I remember it so clearly, because he was, like, as he was saying it, he was finding it funny in himself. He was like, I wrestle my balls on your forehead. It was just that he's laughing at everybody in the room's laughing. Even Chad Mendez is laughing. You will be. But then like funny dude, how about the Jeremy Stevens one? Who the fuck is that guy? And that's become a part of MMA law, right? It's amazing how he's influenced. Oh, he's, he was the master shit talker. And also the master at emotional warfare. Yes. Like you like the Jose Aldo fight, I remember being there for that fight going, although is out of sorts. Yes. His home, he looked fucked up. His body looks smooth. He didn't look, he didn't look like he wanted to be there. And he just threw himself at Connor and got cracked. Wasn't crazy. He was so emotionally torn. And like the moment was so big. And then Connor across the other side looks so relaxed and loose. Because he knew he had won the emotional warfare. The emotional warfare was won. And that is a giant factor in fights, whether or not someone bites on emotional warfare. Yeah. And I think that's a giant factor this weekend. I watched your war room. By the way, I love your YouTube show. It's really excellent. Thank you. And this fight this weekend is a lot of emotional warfare. Right. It's trickling to say it's a wild shit about Homestead. You would say you shoot him. He calls him a goat fucker. I mean, but it's interesting to me that it doesn't seem like Homestead is biting on any other. He's like this guy. He said this thing, but he doesn't believe it. Yeah. And like, whoa. Like he's not, he doesn't seem upset about it. It doesn't seem like its under his skin. He's like this guy says he wants war, but they don't think he wants war. He'd be dead. That's how it should be. I mean, stickin' would be the same. I don't think you could say anything to Strickland that would offend him. He's just, he'll laugh. Yeah, exactly. He'll laugh. So like when I had that fight against Marcus Davis coming up, like I was surprised at how angry he got at me. Like in the countdown show, I'm like, I'm laughing. I'm like, I literally can't believe he's this head up and wound up about it. You know? And like, you go back to the Connor thing. The, you remember the press conference where he stole out, oh, it was built. The last one they did in the past. Yes. Yeah. So I was behind the stage for that one to start with when they were both being kept separate and Dana was there. And, and then when they went on stage, I was on Connor's side of the stage at the bottom of the stairs. And the, the anger just emanates in off Aldo the whole day was exhausted. and for me just to be around. And then after the, the press conference where Connor had taken his belt, as soon as they'd circle back and they were behind the thing again, Aldo was like beside himself angry. And as soon as I saw that, I'm like, wow, that is, that's, that's like a level of witchcraft that you see in like the fainting of the striking. And when you can start to pull somebody's emotions out like that, yeah. And like for me, I think, I think fighters should be completely impenetrable. Like no one should be able to say anything to a fighter to upset them. I just, it's, it's an immediate weakness that you throw in the table for someone to get their teeth into. Well, it's one of the things that I really appreciate about Pereira, his stoicism. He's always just stoic. You could talk all that mad shit about him, you know? And like the uncle of the rematch with uncle, I have, like uncle, I have had talked so much shit after that first fight. Yeah. You know, and then when he blasted him out in the first round, then he went like this. Beautiful. You know, the same thing with Jamal Hill. Yeah. You know, I mean, he, he's very stoic. But afterwards his celebration is even like, look, look, it's so cool. I like the fact that his, his coldness is a part of his brand. Oh, yeah. You know, yeah. He's, he's very cold. That's stare down. Yeah. Like him and Yuri Projoska, it's so disturbing that Yuri thought he was using spiritual warfare. Like Yuri accused him of using sorcery. He's like, no magic this time. Yeah. You're so crazy. Such a crazy request. Yeah. Like do not evoke spirits. I had someone trying to get a witch doctor on me and Brazil once really. I thought I was casted spells. Yeah. It's got a witch doctor. casting spells is like, because if you believe it at work, right, if you really, but that's why Voodoo works, right? Because if you believe in Voodoo, it will fuck you up. Someone says, I'll curse you. You're like, Oh, no, I'm fucking cursed shit. If you really believe that, it will work. Yeah. If you can, if you can make someone afraid of something, your sensitive to something, you know, and, and, you know, and I, I was always a big fan of Marcus Davis and I knew how dangerous he was in the division, but I also knew that if I poked him enough in the right direction, I would get a particular version of him that suited me. Right. And there were two versions of Marcus, right? There was the Marcus that showed up and he was like, stacked, look like the Hulk and they're like, okay, he's going to grapple. Although it was the Marcus that was a little bit slender and he just looked different and that version of Marcus Davis was knocking everybody out. Right. That's when he's coming into box. And, and I knew that if I pushed him enough, because it was easier for me to deal with the heavily musled grappler version of Marcus Davis than the Slick South Paul box of version. So my thought was if I can push him to be really, really angry at me, he's not going to want to roll the dice on striking games. He's going to want to edge his bets and try and force the fight into the range that I'm not very good at. So there was a, there was a purpose to it. But as soon as he bit on it, I was like, that was too easy. That was too easy. And like there was a, there was clips of training and he's likely noses bleeding and he just looks. And then that's when I, for the way, and I made the eye hate downhardy t-shirts, because we did a, like a 10 minute countdown show for it. And I was trained at wild card at the time just to try and get inside his head, you know, I'm training a box in gym. I'm, you know, I'm expecting you to be a boxer and I played the game really hard on that fight. And it was just, it was interesting to see how it played out because of what he expected from me and, and the version of him that I got, right? And he was, he was so angry at me that his vision was, his mind was clouded. And even in the, was it the end of the second round, he went back and sat on and he stole and it always stuck in my mind. Mark Delograti in his corner, it, it wasn't advice, it wasn't anything. He said, you want to round away from shutting this kid up. It was all about, about silence, and you're putting me in my place. Interesting. You know, and then, and then funnily enough, after that, the next fight was Mike Swick and for the whole training cap Mike Swick was like, he was waiting for me to start trash talking. So I'm like, I'm not going to do it because he's expecting it. And he'll find it funny. So it's not an have any kind of impact. So I just waited until the press conference and brought him a runner up trophy. And he was like, I'm bringing this to the cage on, on fight night. And I'm going to give it back to you. But you know, but it was, it's interesting to see what you can do. What you can affect people like that and, and make them act out. You know, like the, the count down show the, the very start of it, it's just hilarious. Still in my mind is you've got this whole calendar. It's like dimly lit and Marcus is there. And he's like, you know, when I was a kid, my mom used to say, you can't say you hate this unless you think a little bit about how much you dislike it every day. And then there was a pause and the US didn't know it with the edits in. And he looked down the camera and he went, I hate down Hardy. And then it cut to me and I'm just laughing like a prick. You know, like, and I totally under, I got so much hate mail for that fight. I can't even tell you. I think I still got a folder in my old email account because I saved it all. That it was, I got, I got death threats. I got all kinds of stuff. I've hated me from that fight. But like, as soon as I thought, you know, I'm going to make I hate down Hardy T-shirt, surely to kind of like bring some light to this. I even made one for Marcus and he threw it back at me. It was just like, I wanted a particular version of him. You know, just like, like what Connor did with Aldo, he primed Aldo to run onto that counter left and, and Aldo, a clear mind training. From a blank slate, not having any of that psychological warfare in mind. We never charged like that. It would have been so much more dangerous for Connor. Right. And Connor was always heavy on the front leg and Aldo was one of the best leg kickers ever. You know, he probably would have tried to kick the legs and piece them apart from the outside and find his motions. But Connor was always going to be a problem for Aldo because he's so fast. And he's so explosive and so big. He was so big for 45. He, his weight cut was hell. Watching him weigh in and that was the days where you would actually weigh in. This is before the ceremonial way. And so he would have to make 145 and then stand there and he looked like a dead man. He looked like someone from like fucking walking dead. It was weird. And then he would just rehydrate in the next day. He had to be about 65 when he actually fought. Easy. Easy. I like what they've done with the weight cuts and I like the fact that he's done in the morning and people come rehydrate and stuff. The thing I miss is to see people facing off when they're in that feral dehydrated state. Right. That's the thing I miss because like a lot of the time I'll be looking for reads. You know, there's the picture you kind of looking around. You know what I mean? It's like you want to see that face off of where people are in that state. Like, what's one of my favorite things to do is see the guys head to head. You know, there's the picture you kind of looking around, you know what I mean? It's like you want to see that face off of where people are in that state. Like, what's one of my favorite things to do is see the guys head to head, looking at each other's eyes, because you just, there's a fucking smell. Yeah. There's a feeling in the air. You get a sense, I wear the meta glasses when I'm doing face off now. So you can see, Pierre-Felove made a little logo, Hardy's Hardy Vision. No. And you can see, and sometimes people are like, face to face you. It's palpable. You know, and what I always loved when people were cutting weight is you got a far more genuine version of them than the version that was, I mean, even look at Connor, right? He was ferrule at 145. But 155, he was, he was cut him, but he was on point at 170. He was like, right, feel great. Just a different three different versions of the same person, 10 pounds apart. Yeah. And when I fought Rory Markham, that was Komey in event in my second fight in London, UFC 95, he arrived five week on the Tuesday at 195 to make 171. And I knew that it was going to be a rough weight cut for him. He was a big, massive. And he'd never been the distance. 16 and 40 was knocked everybody out of the foot. And I was, remember when he fought, was it Brody Farber, kicked him in the neck? And like, as he went down, he like crossed his legs on the way down. That was in the palms. And it was just, you know, I just did it. It was brutal. But like, when we were, we did the weigh ins in a theater in London. And obviously we're all on our on weight. We've, I've been on weight since two o'clock, as most people have. We've journeyed into London on the bus. Everyone's still on weight. No one's drinking. And like you walk through the changing rooms in the back. And we're in like an old, like West End theater. And like you can see where people are at, what state they're at, how much they've cut weight. And I remember seeing Rory Markham just sitting there just, he would just look like he was broken already. He was just so drained and exhausted. So my thoughts myself is I'm going to get right in his face as soon as I stepped off the scales. And I wanted him to feel that I wasn't as depleted as he was the day before, because that would then be his memory going into the fight on fight days that he didn't cut as much as me. He didn't feel like shit like I did yesterday. And like as I walked onto the stage, I'm standing on the scales and I'm looking at him. And there's never a photograph of me looking at the crowd and flexing. I'm looking directly at him. And as soon as they read my weight, I went straight her up. I'll pour it on it. And I tried to push him back a step or two. And that was because we were on weight. If that was a morning weigh in and we were doing it later in the day, it wouldn't have had the same kind of impact. He would have already been replenished. He would have felt much better. Yeah. And he went to good point. He would have pushed. That's why I always wore contact lenses as well. I always had the contact lenses on the stage. I just didn't want people to see my eyes. I didn't want them to get a real version of me until fight night. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Emotional warfare. It's real. It's very important. I love it. I mean, I wasn't regular to the fight, you see. So I had to leave it. Look at the guys in my division. I'm a jump fit. I know. Mike Sweet was great. Josh Cosh check a bit of a prick, but great fighter. You know what I mean? Like good guys in my division at the time. And man, I didn't have the wrestling to be competing with a lot of those guys. That's a giant factor. And that's a factor that takes so long to catch up to. Yeah. God, if you can ever, unless you're like a real superior athlete, just a freak athlete, there's just like someone who's got a gymnastics background or something. It's like very explosive. It's so hard to pick up that wrestling later in your career. It's like, that's what's so crazy about Pereira is that he figured out how to just stuff everything. Like from a multiple champion kickbox where you didn't do any grappling at all. Lost his first MMA fight to submission. Really? Couldn't fucking grapple at all. Gets together with Glover Tashara and just figured it out. But I also think with him, it's a freak athlete thing for sure because it's the same reason why he hit so hard. I think he's just weirdly built. But even a freak athlete though, you take him back 10 years and you take Glover Tashara away. And he's not supplied with the information where he can apply that athleticism. And this is where former fighters passing on knowledge like we talked about. I mean, we went bass-rutten, Dwayne Ludwig, TJ Dilla-Shore. Glover Tashara, it's a Alex Pereira. It's probably one of the best relationships because for me, Glover Tashara was he over-achieved in his career based on his age and his athleticism compared to the people in the division. The reason why was because his game was so solid and so sound. I say to young fighters, you need that Glover Tashara base level where you can be semi-conscious, take him big shots, sweep to top position, take someone's back and choke him out. Like he did that consistently. He just dropped and come back from the dead and finish people. So then for us on Miss Six years of his prime, because you couldn't get out of Brazil. Well, you were talking about him constantly before you were signed. I remember that. I remember hearing his name a lot because you were same with Pereira. You were talking about him before the UFC signed him. But like if you'd imagine Glover Tashara, sorry, Alex Pereira walked into an MMA gym in 2005, they would have probably tried to teach him a whole system of Jiu Jitsu. And then he would have had a wrestling coach that would have tried to teach him folk style or freestyle wrestling. Whereas Glover Tashara is like, there's a lot of this shit you don't need brother. Like, first of all, I'm not going to teach him any submissions because you're not really going to need him. But he does know submissions. He's a Jiu Jitsu Blackball. But that's the thing is like, does he know the whole database of Jiu Jitsu? Does he know everything that a normal Blackball would learn? And I'm not discrediting his Blackball. But what I'm saying is his game has been very specifically tailored to be effective in the arena that he's fighting in. That's true. But it's also the relationship that he has with Glover Tzu, where it's a one really elite coach with the world championship level experience concentrating on a very special athlete. Whereas if you're at ATT, you know, you're this fucking Chetchens and fucking Daggetts Dannies. And this is a room full of assassins and his five coaches. And like, I don't know if you'd get that kind of attention there. You know, there's two different schools of thought. You know, there's the school thought that you need to be around those people because that's a shark tank. And that's how you get better. You'd be around all these killers. And then there's another school of thought is like, no, you better off at a very small gym with a small group of people that really concentrate on I'm more inclined to think of the small gym. I think the small gym with elite trainers is a better option than being in a giant. I mean, it's not that ATT doesn't create amazing world champion athletes. It certainly does. But I think if someone's coming up, maybe you're better off with someone like personally, you'd have to find someone like Glover who's really interested in taking the time and really working with you. Yeah. And Glover, and you know, going back to what we're talking about earlier, like, Glovers already gone through the process of learning Jiu Jitsu and absorbing what's useful and rejecting a lot of what's useless. So he's not given Pereira the useless part of Jiu Jitsu for MMA. Right. Right. Now, how much of Jiu Jitsu specifically is applied to MMA? Right. There are so many positions that just changes when you start to use punches. Things become a lot easier when you can start to strike as well because you can force people to do things they don't want to do. Yeah. Right. Yep. So like, I feel like the refinement that Glover Tashira went through to be the great fighter that he was is the reason why Pereira has become so successful because he's been given the pieces that he needs. And I would imagine that, you know, if you rolled with him, he would be a real problem. But I would imagine these games still very direct, like he's not using crackhead control and he's not rolling for a knee bars and that kind of thing. I just, because but neither is hard or gracing. Of course. You know what I mean? But he's also gone through the shedding process, right? Yes. Because I don't think he ever really acquired all the crazy shit. I think if there's a lot of these guys, they're like fundamentals or just like laser focus. Like Hickson. Hickson was always just laser focus fundamentals. In Taro, no gara laser focus fundamentals. Do you think the existence of Valetudo kind of force them to go very specifically to what worked though for no rules contests? Probably, there's probably some of that because obviously Hickson created a competed in Valetudo very early on. So it's like, yeah. Yeah. I mean, a lot of stuff goes out the windows as soon as you punch, right? A lot of stuff. Yeah. But including some heel hooks and things like that. Like there's certain positions where you see guys in Jujitsu tournaments like boy, you find yourself that in a fight. That guy's gonna blast you in the face. Like you're grabbing a hold of someone's leg and your head is right here and you're hooked like there's nothing stopping someone from elbow and you're punching you in the face. It's kind of nuts to even pursue those. But as long as there's no striking, boy, it's very effective. Yeah. See, this I often think that I'm quite, I feel very fortunate that I came into martial arts before MMA. And the reason for that is because the way that I learned martial arts was not for sport. Right. And this was an observation I've had recently where, you know, a fighter just would fall apart if they haven't done other particular person in their corner. Right. My martial arts instructor back in the day from when I was six was teaching me Taekwondo or teaching me martial arts. Should I say for him not to be their corner in me because I'm doing it for self defense. There's no sport context. He's not teaching me techniques that I can use when he's there to coach me through a street fight. Right. He's trying to give me the techniques that I need. So when he's not there, I know what I'm doing. Yeah. Right. Same thing with like spatial awareness. Like often, like, you know, when I was in clubs and I was fighting a lot back in the day, my awareness of fire exits and tables and that kind of stuff. It gives me, it gave me a similar awareness to how I can use the cage against my opponent, which I feel is not necessarily used as much as it could be in MMA these days. Like there are certain fighters, they just don't like how often do you see two fighters up against a fence panel and the whole cage is there. And they're like, they're not, they're not no one's using the pressure that they could be using. Sometimes people circle themselves onto the fence unnecessarily. The idea of being back to against the wall is only if you don't want people attacking you from behind was my, my perspective in a self defense context. So I think the way that I learned martial arts allowed me to kind of see it as a, um, in a more efficient way. Right. Like say, for example, if I'd have learned Jiu Jitsu, I wouldn't have wanted to use Jiu Jitsu for a street fight because a lot of street fights I got in it wasn't one person. Right. So I don't want to be in psych control or choking somebody out while he's following me in the head. Like for me, it was the efficiency of, okay, here's a guy, here's a guy, you know what I mean? Like like how quickly can I get through these people? Yeah. You know, and I feel like that's something that this is maybe where the scoring criteria can be adjusted to, so we keep getting what we want out of the sport because there are stagnant fires. They do slow down. People do start to think, okay, this round, this round, this round, and there's not, there's not an instigation for a conclusion built into their game necessarily. But isn't that also dependent upon matchups? Like sometimes people just cancel each other out skill wise and that's just part of the game. Absolutely, but usually the ones where they cancel each other out skills skill wise are they actually the more interesting fights because whether it's grappling or striking, it keeps moving almost always. It's when there's a dominant skill set on one side and the other person just can't deal with it. Like look at my arms aren't trick us. Exactly. Let me against GSP. Right. I didn't have the skill set to compete with him. Right. But if I'd have been able to wrestle had a forced him to strike, if I'd have been better at Jiu Jitsu, I'd have maybe forced him to strike a bit more. Right. But because there was a way of him to completely take him out my game, there wasn't necessarily an onus to instigate a conclusion to the fight. Right. So almost always when you see one person that is so dominant in wrestling and the other person can't handle it, that's when the fights can sometimes be quite stagnant. Yeah. My argument in those scenarios is, okay, well, yeah, you win in this with wrestling. You're winning it with wrestling. But you're not concluding it. Right. Like you're going to get to the end and the judges are going to go, well, yeah, you, you know, you you control him for more of the fight. Like the harms aren't trick us. Yeah. Yeah. Like this is, I mean, I'd be interested to get your thoughts on this. I think we should stop restoring control in MMA. Right. Control is scored up against the fence. Right. Defense is not scored in MMA. Right. Defense is its own reward. Right. Control in my opinion is its own reward. If you're a grappler and I'm a striker, it's on you to take me into the range that suits you. Right. But if someone's taking someone down and controlling them and working towards a submission, how do you quantify that? You go the way they might not get it, but they're working towards it. So then if you consider top control as you would center control, right, when everything else is even, you go to octagon control as one of the latest scoring criteria, when the strike in and the grappling everything's even, then we move into, okay, well octagon controls weird though because it's like, so octagon control could be you're in the center of the cage and you're pressing the action. But what if you're a counter striker, look, what if your tyrant would leave versus Stephen Wonderboy Thompson and you spend a lot of the time just moving away? Like, remember they fought to a draw, right? Did they fight to a draw in one of their fights? Yeah. But that was also, that was also, I mean, and I don't necessarily want to criticize Tyrion, but I don't really think Tyrion liked fighting. He spent a lot of time wearing his back heel down against the fence with the crowd booing in the championship rounds. I never got the impression that Tyrion liked fighting. He was just good at it. You know, that's interesting. And I don't know why I would think that. I just thought that was the style to beat Wonderboy. I think that's the smart style to beat Wonderboy because he didn't fight that style that Darren Hill. Well, could Darren Hill absolutely. So he said them to come down and got rid of him quick. For sure. But with with Wonderboy, you cannot stand in the middle of the cage and kickbox that guy because he's doing weird shit. He's doing things with his legs. You can't do. Like, and you know, like if you see a guy like Raymond Daniels or MVP, like you can't. You can't. You can't. Yeah. It's a little silly. Yeah. I can. I hear what you say in totally. But like say for example, in the Damian Mye of Fight, he defended 26 takedowns in that fight when the distance, right? Right. But with the Wonderboy fight, he rocked Wonderboy and he had Wonderboy hurt. Where Wonderboy didn't hurt him, which is because he forced Wonderboy to be offensive instead of countering. So by making it boring, by backing up. Yeah. But I at the same time, I don't necessarily I don't know as that was a calculation of going on. I think it was. You think yes, because he fought him that way the second time as well. I think but I think that was intimidation for what Wonderboy could do on the feet and him not wanting to waste energy trying to take him down. I don't think he was intimidated. I think he was waiting. He was waiting for moments to explode because it's not like he was timid when he blasted him and had him rocked and hurt. I think he was just a fan of me. And the thing is what was interesting is I had a similar. You didn't think you weren't a fan after the Darren Hill fight? Oh, absolutely. Right. Like and same with the Robbie Lola fight. You know, that was an incredible knock. Yeah. And this was the thing that was frustrating is that he had the capability to do that kind of thing. And sometimes I just felt like he wants to play King of the Hill. He didn't want to be the smashing champion that other fighters did. You know what I mean? And well, you know, you got to think like he had some he hasn't fights. It didn't go his way as well. Strikeforce, the Nate Markword fight. The Nate Markword fight when he got KO'd where Nate he hit him with like a video game combination with those elbows against the cage. Like, so this consequence is to just wait and by the way, Nate Markword, boy, there's the guy that kind of people forget how fucking good that guy was when he was in his prime. Whoo. Yeah. When he went over to Strikeforce, he was a fucking monster dude. That guy was good. He was good. You know, I had heard stories about him training at in Colorado with GSP with all those guys like, dude, Nate Markword fucked everybody up. He was that good at one point in time. So many names of fighters that I've just been kind of lost to time that people don't realize. Yep. There was so you've had words. There's another one. I talk about him all the time. There's a point in time where he's Edwards was the best 155 pounder on the planet. Facts. Yeah. It's just like people forget. People forget how good people were. You know, interesting, the point you made about Counter Strike and I've always thought this about God playing as well. If you're a God play, you've kind of got to accept that you're losing until you win. Right. It's like Machida was one of the best examples of a Counter Strike. And then you know, you say Add a San Diego against Palla Costa. Palla Costa was in the center of the cage for most of that. Yeah. So if you're just looking at Octagon Control, well, you're going to score its Palla because he was in the center. But there was no doubt that Izzy was just toying with him and lightning up from a distance. Yeah. Because he actually got in control because Izzy was landing on at shots. But that's that's the thing is that that was a very, very clear one right where you've got one person moving back and giving the center of the cage, but clearly winning on the striking. Whereas if when it gets very even with the striking, you have to really have good judges to be able to pick apart who's landing what? Yes, because like we had a fight the week, Jacob Kasuba, he was fighting the tan shot and he was backing up the whole fight, but he was landing way more strikes than his opponent. But even when it got to the end of the fight, I'm like, these judges going to score this right? Because they don't have the stats that we have in on the screen in front of us, right? Exactly. They should. But because they don't, are they going to they're going to go, well, you know, we was moving forward and we had a fight in Sioux Falls the other day where the female fighter, Sharon Bowers was pushing forward and she was landing. But her opponent was backing up and countering a lot of the shots. And the judges scored it to Sabrina. It was, you know, it was the right decision to make. But the crowd didn't like it because they felt like like the Bowers was the one pushing forward and making a fight out of it. But that's casuals. Of course. Yeah. But it is, it is a risky thing to be a counter striker and a guard player in MMA because you have to first of all credit the judges to see what, you know, but who's left that's a guard player? Not many, right? It's kind of been cycled out of the game. Only there are. There's like the best at it. But even that didn't work out for him in sometimes. The time it spent energy, God playing. A lot of the time, why, you know, good wrestlers decide not to wrestle because the amount of energy it costs. That's true. But I mean, like, look what he did to gamma right. And that was super impressive. Gamrock's so good. So good. The fact that gamma right was just lost. Yeah. Grandma Olivera. Gamrock's good Olivera. Gamrock's debut. Okay. It's Garam Kata del Aussie. Like both of those guys. He's in karate combat now. Both of those guys are so elite. And then when they got matched up against each other in their USC debut, I'm like, people aren't going to realize how good this matchup is. Right. Right. So I reckon I call his debut against a, against like a champ. Yeah. Like, and he was 5% behind Islam in his fight. But that's surprising. The fact was, you know, incredible fight. Yeah. Yeah. I am very curious to see how Pereira does against serial gun. Yeah. Serial guns are different thing. Just moves differently for a big guy, doesn't he? He's also a real heavyweight. They're in a fucking time since he's been 15 where that guy's making 185. Right. That's a big man. And he's an incredible athlete and a really elite striker, like a really good striker, like an a fucking big heavyweight man. And I know Pereira weighs like 260 now. I get it. I get it. Yeah. He's a heavyweight. Yep. Definitely. But he was 185. It was 185. Just a few years ago. And he was 185 pound champion and then the 205 pound champion. And I don't think serial gun can even make 205. No. Serial's big. Yeah. And he's big and fucking big. And he's good man. And I'm telling you that Tom Hardy fight, excuse me, Tom Aspen, I'll fight. Tom Hardy. She's just, my mind sucks. The Tom Aspen, I'll fight in that first round before the the eye pokes were disgraceful. Like first of all, I think still got to fix the gloves. Oh, God. You know, my solution is mittens. Well, we don't do this anyway. Why these, why these out like this? Yeah. Yeah. It's a fucking, it's a good point. The thing that annoyed me is like they went through all the, all that, the effort to fix the gloves. But they never asked a fighter or a person that wraps hands like what they actually thought they were getting contender series fighters to to grade them. And of course they're all like, they're great. They've got USC on them. I'm so happy to be. You know what I mean? Like, you know, like talk to tape for example, I'm like, they must have asked you about the hand wrapping about the gloves and stuff because the problem is, right? Like when you get there on Tuesday and you try your gloves on, you're like, yeah, they feel good. And then you get to fight night and they put a quarter inch of padding underneath. And then you try and a close your hand. And like the difference between like the pride gloves and the rising gloves or the like the fair text, I always used to use fair text if I could. There's a curve in the glove. Right. When you try your gloves on, what the, what the blue shirts backstage do and because they know the game is they roll the glove up and then wrap it with the Velcro of the wrist. So it stays rolled from Tuesday to Saturday. Right. And then when you get them on Saturday, they've kind of curved a little bit. Right. But it's not, the curve is not built into the padding. Right. And the new ones that they made, there was just too much technology and not in a common sense. Have you used Trevor Whitmans? I have. Veronica's just got a pair of them. The best. They all very, very good. Absolutely. They're the best. That's an ownership problem, though, isn't it? It is. I've tried to negotiate that and broker that and maybe I still can be successful. I just talked to them. I talked to Trevor. Maybe it still can be done. But even with Trevor, the fingers still exposed. And I think there's certain guys who just have this fucking impulse to do that. And I think one point every time folks, I'm in the eye, one point every fucking time. Because there's a lot of fighters that have never poked anybody in the eye. Right. So how come? How come? They've been in wild scraps never poked anybody in the eye. Yeah. I watch one championship, small glaze moyta and they are in range. They're not poking each other. No, they're not. And by the way, I love small glaze. It's so cool. It's so good. It's so interesting. And for all these people that like hate when fights go to the ground, my God, that's the solution. And I've been trying to sell this to the UFC forever. I'm like, fuck all this slap fight shit. And I know you're really interested in Zufa boxing. That's great. How about UFC striking? How about UFC moyta? You know, because and even kickboxing, what they're doing with one, you know, guys like Yuki Yosa and, you know, watch out for Ben Willis, have you seen this guy? He's a beast. I signed him to PFL a little while ago. Just can't get him matched. Just clear. Get him matched. People don't want to stand. Well, the click on his, on his Instagram, my opinion is one of the best strikers in the world right now. And I've, you know, he trained, trained at Renegade for a long time with the Edwards brothers. And I would watch him just play spar with people and did the level of trickery. Like that's where you go back to saying about dimensions, right? There are ranges in fights. And then there are dimension in those ranges. Yeah. He's like a Jedi level of dimension of understanding of striking. And to see him have the success. He has me stopping John Linnaker with calf kicks and, you know, just very impressive. You're going to see him go. How was one doing? Are they not good from what I can tell? I mean, that's what I've heard as well. And that concerns me because we have more limited options. That's sucks. Yeah. You know, this is why I mean, and I've, you know, I feel very much like I'm in the right place now with the PFL because we need more organizations. Yes. We need more organizations. Unfortunately, in my opinion, the US is not the custodian of the sport that we need right now. You know, what do you think they're doing wrong? I mean, I think, I think it's a variety of different things. I mean, underpaying the fighters, killing the sponsorship market, they buried a lot of growth of the subculture. You know, you remember the old USC expos that we used to do. I do like five, six hours a day signing tap out over to Silverstar over to Zionson. Like as soon as that was all killed off, a lot of that subculture died off. And all those subcultures offer jobs outside of outside of fighting, you know, it allows people to then start a brand and sponsor some young fighters like Charles Lewis, mask, paid me double what I was getting paid for my purse when I was in Japan. Double just away, tap out shorts on an in a tournament and cage force. I didn't need to do that, but he was a fan of the sport. He loved it and he wanted to support it. And back in the day, like I had sponsors like ear wreck records and stuff that was on my banner, just heavy metal brand from like my local town. Like the idea of being able to have these personal sponsors that would help you out was massive. Yeah. And then the other thing that the other issue that we've got is that we don't have, we don't have enough events now for a lot of fighters to get experience. So then a lot of people that get signed to contenders are like five, six, seven fights into their career. I was talking to this somebody about to see the day and this good clear examples, like I was 19 and six when I joined the UFC in 2028. Conor McGregor had already built a brand and and I just said 2028 started to 2008. Maybe there's a return on the clock. 2008. So I had like a dive down a little bit with the, yeah. So in 2008, like there was, where was I going? Well, that's what I was trying to thought. Sponsors. Yeah. So like we had sponsors, there was a subculture that was growing around the brand and there were shows that that would host you long enough for you to develop a brand. Right. So like I didn't have nearly as big of a follow in this Conor McGregor or Paddy Pimler, but I had a similar platform, right. I was cage warriors champ, then Conor was cage warriors champion. He was an established fighter with a game and a following before he came to the UFC same with Paddy. We don't see that as much anymore. Right. We don't see the fighters growing on their local scene and building a local fanbase that really starts to grow the sport on a grassroots level. You know, Brett, but why is that the UFC's responsibility? Oh, no, I'm not saying I'm not saying it is. What I'm saying is that unfortunately, I think the US is now kind of paying for the control that they took many years ago because the industry has been stifled around it. Like the sponsorship industry for a start was massive. You know, and I problem with it was there was a lot of sponsors that weren't paying. So that the lot of fighters would wind up in lawsuits. There was a lot of bullshit that was going on. I mean, there were some of them were and it was great. You know, like, you know, I'm really good friends with Brandon Shaw and there was a point in time where he was making X amount for a fight, but he's making like three times that in sponsors. Yeah. I mean, I doubled my show money on the GSP fight because of my banner. I only got 22,000 for that fight, but which is crazy crazy. It's crazy. But that's what I signed up for. I wasn't waiting for the money, you know what I mean? But in hindsight, when I look at it and GSP was getting, I mean, you get like six million. He spent quarter of a million on his training camp. How can I compete? Like he would book out a whole hotel and bring guys in from New York. I had an old in my corner who at the time was a brown belt. You know, and I had a tie boxing coach that was telling him me to knee him in the head on the ground from bottom position. You know, it's blessing me. He just didn't know the rules. I didn't have the support network because I couldn't afford what I would have really needed for that. But if I go back to, you know, the sponsorship process was interesting, because the first thing they did was they brought in the fees that the sponsorship companies had to pay. So it was like, if you're a clothing brand, you have to pay $50,000 a year to sponsor UFC fighters and that goes to the UFC. Now, before that, as long as it wasn't offensive and it wasn't a conflict in sponsor, the UFC would ticket and you carry on. Kind of depot. Oh, man. Remember that? No. I turned them down a few times. But like, if you think about it, like, say, air-rate records, right, they couldn't afford to pay the UFC $50,000. They would pay me 300 pounds to have the thing on my banner, right? So then as soon as you bring in this, okay, everybody has to pay 50,000 to beat a sponsor in the UFC cage. Almost all of the sponsors then fell out the market and then you've only got a few that are lingering. And then if you're a, if you're a clothing distributor, if you sell a variety of different brands, it was $100,000 that you had to pay. You know, right? So if you're MMA warehouse and you're sponsoring Alistair Overream and your sponsorship budget for the year is $250,000 and straight away, 100 grand's been taken out because the UFC need it just your pool's gone down. Right. So you've got less money to give to the fighters and then you sponsor in less fights is overall. I get that. I get that argument. And I definitely agree about fighter pay. Look, I'm always in favor of fighters getting paid more. It's a very dangerous job and it's the only thing that people are paying to see and not paying to look at the cage, they're not paying to look at the ring card girls and not paying to hear me talk. They're paying to watch the fights. The fighters should get the majority of the money. And it is a problem when they don't have leverage. And I think that it's great that you have things like MVP getting involved in the Netflix card. And I wish the car was a little stronger, but it's difficult. Like, like, like, lens fighting against Francis and God. MVP getting involved in the Netflix card. I wish the card was a little stronger, but it's difficult. Like, like, Lin's fighting against Francis and Ghana, like, you know, you need like, who the fuck is even available that's not signed to a contract that you can get Francis to fight. Yeah. That's not a goddamn execution, you know? Yeah. Francis is the legitimate heavyweight champion of the world. Absolutely. And the thing is, the heavyweight division is always going to be more of a victim of the underpayment than any other industry. Is Francis no longer with a PFL? No. How did that what happened there? I just think it was, I just think it was a bad deal done by the previous, I mean, by the previous CEO. Oh, it was a previous CEO. Yeah. So he's not aware. So he fought, handing for error and that one fight. Yes. Is that the only fight that he had? No, he had. That's kind of crazy. Yeah. It was just, I mean, it was, it was a bad deal for the PFL. And we've done a lot of, we've done a lot of bad, bad deal. What was that guy that just knocked out, handing for error? Oh, Sergei Billistani. Whoo. Used to train with Fedor and, Oh, yeah. That guy is fucking legit. Yeah. And very, very fast. Like him, V Tom Aspenor was an interesting fight. Oh, that is an interesting. Anybody's an interesting. Infysirulgan. He moves a lot like Cyrulgan, but he's got Sambo background and. But like, he's legit. I watched that for a rare fight and I was like, holy shit. He's funny's head around him. Yeah, dude. And, you know, I mean, this, this cat. Yeah, pull this up. Here we go. Well, go this guy, he means moves like Fedor too. He trained with Fedor, which is interesting. Yeah. Yes. You want to get through to the third, yeah, that's that little body shot. So third round was the, the finish. But it just looks in with so dominant. He looked so dominant like throughout the fight, man. Like right away. He's a beast. This kid is very, very legit. Oh, my goodness. The speed. Yeah. So the world needs another fucking big heavyweight, man. Yeah. And this is, this is awesome that this guy exists. What's his name again? Sergei Billistani. I just saw this yesterday. I'm guilty of not watching enough PFL. But the thing is, it's like the fights are legit. The talent is legit, but man is just not getting the attention that it deserves. The thing is, as a UFC fan, I get it, right? Because you want to watch one promotion where all the fights is off. So you can find out who the best is. Because that's what ultimately it was about, right? It was about finding out who's the best. This is a big guy I can kind of compete with any, but of course. Of course. And we've got guys that can across the sport. I mean, across the across the promotion we have, I mean, you know, Dakota, Fad, Gene, you know, we've got some real, real good fighters. And even in like, if you've not watched Lewis McGrill and Dean Garnett, it is one of the best fights you'll ever see. There were 13 knockdowns in it. It was carnage. But then we're also seeing really interesting things like the Scottish twister. Have you seen the Scottish twister? So that was Stevie Ray, who hit it against Pettis. And then he hit it against Lewis Long in the Glasgow. And then he's passed it onto Jake Hadley. And then Jake Hadley's just submitted Mateus Matos with it. And it's fascinating because it's kind of a twister. Uh huh. It's like it's, have you tried it? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I struggle with it. So here it is. But look at this, the key is the foot in the thigh. It's like an off-side triangle. You can see that that right foot is just hooked in. And he's going to threaten with an arm triangle. He's kind of holding a matos here. There's a bit of a ham fight going on. He's going to keep hitting Matos. And he's going to, Matos is going to go to an arm triangle position. Then he's going to start to try and force that, that right elbow down. So he's not in an arm triangle and turn into the body triangle. But that right foot caught in his thigh doesn't allow him to turn fully into the guard. So look at this. How he turns in. Clares the head and there's the crank. Look at the foot on the inside of the thigh. Oh, that's nasty. So that is, I mean, I've had this done to me as well as I've done it. So you've got compression into the neck, pressure into the lower back. Your hips being lifted. It's horrible submission. It looks horrible. And this is the cheesecake assassin demo in it. Interesting. But like, and this is what's fascinating still to me about MMA is that I still feel like this technology is that we're not we've not yet discovered. The calf kick at being a good example. Right. Scottish twist to be another good example. What comes next? Right. There's going to be some shit. I've got books and books and martial arts books. And I feel like if I dug, I might find something. But yeah, I don't know what's missing. Um, here's something that I think might be missing. Front leg roundhouse kick to the face. Mm. Guys who are fast with that, I used to see that a lot in Tagundo. I used to see that a lot. There's guys that get his throat at there like a jab. And if it hits you in the face, you're fucked. And we've seen it a few times in MMA. We've seen a few guys get dropped. What I've read was down the UNS and John Wily. You just don't see it very often. And man, if you're good at that, if you have a fast one, that is a devastating kick. Yeah. So that is a good example because that's a great technique and a great setup. Mm-hmm. Because the reason why the head kick landed, because you should just land on the inside low kick. Yes. So Wily had pulled a lead leg back and pitched a head forward. Yeah. Beautiful. Said, I totally agree with you. I think there's a lot that still to be discovered. It's just stunning to me how few people get cracked with that. I mean, I feel like that was a major weapon when I was doing talk window. A lot of people use that. Yeah. Crescent kick as well. Oh, yeah. It's just a few guys that use that still. Anderson used that a few times. Yeah. There's a cat. I forgot. I'm so sorry, man. I forget your name. But this is dude who's got a video on Instagram where he knocks his step guy out with an inside crescent kick to the face. There's a few people that are pulling it off, you know? Yeah. There's definitely more to come. There's definitely a lot more techniques that I also think they're going to be a lot more targets on the body that can be exploited that we're not yet expert. Right. Well, a lot of the guys in kickboxing in particular in one are using that toe kick to the body. Yes. App chaggy. There's this cat. Yes. What is his name, Jamie? I've actually congratulated this guy. I apologize, sir, because I went back and forth with him. Jason Berry. What did you just said? Back it up a little bit before that before that before that. See, look at those cases. Just in Barry. Justin, Barry. Justin, Barry. That's it. Look at the curve in those cage warriors gloves. So they're basically a, they're either, they're either fair text gloves or they're a copy of the fair text. Look at those things. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. Very cool. Crazy. Yeah, cage warriors is another great organization that's really producing elite talent. It's just, I agree with you. There's not enough of them. But it's like, what does the PFL have to do to get more attention? You know, because it seems like they're throwing a lot of money at fighters. Like, does that, is that million dollar thing still happening? No, we've got rid of the tournament. We've gone to regular shows now. So we have Maine and Co Maine. We've got rankings now done by combat registry. They don't have all the crazy point system where you're all that gone. That did make it. Honestly, I'll be honest. I love the PFL, but PFL has been its own worst enemy for many, many years. Right. We've got a new CEO, John Martin, who's, he's been on Ariel's show a couple of times. He does great interviews. He loved the sport from a fan's perspective. He doesn't know it quite as much as other people, but he's making the right moves and making the right decisions. Previous, I mean, I loved Don Davis, but he was like, Willie Wonka of MMA. He was like, I've got a great idea. Let's do this. And then Pete Murray, who just was consistently making bad deals and all the point things were like, hey, I didn't understand any of it. So I was running PFL Europe for a couple of three years. I stepped in at the end of 2022 as commentator. In 2023, I became the head of, head of fighter ops for Europe. So I was doing all the sign and matchmaking. I only had four shows a year, but I mean, it was, it was a passion project for me to sign all these young guys and match them. My argument was every single, and I always used to say this to the fighters because remember when Dana used to do this back on the old way in days where he'd get all the fighters, no corner men, no coaches, just translators and the fighters. And we'd gather in one of the changing rooms in the arena. And Dana give us this speech and it, it was stirring like we're all there to murder each other. But for like five minutes, we all felt like we were in it together. And I love that feeling. I missed it. Even walking out with like fist bumping each other and we'll hyped and that's where he denounced the bonus amounts and stuff. So I would do that with PFL Europe and gather all the fighters together. And I'm like, look, there's not a single fight on this card that has been matched for one person to win. Every single person stepping into the cage has got a fair chance of winning. Your destiny is in your hands, right? And with PFL Europe, I was able to build a good roster and to, I mean, we had some fantastic shows. But when I first inherited it, we had four tournaments, right? So I had to sign 16 fighters, sorry, eight fighters per weight class. So I had 32 fighters on my roster that was done already before the year started. Then I'm having to get loads of different flags. So we're going into a place and I've got a bunch of fighters on the card. I don't need to aren't necessarily any tickets. And it was just working against me constantly. So I pushed to go down to two tournaments and have just a normal MMA show for the rest of it. And that worked out well, but they just they loved the tournament format because it was a distinguishing factor. And the question is, you know, what do we have to do to make a difference? Like, I mean, I think we are doing those, we are making those moves. We have to make more content and tell the fighters stories better for sure. Maybe you guys should start a fucking boy tie. I'm down for it. Maybe look, look, you're just fucking up with that. I've sent Dana all these different fights. I send him all these, is, um, among Azaleeov, that dude, Azadula, among Azaleov, holy shit. Is that guy good? I'm like, look at this. This is what people want to see, man. Like everybody boos when the fights go to the ground, if it gets boring, this shit's never boring. Yeah. Maybe you guys should pick up a slack. 100% look, I mean, I've, I've thrown hundreds of ideas on the table. I always am. They might be the move, man. I mean, we'll, they might be with different shoes. Yeah, I think so. But my look how big it is with one. I mean, it's essentially become most of their fights now. Yeah. And it's accommodating fighters that have got two or three hundred fights in another discipline that don't want to learn how to wrestle or grab it. But they are the elitist of elite strikers. And so easy to translate. Absolutely. Everybody knows what's going on. To the faces, a kick to the face. Yeah. I agree with you. I mean, I think, but I'm always throwing ideas at the pier for the one that stuck was introducing elbows. Like when I first started working with the pier for we didn't have elbows because it's crazy. Crazy. Crazy. And I hated it. You know, and I'm like, well, it's pride. Yeah, it didn't have elbows. Yeah. Did Bellator? Bellator had elbows. So what the fuck? Well, we see that was my, that was my selling point. That was the way I got, I managed to convince them. I said, okay, right. We've taken on Bellator now. We've inherited Bellator and everything that we've taken. Take the rules too. Right. Yeah. But well, this is how I pitched it to them. Right. One of my biggest opponents was Ray Cephal. Like he did not want elbows added in and I could not get my head around it because he's always coaching elbows from the corner. Right. Why didn't anyone else? I'm not sure. I couldn't get my head around it. But the thing that pushed it over the line was me going, okay, right. We've just, we've just taken on Bellator, right. We've got Bellator and we've got PFL. Imagine in a world where we now apply PFL rules to Bellator. What are the fans going to say? They're going to be like, well, that'd be terrible. They'd hate it because you're taking elbows out. I'm like, you've illustrated my point. Exactly. So clearly that's not the right way to go. So then we need elbows. Well, I'm glad they listened to you because that's ridiculous. Yeah. You know, what really needs to happen is needs to the head on the ground. 100%. Absolutely. It's crazy that someone could just huddle in a turtle position and not get pummeled. Like you shouldn't be in that position. The only thing I can do without and I loved it in pride and I wanted to fight and pride for the soccer kicks as well. That's the only thing I would, I couldn't reasonably do without. And the reason why... No ring. The ring is different. You can move. Yeah. The problem with being planted into the cage and stomped or soccer kicked. For sure. Remember where Sims Frank Mere? Oh, I don't. Oh, yeah. Yeah. The thing with, and I've watched every single pride fight, there's ever existed. I'm sure. I only ever see people getting followed in the head when the fight's already pretty much done. Right. Right. So it's... It's not... It's like the icing on the cake that we don't necessarily need when you can just hit with one more shot. And they tried something in cage rage when cage rage existed back in the day where the referee would decide that you could stomp on or kick it in there. Let me ask you this. What do you think about side kicks to the knees? I don't mind it. The problem with that is it's one shot and you're out for a year. But then he hooks it just as dangerous on you. But they're not because you can tap. You can tap and you can hold onto the arms before it gets to that position. You can tap. The thing about the side kick to the knee, like... What's the space? Colute round tree. Yeah, but the guy from a desk is the darkest. Yeah. When you watch his knee go sideways like that, you're like, cut the Lord. You're done for a year. If you're ever the same again. I mean, I know, I know, Shavkats in a similar situation right now is that... He can hit to the back of the head. But you do hit to the back of the head. Well, because if it's a roundhouse kick and it goes over the shoulder, guess where it lands. Absolutely. The thing is, the back of the head is more protecting from the bottom of the base of the skull down, which is... That's where if someone throws a roundhouse kick and it goes over the shoulder, it's going... Bong! Right to the back of the head. But then how many football players in a season are taken out with a low tackle? I mean, it's the same in rugby as well. It's like, for me, that is a risk of the sport. But it's a victory with an illegal move that we all allow. It's only illegal because you can't strike to the knee. But then... No, no, back of the head kick. Oh, yeah, for sure. You know what I'm saying? Back of the head kick, you win. But to knock out. But to take the knee. And you shouldn't have hit them there. Yeah. But then also you've got to go into, well, did they turn their head? What was the circumstance of it? That's right. I mean, the thing, like, you can't... In the rules, you can't strike joints. Right. But then it was the same thing when we had elbows. And we're doing shows in France. And I'm saying to the French Commission, we don't have elbows. And they're like, OK, so where does the elbows start? And where does the... Where is it for? Where is it for arm? Right. But a thing about attacking the knees, you would have to say, well, it's got to be a straight kick where you hyper extend the knees because you can't say don't leg kick the knees. Because you're going to be able to leg kick the back of the knee always. If you take that out, you're taking out a giant chunk of all techniques. But the side kick to the knee, the problem with that is you're going to ruin careers. There's a lot of guys that are just not the same. Tago Silva, I don't think it was ever the same after the John Jones fight. In my mind, it's the game we play. I agree, but I see your point. I see it. No one's dying from a knee injury. It's very unusual too. It's like the Modestus fight was one fight, they'll give a name. And Khalil's obviously a very elite striker. Yeah. But... Yeah. I don't mind it. I genuinely don't. I trust that in making sure the fights are protected when they can't protect themselves. That's where we need to raise everyone's understanding of what's happening. Yeah. I agree with you. Well, listen, brother, always good to talk to you. We should do this more often. We should have said that for every six years. We should say that. We're back in Austin soon. We're back in Austin soon. Oh, well, it's too high. Johnny Eblins fighting Costa Lovenstein is in the rematch. What a moody sense of. When in July? July 19th Saturday. Saturday, July 19th. Oh, motherfucker. Oh, motherfucker. You're in... I know who you are. Damn it. I'm out of town. Yeah, I know. I know where you are, be there. You'll be there? Yeah, I think I'll be there. Okay. We'll talk about it afterwards. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah. Johnny Eblins Costa Lovenstein is too bad. I want to see that. Fuck. Yeah. And I will say, like, for me, our middleweight division is probably the most competitive with the UFC's middleweight division. With Johnny Eblins and our motherfucker. Like Costa Lovenstein is the current champ. Did you watch that fight? No. Johnny Eblin undefeated in 1718 fights was beaten the brakes off-cost. Oh, we got to move it. Like last 10 seconds. Yeah, I did see that. Yes, that's right. So, so Costa Loven did his belt, he beat Fabian Edwards, Travis Brown elbows. Yes. And then Johnny Eblin just ragdolled Brian Battle, like it was nothing. That's all that, too. That was insane. Yeah. He's a beast, dude. Well, now those two boys are going to rematch. Austin at the Moody Center, middle of July. That's going to be good. I wish I was here. Me too. All right. Very good to see you. Always. Dan Hardy, what's your Instagram? I'm not here. Yeah, I'm hard to get. All right. Bye, buddy.