It's a safe bet that almost no one involved in the war now ongoing in Iran in the Gulf would like to see it continue much longer. If you were to poll, the Iranians or the Americans, basically anybody, how long do you want this to go? Very few people would say, I want it to go a long time. But that doesn't mean it won't go a long time. Unfortunately, it is likely to. It's unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. Of course, that could prove to be untrue. You never know. Oh, it's an utterly dynamic situation. But big picture, there are still a couple of unresolved questions that this war may resolve. This war may be the only thing that resolves them. And so until there's a consensus on the answers to those questions, it probably is going to continue. What are those questions? Well, the first is geopolitical. And it's the biggest question of all, which is who runs the world? Who gets to make the decisions? Not simply who's richest, but who makes the rules? Who sets the terms? And for most of our lifetimes, there has been no question about that. The answer has been the United States. The United States sets the rules. United States runs the world. That's been true in the western half of the world since 1945 when the US emerged stronger and richer than any other nation after the end of World War II. And it's been true since August of 1991, 35 years ago after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The United States has reigned in a unipolar world. That's the call. There's just one pole. There's one center of gravity. There's one power center, and that's been the United States. But that has changed over the past several years, maybe decades, certainly since China was admitted into the WTO in 2001. Now, it is a multi-polar world. You've heard that phrase, no doubt. And that means there are a couple, at least a couple centers of gravity. Really, there are two. There's the US and the constellation of states with which it's allied. And then there is on the eastern hemisphere of the globe, China. And China is now a peer with the United States at least almost no matter how you measure it. Population of course much bigger. Military power well we're not quite sure but certainly from a technological and industrial output standpoint at least a peer. And then on a pure economic level well China has a bigger economy a bigger real economy than the United States. So yes China is a peer. And so the question is, since you now have two countries that are roughly evenly matched, we think, we never do know until they come into conflict, but they seem roughly evenly matched, who gets to set the terms for commerce and diplomacy and everything else that happens on the globe. Well, if you were to reach a diplomatic solution, there would be in effect a power sharing agreement between these two countries. You take the east, I take the west. Here are the terms. But unfortunately, no such agreement, formal or informal, has been reached for a bunch of reasons. It's everybody's fault. But one of the reasons is almost nobody in Washington can get his head around the current present obvious reality, which is no, we don't run everything anymore. We are in competition, not necessarily in conflict, but in competition with this other country that's as least as powerful as we are called China. Different system, language, culture, etc., But at least every bit as powerful. And so you can't make unilateral decisions anymore. It's sort of that moment that many parents face when used to barking orders at their kids, they realize the kid is taller than them. And like it's a new relationship in some ways. You're always the parent, but you can't just bark orders anymore. That's pretty much where we are with China. Or maybe a little past that actually. And what we've noticed over the past several years is the total unwillingness, the inflexibility of Washington policy makers to just acknowledge the reality. And instead, even as we speak, there's probably some symposium underway in Washington about what will we do if China invades Taiwan. Well, of course, from China's perspective, Taiwan is part of China. It just sort of run off for the past 75 years, but it's still part of China. That's their view. And the United States of course isn't in a position to stop the reclamation of Taiwan. Let's stop lying. And yet only in DC is that not obvious. Which is to say people in Washington are still acting like they're running everything unopposed. But they're not. And the rest of the world is looking on and thinking at some point you got to knock it off and face reality. Now there are a lot of people in the United States, me included, who would like to live in a unipolar world. It's, you know, it's way less fun to be constrained, to have to come to terms with another country before you make a decision. No one wants to do that. No one wants to be challenged. But again, it's sort of not up to us or anyone the moment that you live in. You're not in charge of reality actually. And so, this is the reality we live in. And the question is, are we going to come to terms with it in a reasonable way or are we going to be forced through use of arms to face that reality? And it looks increasingly like the latter. Unfortunately, that is not the way to settle matters like this because you can emerge greatly diminished from those contests and find yourself in a much weaker negotiating position. Better negotiate while you're strong than when you're weak. But our leaders weren't wise or far-sighted enough to do that. Seized by hubus. They were dictating terms like Baghdad Bob, you know. Uh it's sad actually. No reason to laugh about it. But that is one of the questions now being decided in Iran. Why Iran? Well, because these questions are always decided by proxy. No two great powers want to go to war with each other. of course, especially in the nuclear age because that could mean simultaneous elimination and no one wants that at least consciously. And so typically these things play out in third countries like Vietnam famously or Afghanistan for both the Soviets and the United States or Korea and now Iran. Iran which is part of alliance that includes the other big powers Russia and China. So they may not be explicitly weighing in, which is to say they're not fighting alongside the Iranians yet, but they're certainly on Iran's side and they're certainly helping in a multitude of ways, one expects and a lot for them rides on the outcome. And because it does makes it harder to settle this thing. So that's the geopolitical very obvious overlay here. That's why this is not just a debate about whether the Ayatollah has nuclear weapons. stop. It's much bigger than that and much more serious than that and the consequences are much more profound than that. So that's the first. But there is another layer that most Americans are not aware of but much the rest of the world is highly aware of and that is a religious layer. Now Lindsey Graham is on tape saying to a gaggle of reporters his bloodshot eyes, his puffy face, God knows what he's been doing, saying explicitly, "This is a religious war. this is a religious war. Now, his motive in saying that, you know, he's not here to answer the question. We can only guess. Is he trying to ferment a religious war? Probably. He's an end times kind of guy. But it almost doesn't matter. He's telling the truth for once. This is a religious war fundamentally. And that is not obvious to most Americans because this is the most secular society, not just the United States, but the West, the English speaking world, Europe, in the US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand in history. There's never been a more godless, to be blunt about it, a more secular society at scale. Never. Nothing approaching this has ever happened ever. Every society is fundamentally a religious society, explicitly religious, except ours. So we lack the terms to describe what we're seeing and we lack the imagination to think about it and well to quote Jesus we have the eyes but we cannot see. We don't see what's happening around us but the rest of the world very much does see. So you often hear people talk about the Middle East crisis and they usually mean energy. You know people want the oil, the gas, but traditionally when people have talked about the Middle East they're talking about Jerusalem. We're talking about the holiest spot on earth. Let's be a lot more specific when we say the holiest spot on earth. The holiest spot on earth is something called the foundation stone. The foundation stone is literally a rock in Jerusalem on what used to be called Mount Mariah, which was at one point the highest place in the oldest part of Jerusalem. And it's on that spot, on that rock, on that stone that Jews believe the world began, that the Old Testament or the Jewish Torah tells us that Abraham brought Isaac bound to be sacrificed to God. It's on that spot that Muslims believe that the prophet Muhammad ascended into heaven. And of course, it's right nearby that Christians believe Jesus was crucified and then rose to heaven. So on that spot or right nearby, a lot has happened. But critically on that spot, because it was the place where Abraham brought Isaac, and again to American ears, this sounds weird, but to the rest of the world, it's like, yeah, everyone knows this because it's the center of their lives. On that spot, Solomon built his famous temple. Now, in the Torah, it says pretty clearly, and correct me if I'm misreading it, that Jews, followers of God, can only publicly worship God and sacrifice on that spot in that city, Jerusalem. On that spot and on that spot was built a temple, the first temple. Now, that was destroyed by Babylonians famously. And then it was rebuilt and later improved by Herod. And it was at its completion, I think, the largest building, certainly the largest religious building in the ancient world. And it was in that building that Jesus preached in what we call the second temple that Jesus preached. The very center of Judaism, a building without which you can't really have Torah Judaism. The religion just didn't work without it by its own terms. In its own book, it said that. And during one of his sermons, in that sermon, Jesus, who Christians believe is God sent to earth, says, "This will be torn down. Not one stone will be left standing." And it was shortly after that that he was put on trial in the middle of the night and tortured to death, crucified as it happened. So that's that's the religion. Here's the history. About 35 years later, 37 years later in that range, in 70 AD, Titus, the emperor, the Roman Empire of the Roman Empire, got into quite a conflict with the Jews of Judea and Jerusalem. And it's complex and incredibly brutal. But the bottom line was in AD.70 the Romans besieged Jerusalem, finally broke through the walls and tore that temple stone from stone. Not a single stone left upon another. Really a a kind of dedication to destruction that's hard for the modern mind to imagine. We talk about genocide. this genocide that the Romans tried to genocide the Jews for real and they succeeded in destroying the temple and with it temple Judaism Torah Judaism you can't have the religion that existed before AD70 after AD70 because there's no temple and so this has been an open wound for 2,000 years and certainly understandably people have wanted to rebuild the temple to build what they call the third temple to reestablish this religion at its birthplace. There are a couple problems with this one. Exactly 500 years after Titus destroyed the temple in AD.70. In 8570, a man called Muhammad was born in Mecca and built one of the world's great religions, the world's second largest religion as it stands today. In a very short period, his name was Muhammad. He was born in Mecca. He died in nearby Medina. But in the meantime, he built or inspired the building of within 50 years of his death one of the great religious monuments in the world. Certainly one of the prettiest called the Dome of the Rock. And it's in Jerusalem on Mariah. in fact built over the foundation stone. And if you've ever been to Jerusalem or if you've ever seen photographs of it, you will remember vividly a gold dome. It's called the dome of the rock. Why is it called that? Because there's a rock underneath it, the foundation stone that is built on the site of the second temple. And that's within what's known as the alaka complex. There's a mosque next door called the Alexa mosque. And that spot is one of three holy places apparently co-equal holy places in Islam. Mecca, Medina, Dome of the Rock, Alexa. So that is at the very center of Judaism. I mean it's physically the center of Judaism. That spot that exact spot over the foundation stone and Islam and it has been occupied by a mosque. A mosque has been sitting there since the 7th century, since the late 600s. Amazing. You may be dimly aware of this. Now, why go on at length about this? Because now is the moment. right now like this week is the moment that some people not a huge number most people Christians Jews Muslims are not fully aware of all this but some people are highly aware of it and would like to begin the process of tearing down the Dome of the Rock tearing down Alaka Mosque and rebuilding the third temple. Now there are a lot of things to say about this about its likelihood the potential effects of it but first just a quick side note on the theology of this from a Christian point of view now it was Jesus who said this temple will be torn down shocking everyone around him if it's in the gospels it's in at least a couple of the gospels and the people heard it just couldn't believe it and of course the people running the temple the Pharisees and Sadducees were gravely offended by it why wouldn't they be but But then it happened less than 40 years later. It actually happened. He was right. He called it. And so from a Christian perspective, he did that. God called for the destruction of the temple. And as Jesus says plainly in the gospels, I'm the temple. I'm the temple now. The temple will be rebuilt after 3 days. When I'm resurrected, I am the new temple. Says that. But there has been at least one attempt in the last 2,000 years to rebuild a physical third temple and it happened in the 4th century and it happened without getting too far a field shortly after the death of Constantine. Constantine was the 4th century Roman emperor who converted to Christianity and very famously turned the Roman Empire Christian thereby spreading Christianity basically instantly across the west where it's remained more or less ever since. That was in the 300s the 4th century. Now his nephew became emperor not long after he died and his name was Julian referred to very often by Christian historians as Julian the apostate. And he was an apostate. He was the last non-Christian emperor of Rome of the Roman Empire. And he had been born a Christian apparently, but he was a fairly enthusiastic pagan polytheist and very aggressively opposed to Christianity. And for that reason, he decided, Julian the Apostate decided in 363 to rebuild the third temple. So it has been tried. For those who are thinking, could this ever happen? Oh, it it happened. They tried to rebuild. He spent a ton of money doing it in 363. Inflation makes credit card statements particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just to buy groceries and gas, things you used to be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the banks charge you 20% interest. If the system is designed to keep you underwater, it's working. But there's another option. Our friends at American Financing are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people. mortgage rates in the fives, supporting the American dream of home ownership, and they're showing homeowners how to take their hard-earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now, we're against debt in general, but in this economy, most people have no choice at all. [music] So, don't go bankrupt enslaving yourself to to a lender. Average savings are about 800 bucks a month, and it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a salarybased mortgage consultant. No upfront fees or obligation to see how much you can save. Give American Financing a call 800685-5696. That's 1800685-5696 or visit americanf financing.net/tucker, America's home for home loans. What happened next? Well, let's read the account of the only attempt ever made at rebuilding the third temple. And this comes from a personal friend of Julian the Apostates who wrote it contemporaneously and we still have it amazingly all these years later. I'm quoting, "Julian thought to rebuild at an extravagant expense the Proud Temple once at Jerusalem and committed this task to Olympus of Antioch. Olympia set vigorously to work and was seconded by a governor of the province when fearful balls of fire breaking out near the foundations of the building continued their attacks till the workmen after repeated scorchings could approach no more and he gave up the attempt. By the way, just a few months later, Julian, Emperor Julian the Apostate was killed. You know what he was killed doing? Invading Iran. [laughter] literally invading Iran in 363. Yeah, he was killed doing that. So, it was during his invasion of Iran that he decid he decided to rebuild the temple. You can't make this up. And we're not making up Israel. And by the way, there was an earthquake at the same time. The there are many accounts of what happened when they tried to rebuild it. And all of them describe the earth rending and flames coming out and all sounds kind of spooky and supernatural like it's just too perfect, right? Jesus tears down the temple and begins this new relationship with God directly through him. No need for a building anymore in Jerusalem, a city he went out of his way not to spend the night in. Walk over to the Mount of Olives, even after the last supper, but whatever. And there's this one attempt by a guy who hates Christianity to rebuild the third temple. And by the way, the workman get burned by fire from the ground at an earthquake. And you can sort of laugh at that if you're a rationalist, a materialist, a modern man until archaeologists discovered that actually there was a big earthquake in the region from Galilee to Jerusalem in 363. So that actually happened. In any case, why the long history lesson? Because it's not history anymore. It's happening right now. There are key players involved in this war, the one happening tonight, who believe that what we're seeing on our television screens and on Twitter will usher in a series of events that begin with the destruction of the Dome and the Rock, Oxam Mosque, and then the rebuilding of the third temple after which the world will end. God will come back. And they mean it. And by they, we mean literally some of the guys fighting the war. So you may have read reports today that commanders in the field of American troops, a lot of them, and who knows if this is true, but it's out there, told their troops on the eve of the outbreak of this war that we're doing this for Jesus because it is Jesus's will that we do this. and that by doing it, we will usher in a series of events that bring about the end of history, the end of time, Armageddon, the last days. It's hard to believe that's true, especially since, by the way, there are a million Christians in Iran. So, if you were doing this for Jesus, presumably you would go out of your way not to hurt his followers in the country you're attacking. Did the US government or any government make any attempt to spare the Christians? Are we making an attempt tonight? Of course, we're not. And of course when the smoke clears ultimately we will find out just a guess that Christians suffered disproportionately in this as they do all wars from the Iraq war to the bombing of Nagasaki the seat of the Christian church in Japan etc etc. Christians have a way of dying disproportionately in these wars which tells you something about their real motive. But in any case, there was a spate of stories suggesting that US commanders told their troops they were doing this for some weird anti-Christian reason posing as Christianity. But it's not just the US side. Here's an IDF soldier, apparently an American by his accent, describing why he's at war. Watch this. They call this operation the Swords of Iron. But what are we really fighting for? We're fighting for the right of the Jewish people to exist, be Jewish, practice the religion, and be free. And one day, our true leader will come and we'll be united as a whole Jewish nation so we can rebuild the beta mikdash. Behamed probably mispronouncing it. That's the Hebrew term for the temple, the third temple. We are doing this so we can rebuild the temple. Now, you'll notice he's pulling off patches on Velcro on his IDF uniform. These are not civilian clothes. This is the uniform of the government of Israel, of its military. And he has patches on that uniform, one of which is a symbol of the temple, the third temple. So, it just couldn't be clear. Why are we doing this? To rebuild the third temple. Now, if you think we're just cherrypicking this off the internet, one guy wearing an unauthorized temple patch paid for, by the way, a uniform paid by us, armaments paid for by us, the US taxpayer pays for all this stuff one way or another. The US taxpayer pays for the military of Israel. Boy, does it. If you think we're being unfair and just like found one guy, well, here's a bunch of guys. It took us about 2 minutes on the internet to find this today. Here are all here is a selection of IDF soldiers. Let's put it on the screen. There you go. And all of them have the same patch. Look for me. Look carefully at that. What is that? That's the temple. That is the third temple. And we'll get to a minute in a minute about how this might actually happen and what it would mean for the rest of the world. And just to be clear, these are conversations that most Americans, certainly me included, never wanted to have. Everybody's religious beliefs, sincere religious beliefs, when held up to the light of the rational world, to the man-made world, seem a little spooky and crazy, which is one of the reasons that in the culture some of us grew up in, we don't talk about them in public because they're personal. They're the most personal part of a person. So it is without judgment by the way that we're airing this okay just describing it because it is significant to the future of the world to the future of this war and to our future as Americans. So, how exactly did the IDF, the Israel Defense Forces, a military that the US taxpayer pays for, that lots of wealthy Americans send money to to friends of the IDF, how did all these guys wind up wearing patches suggesting the point of this war was the destruction of one of the holiest places in Islam and the rebuilding of a temple that is totally anathema of Christianity? Like, how did this happen? Well, there are a lot of ways it happened. The main way it happened is because no one in the United States noticed because it's such a secular place. And as noted, we have eyes but can't see and ears and can't hear. But this has been going on a long time in public, through in part the efforts of a group called Habad, C H A B A D. And you may know people who give money to Abad or run Habad. Super nice people engaged in all kinds of charitable activities, drug rehab. You know, there's a lot about Habad that's that's really good. But what is Habad exactly? Well, Habad, you can look it up, is a very old organization, about 250 years old, and it's a branch of Hidetic Judaism. It's an organization that was overseen for many years by a guy called Rabbi Monakam Schneerson, who was famously in Brooklyn, considered the Messiah by some of his followers, um, who was a friend of presidents or certainly someone presidents visited, a very powerful man in the Orthodox and his hidic community. and he was the overseer of Habad, which predated him and outlasted him, but he was its most visible ambassador. And Habad has been pushing in a pretty subtle way, unless you look carefully, for the reconstruction of the Third Temple. And it seems like from the reading we did recently, that those patches actually came from Habad. Well, any case, Habad is pushing for the building of the third temple. But it's not just hidic groups from Brooklyn, and it's not just IDF soldiers. There are amazingly a lot of American evangelical leaders, Christian Zionists whose main point is rebuilding the third temple. How could an American Christian or any Christian call for the building of a temple whose presence whose inherent presence denies Christ who said clearly and Christians believe this. It's a it's a core point of faith, I am the temple. You want to speak to God, you speak through me. That's Christianity. That's the whole religion right there. So if you're a Christian preacher calling for the rebuilding of the third temple, you've kind of missed the whole point. That's more than apostasy. That's like not even knowing what the religion's about. So it's hard to believe there could be any ordained Christian leaders pushing for the rebuilding of the third temple. Oh, but there are a lot. There are a lot. And here's just one. This is Pastor Greg Lockach. Listen to this. The Gaza Strip, which has now been cut off by Israel, and rightly so. They should have cut him off a long time ago. Now, I don't care how insensitive you think I am to that. There's six doors in this church. You can leave anytime you want to. They've cut them off, you know, electricity. They've cut off their water. They they they they should have. Now, listen. I'm I'm not for hurting anyone that's innocent, but anybody that supports terrorism is not innocent. You understand that? [applause] [music] Israel should make the Gaza Strip a parking lot by this time next week. Destroy the whole thing. What they ought to do is evacuate up there on the hill and get a great big missile and blow that wicked dome of the rock plum off of the spot where it's standing right now so we can get that THIRD TEMPLE REBUILT AND USHER IN THE COMING [music] OF JESUS. BOY, it is it is embarrassing and shameful as an American Christian to hear that and to know that video is from a few years ago. It's been on the internet. No one bothered to highlight it. Most people weren't even aware this was going on. Oh, it's definitely going on. These are very common views. Seems obvious that Mike Huckabe has them. That a lot of the Christian Zionist John Hegy that you think just like Israel. They just like Israel a lot. No, these are clerics. So, their lives were informed by their religious views. What are their religious views? Well, you just heard it right there from Pastor Lockach, who is quite a prominent Christian Zionist. He's not some lone wacko. And there he is with an Israeli flag waving behind him. Casual calls for genocidal violence. JUST BLOW IT UP. Make it a parking lot. Well, 2 million people live there. What happens to them? They're terrorist sympathizers. That right there is the tell. This is not Christianity. Imagine Jesus saying, "Just kill them all. They're terrorists." Is there anything in the gospel that suggests Jesus believed that? No. There's a lot to suggest, in fact, to tell us in very clear terms. He thought the opposite, of course. But the last part, let's build the third temple and bring about the return of Jesus, is a direct contradiction of core Christian theology. And even people without theology degrees who didn't go to some eminent Bible college can tell you what Jesus says I am the temple. That is not Christianity. It's not even a close faximile of Christianity. It's clearly evil. And it is in some sense the driving force behind the efforts to rebuild the third temple. Julian the Apostate, who was the last guy to try it, who died invading Iran, was not a was not Jewish. He was a pagan just like Pastor Lockach. But for some reason, he was the instrument of trying to do this. And there are many of these people and not just in the theological realm, in the political realm. And that's relevant to you whether you believe in God or not or interested in the history of the Abrahamic faiths or not. Global leaders believe this. People you wouldn't expect and you wonder what is going on here? It's enough to make the hair in your arms go up. Did everyone know there was an effort to rebuild the third temple and the foundation stone except me? I can't believe I was left out of this conversation. No. All of this took place in public. And if we'd been paying attention or been tuned into that frequency, the spiritual frequency, we've been spiritually sensitive enough to pay attention, we would have known this. But of course, when you grow up in a materialist culture, when the only things you believe are real or the things that can be measured or purchased on Amazon, you tend to miss a lot. And we miss this. Here's the president of Argentina, Javier Mle, who we know personally at the Western Wall, which is believed by some to be a remnant of the second temple. The last stone from the second temple. That's the claim. Here he is. There, the famous whailing wall saying this. Watch the subtitles. There's a prophecy about the destruction that says that a fox will break into the holiest of holies. There is another prophecy that says that the same place will be rebuilt. Now that I see with my own eyes the first prophecy come true, I laugh in joy and full of hope as the second prophecy will surely come true. So a correction that doesn't appear to be the Western Wall and there were no subtitles. You heard him say it through his translator. I laugh and quiver with joy when I think about the third temple being rebuilt. Now, this is the supposedly maybe, who knows, Catholic president of an overwhelmingly Catholic country, South American country, wonderful country, Argentina, who got elected and was presented to American news consumers as a libertarian economist, who was going to fix their debt problem and get rid of inflation and just make life better for Argentines. And there he is in Jerusalem saying that he's weeping with joy, thinking about the return, the rebuilding of the third temple. What the hell is that? You would think that would not even be on his to-do list. If you're running a country as complex and damaged as Argentina and as promising and great as Argentina, but like there's a lot of things you got to do in Argentina if you're running it. But you take time to fly to Israel and say the thing you really want in life is the rebuilding of the third temple. What is going on here? And why haven't we talked about this before? Say before we invaded Iran with troops who say out loud, "We're doing this to bring about the creation of the third temple. Why weren't the rest of us informed?" Now, here's a piece of tape you may have seen and that I personally don't want to play since I know the guy and I like him, but it does make you wonder. So this is the current Secretary of War, Pete Hgsth, former Fox News employee. Nice man. Very nice man, 2018 in Jerusalem and is someone who knew him well. I can tell you I had no idea that he had such evolved and specific and apparently very informed opinions on rebuilding the third temple of all questions. This is not something they teach you in Sunday school in the Presbyterian church. This is not something that people talk about at dinner in the United States. This is not something our Congress ever mentions that the president ever talks about. This is considered so esoteric and weird and cryptohistorical and religious and kind of culty and what's Habad and that no one ever mentions it. But here's Pete Hegth, football player from Princeton, going on about it in a way that suggests he's thought a lot about it. This is 2018. Today, Jennifer and I and others had a chance to go see the Western Wall of the Temple Mount, the Western Wall tunnels, uh, so much of the old city. And as you stand there, you can't help but behold the miracle before you. And it got me thinking about another miracle that I hope all of you don't see too far away because 1917 was a miracle. 1948 was a miracle. 1967 was a miracle. 2017, the declaration of Jerusalem as the capital was a miracle. And there's no reason why the miracle of the reestablishment of the temple on the Temple Mount is not possible. [applause] I don't know how it would happen. You don't know how it would happen, but I know that it could happen. What is that? That's the secretary of war right now overseeing the war with Iran that people fighting it are starting to say actually is about rebuilding this third temple. It's the same man. Okay, this is the point where you begin to think maybe we should have talked about this and its implications. And what are its implications? Religious war. Global religious war. So the first heavily publicized move by the United States military and the Israeli military in this conflict was to kill the head of state of Iran, the 86year-old Illah Kamini who was replaced today by his son who's apparently more anti-western than he was. So I guess strictly speaking that wasn't very effective. But if you take three steps back, and no one did because everyone's busy denouncing him as Hitler and the most evil man in the world, and we're so grateful he's dead. When was the last time the United States military or the Israeli working in conjunction with the Israeli military killed the head of a world religion? Is that wise? It's not because we agree with all world's religions. It's not an endorsement of Shia Islam to say maybe we should pause before killing its 86-year-old leader. It is instead an acknowledgment that that might have consequences that affect the United States and Europe and the world, but particularly the United States since we are the United States and we have children and hope to have grandchildren and what will be the downstream effects for them when you kill a religious leader? Did killing the religious leader their command and control structure? Were they unable to launch missiles and drones when we killed the 86-year-old Ayatollah? No. because he knew he was going to be killed. That's why he stayed above ground. Apparently, he wanted to be martyed. Now, why would he want to be martyed? Maybe because he wanted a religious war. Why did we kill him? Maybe because we wanted a religious war. Now, why would we want that? Why would the Israelis who got us into this war? Everyone admits that now. Sorry. Why would they want that? I don't know. Think about what would happen if this war leads to the destruction of the Dome on the Rock and the Alexa complex on Mount Mariah in Jerusalem. And we'll explain in a second how that could happen. A war that began with the killing of the head of Shia Islam. What would happen? Well, here are the numbers. There are about 15 and a half million Jews in the world total. There are about 2.5 billion Christians and there are about two billion Muslims. So whatever happens next is not going to be a fight between the Muslims and the Jews cuz 2 billion versus 15 million not much of a fight. This is likely to be, if not brought under control immediately, or maybe it's too late, a war, a religious war, the one that Lindsey Graham just described between Muslims and Christians. And it's not going to play out in the Middle East because this is a regional conflict, but as noted at the beginning, it's a global conflict where every big power has a stake in what happens. This will play out globally and it'll play out in our cities. Islam is the fastest growing religion in the United States. There not that many Muslims in the United States. What? 5 million or something like that. But it's the fastest growing religion. That's enough to to cause problems for sure. In Europe, 65 million Muslims, second biggest religion in every European country, fastest growing in every country. Australia, same thing. Second biggest, fastest growing. New Zealand, same thing. second biggest, fastest growing. Canada, same thing. What happens in all those countries, those Christian western white countries? What happens there if there's the religious war that Lindsey Graham and clearly the Israeli government and some in our government are hoping for? What happens? Those countries suffer more than they have suffered. And so, it's possible that the real target here, it's just possible. was throwing this out out there. It's not the Mullers in Iran. It's us as it always has been. But don't take our word for it. Here's a particularly candid and honestly kind of articulate clip from a couple of years ago. This is from August of 2024 from an Israeli rabbi, Joseph Misra, describing how [snorts] Israel should take advantage of a then ongoing conflict with Iran, much less intense than the current conflict we're seeing with Iran to destroy the Dome of the Rock and Ala. Watch this. If it was up to me, the last time when they shot hundreds of missiles, I would pretend that one missile came from Iran and shoot it down. You know, then all the Arabs will go against Iran. It will be the end of the problems. >> You make them fight with each other, this bunch of lunatics. >> Never too late. You deal with a bunch of cowards. shoot it down into the Dome of the Rock in Ala, destroy what's on what the Israelis call the Temple Mount on the foundation stone. Destroy it and blame the Iranians. And that has the effect, as you just heard him say, of turning our enemies against each other. Turning our enemies against each other. Well, they've refused to recognize it for quite some time. The Europeans are the enemies. the mortal enemies of the Israelis. That's the Israeli perspective, obviously. Look at the effects. And so, if that were to happen in this conflict, it's not the Israelis who would bear the brunt of it. It's the Europeans, it's the Canadians, it's the Australians, and it's us with AR, and it's the Russians. 20% of Russia is Muslim. All of those countries would be in for serious turmoil and budge and maybe already this shortly into the war. Turn them against each other. You heard the rabbi say. Now, how could this play out? Very simple. Iran is sending drones and missiles into Israel right now, mostly into Tel Aviv. Is it beyond imagination? That in the fog of war, maybe one of those missiles hits the Dome of the Rock or we're told that it did. And of course, during war, the first thing you see is censorship. So, it's very hard to know what's going. You're already seeing it today. Is there less or more video available on the internet today than there was yesterday from this world? Well, there's much less, of course. That's called censorship. They're censoring video of what's actually happening. It happens in every conflict. Every war sets off the same cycle at home. Far from the fighting. Censorship and persecution. Censorship and persecution. Persecution of the enemies, real or perceived, are the people prosecuting the war and censorship of their views. So in that environment when you can't really know what's going on, it's thousands of miles from here. All of a sudden the Alexa complex is just vaporized. Oops, the Iranians did it. Then we have this debate. It's like a hospital bombing in Gaza. Who did it? Well, it was a booster from a Hamas rocket. Well, how do I know? I wasn't there. All we know is it's gone. Oh, so sorry. Could that happen? Oh, yeah. Could happen. The army is fighting with patches of the Third Temple on their arms, on their official uniforms. And what happens then? Global religious war. Talk about high stakes. You thought nukes were high stakes. At least nukes are over quickly. There are survivors. a generational religious war that's worse than any virus and more deadly that could happen. Do the people in charge know it could happen? Some of them do. They don't seem worried about they should be. We should all be worried about. We should all be noisy about it. No, you can't do that to the world. We hope to give to our grandchildren. hate to brag, but we're pretty confident this show is the most vehemently pro- dog dog podcast you're ever going to see. We can take or leave some people, but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best. They really are our best friends. And so, for that reason, we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch Pet. It's the fastest growing pet teleaalth service. Dutch.com is on a mission to create what you need, what you actually need, affordable quality veterinary care anytime, no matter where you are. They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately. It's offering an exclusive discount. Dutch is for our listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year. Visit dutch.com/tucker to learn more. Use the code Tucker for $50 off. That is an unlimited vet visit. $82 a year. 82 bucks a year. We actually use this. Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance in a 10-minute call. It's pretty amazing, actually. You never have to leave your house. You don't have to throw the dog in the truck. No wasted time waiting for appointments. No wasted money on clinics or visit fees. Unlimited visits and follow-ups for no extra cost. Plus, free shipping on all products for up to five pets. It sounds amazing. It couldn't be real, but it actually is real. Visit dutch.com/tucker to learn more. Use the code Tucker for 50 bucks off your veterinary care per year. Your dogs, your cats, and your wallet will thank you. So, what is going on uh in this war? It's again hard to know because of the censorship, but there is a man, an independent analyst called Brandon Wkert who we think after spending a lot of time looking at analysis from a bunch of different people is one of the most informed people in the United States who can speak freely and publicly about what is actually happening and not just in a conceptual big picture way, but in a detailed way and coming at this with an understanding of the technology in use, the tactics and the strategies. We've been super impressed and we think you will be too. With that, Brandon Wicker joins us now. Brandon, thank you so much for coming on. >> Thank you for having me and thank you for those kind words. That was very I'm I'm very honored. >> Well, it's true. We've never met, but I've just been watching your stuff recently and you know, wars tend to bring out phonies and people are like, "Oh, I was on Seal Team 27 and I know what's going, you know, and they don't know anything." Um, but your analysis has been >> I'm just a nerd. I'm just a nerd. >> Well, I have been very impressed by your by your grasp of what's happening. So, can you just give us really quickly the overview of where we are today? What are the big developments? >> Well, the big developments, as you saw with Secretary of War, I guess he's calling himself now, Heg Seth, is uh they're transitioning the munitions. So, now the claim is that uh it's been so successful this air war, they don't need to use what's known as standoff weapons. So, think the Tomahawk cruise missile. Uh, and they're going to now shift, the air force and the Israeli air force are going to shift now to flying large sorties of warplanes into Iran uh, and bombing targets with what are known as gravity bombs. And these are things like the joint directed attack munitions, JAMAMs. Uh, they require you to be close to the target. So the the risk factor to our pilots is now increasing exponentially. But I would just like to posit a theory and it's just a theory. Um I actually think the real reason we are doing this shift is not because of realities or facts on the ground that are amendable to the US and Israeli strategic position. I think we are being dictated to by the depletion of our stock piles. And what I mean by that, I have some numbers for your audience. We all know the Tomahawk cruise missile going back to the Clinton era where he would just pop those things off, you know, as soon as Lewinsky the Lewinsky impeachment got underway. Uh 4,000 Tomahawk land attack cruise missiles are believed to be in the arsenal. We have been draining those since 2022 2023 in Ukraine at an disproportionate rate. Uh in the last 4 days of this conflict, we have expended 400 of those systems, which means that's 100 per day with the operational and tempo not ceasing. Uh in 2026, the budget request was only for 59 new missiles. We need several hundreds every year. The reason we're getting such low numbers, Tucker, is because our defense industrial base is broken and we have no business starting a world war or a major regional war as we are in the process of doing. So, I believe the real reason the the US and Israeli militaries are starting to get more daring and dangerous with their air strikes is because they cannot afford to blow through the munitions that are already depleting. And it is is in fact a race to depletion between us and Iran. And right now I think the Iranians still have a very sizable unused increasingly sophisticated missile arsenal. Colonel Rob Mayus is a friend of mine. He's a former Air Force colonel. He disagrees with me. He says, "Look, these these missiles that are being popped off by Iran are basically a bunch of deadenders. It's going to fizzle out." And Hegsth made a sort of argument about that today that there was a decrease. But I actually think that those deadenders, if that's what you want to call them, uh actually are probably still combat effective and that is why we are now having to still continue the war even though we have blown through these standoff munitions uh which really were protecting our people. In fact, I got word from a source of mine who's monitoring this uh on open source, which it looks like the USS Abraham Lincoln is going to be repositioned to within anti-ship ballistic missile range of Iran. So, either the US really believes we've degraded the Iranian capabilities sufficiently or we're just throwing caution to the wind because we got to get this thing over before we run out of materials. And that'll probably start happening this weekend. Thi this is not a surprise to people who watched carefully the few days in the run-up to this conflict where there were uniformed service I mean there were flag officers who apparently made this >> caseer yes >> exactly that we just don't have the munitions to sustain any kind of real conflict they they said that right >> yeah in fact it is my understanding and this is again take from this what you will uh it is my understanding that last Friday the order went out at 3:38 p.m. Eastern. Uh before that, there was a quote particularly contentious meeting between General Dan Raisen Kaine, who is Trump's handpicked chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He was pulled out of retirement uh by Trump. So, this is Trump's guy. And Kaine tried to get to the word to the president that this thing is not going to go like you think it is. This is not Venezuela. This is a very different operation. And the president for whatever reason still decided to ignore the best military advice he got and went forward with this. In turn, Vice Admiral Fred Cotcher who was an agitant basically to Kaine leaked parts of that meeting to I think it was Reuters. Now the question that I I've been hearing from people is uh was that Cotcher acting on his own valition or was that in fact Kotcher executing some kind of informal order from Dan Kaine because Kane is >> the rest of the military is very the high level is very worried about the blowback from this operation and it is my contention that they the permanent bureaucracy is desperately trying to push blame away from itself to the polit politician itions and even as we're seeing Marco Rubio now to Israel itself which is not how a winning war would look like. There'd be no blameshifting. >> So do you have any insight into how the decision was made to kill Iran's head of state/chief cleric? And I this has not been a conversation anyone's been willing to have because of course the proponents of it have been screaming about how he's Hitler, he's the worst person. And if there's any question about whether it's a good idea to kill him, >> you're you're an Ayatollah lover, you know, just the normal low IQ crap that you see on Fox News. But it's a real question like why would what what was the thinking there? Do you know? >> So, um, again, this is all, you know, background and sort of piecing the puzzle together with what I know about how it works up in that horrible city we call DC. Um but basically what it sounds like is the administration used the idea of diplomatic talks uh to lull Kamani into a false sense of security. Uh we were going into a holy week at that time and the Iranians wanted or Kamani wanted to basically come out of his hole and uh he thought okay we're going to get a reprieve. We'll we'll kick this down the road until Monday which I think was March 2nd. They got the word on Friday that hey we're open to negotiating. So Kamani and his cadre let their guard down and at the moment they did Israeli uh missiles were fired at a very interesting it was actually if I can nerd out here for a second the Israelis did a very interesting performance with their missile where they fired it into space from I believe F-16s or F-35s. It went into the space above Iran and came down at hypersonic velocities and it came within millimeters of the the known position of Kamani. So it from a tactical standpoint, yes, it was very technically um impressive. But the the key thing here was that the US used its honor in to lull the the counterparty into a false sense of security using our diplomatic word that hey we're we're going to hold off and try to talk to you. And I actually think and I say this as somebody who's a fan of Steve Witoff, I actually think Whitoff and probably Kushner uh were probably in on the whole thing uh to to basically lull um the Iranian uh leader into a false sense of security so we could clip him. And I think Tucker, I think the assumption was that if we lpped off the head of the regime, Kamani, that the whole thing would implode like a house of cards in about 72 hours. Which is why I think Trump didn't really care when uh Dan Kaine was warning him last Friday that, hey, we've got 8 days of munitions and sentcom before we have to start cannibalizing Indoaccom and then we have a real crisis on our hands. I think Trump was thinking, "We can probably do this in about 24 to 72 hours. we'll get Kamani, the Israelis will, and then it'll all work out. It's all gonna it's all going to work out. And obviously, nobody took the time to brief the president on and I could have done it. I wrote a whole book about it um on basically what the Iranians have been doing for for pretty much 47 years to harden their regime and to make it relatively survivable. And that is why now we find ourselves, what is it, day four or day five now? and they're already having to panic and change the munition structure because we're depleting them too fast. This is why, by the way, the heads of those defense uh companies are now being summoned to the White House because Trump is going to try to read those leaders uh the riot act saying, "You got to boost production." And they're going to say to him, "Sorry, we can't do it because the defense industrial base is both broken and corrupt." I don't know the truth about what you said about the the diplomacy uh as a cover for action lulling into vulnerability. Um, I have heard just the opposite that the Israelis are telling everybody that the US knew the strike was going to happen and and they're doing that to shake the faith of any of our partners in the region in our diplomacy and make us sound disapp that that would that well and and obviously I like I said take from this because this is all you know I don't have evidence of this to present either but I I find it just if I can speculate here for a moment I find it impossible or improbable able to think given the level of fusion between the US and Israeli command and the I mean for goodness sakes there are Israeli officers permanently stationed in the Pentagon and I was just told uh by a former CIA case officer at Langley. So um basically I find it really hard to believe that the administration did not have any involvement in this. Now, they want to say that they didn't, and I think they are saying this because they're worried that there's going to be significant political and possibly legal blowback. Um, you know, over time because this war is anyway, but so I don't believe that particular story when they say, "Oh, we had nothing to do with it." I think we probably did not have an active role in the sense of bombardment, but I do believe that we we were aware of what was going to happen, and I think we probably nudged it along. >> If that's true, that's one of the craziest things that's ever happened. I mean, we're trying to negotiate an end to the war we've been waging against Russia, which is right at >> Yeah. Well, exactly. And the Russians aren't stupid. The Iranians aren't stupid. Not everyone other than us is stupid. >> And which is our assumption. They're all a bunch of savages. They're all poshunes, you know, living in the Hindu Kush. But they're not actually. They're really smart. And they look at this like, why would we enter into negotiations with the same negotiating team >> that just did this? So, okay. But here's my macro question, which is what about the safety of the United States? Like when you kill an 86 year old leader of a global religion, which Shia Islam is, it's this smaller but still enormous branch of Islam. >> You're going to you're going to expect to create religious extremism. You kill the religious leader during Ramadan. Like, was there no one in the room? And I know you're not supposed to say this cuz it makes you like a Muslim lover or something. I just want to say this as a Jesus person, but as an American who wants peace in my own country, nobody stood up and said like, "Hey, what what are we doing here?" Like, we're going to create a generational war that our grandkids are going to have to deal with at the shopping mall. Did anyone say that? >> No. No. I think I think General Kaine was the closest and he was making sort of a tactical technical argument. And I have to say, as much as I do like the general, and I do like him, I think he's a decent guy, I I I think I think he's gone down in my book a little bit because he didn't resign in protest because whatever they're saying in public, the logistics does it's like math. It doesn't lie. It's it's gravity. It doesn't lie. And uh the logistics are not in our favor if this becomes Trump said it was a forever war yesterday. Now he's putting in sneer quotes, but uh you know this could become at least a 5 to 8 week war. Heg Seth said 8 weeks today. Um and so I I I'm starting to remember co and two weeks to flatten the cur the curve became you know years of you know dealing with fallout. So I am I I am very concerned that the president has really bad adviserss. Uh these are not people that I think have the best interests of MAGA or America first. the coalition that got him elected uh in in their hearts. I think these are these are deep sters masquerading as MAGA lovers. Um and I think that that this is why we're here. This is one of the most um strategically irresponsible moves I've ever seen. And the fact that the president, I don't believe, was informed the truth about what was going to happen in the way it was going to happen. I think now that's why you're seeing the administration expanding the war, talking about giving Kurds weapons and and and money and and we're going to now expand it into Iraq and destabilize Iraq as if that's another thing we need on our plate. This to me is somebody who This to me is is a country that has made a very serious mistake with triggering this war and now they're just making the mess bigger and bigger and bigger hoping that they can clean it up once it's totally, you know, out of hand or or maybe they don't even want to clean it up. I don't know. That's speculation. But I do believe that we were involved on some level with what was going on uh behind the scenes the day that And by the way, I just want to make something clear. I am very much anti-Islamic Republic of Iran, that regime, all of that. I've I'm on the record. People know this about me. So, I'm not saying this because I'm mourning the loss of Kamani, but but it is it it it is very dangerous what we're doing. And I think that we really damaged America's credibility for a long time, for a long time. When it comes to diplomacy, >> the gold industry bankrolls a lot of conservative media. Much of the gold IRA business is not actually about selling gold at all. It's about selling massively marked up coins to people who trust the voices [music] delivering the pitch. >> Why is gold a hedge? >> I've decided to partner with the top rated precious metals company. >> The companies have the [music] exclusive control. They can manipulate the price of the coins at any time. >> That's the dark side of it. >> What he said was you don't get as much of a loss and they tend to really accelerate [music] when the market goes up, which obviously sounds too good to be true. >> We know this is happening because we talk to people who work inside these companies. The reality is there is no regulation. >> And then we talked to people who lost their savings. >> They were pumping this company and I trusted them. >> Even as the price of gold rises, >> it's so crushing. >> The great gold scam. Watch it now at tucker carlson.com. People are getting robbed. We're sounding the alarm and we hope you will join us. >> Yeah. I mean, I'm I'm not going to put up with that for one second. That whole like call your patriotism. some guy working for Israel is calling me unpatriotic in a country ancestors founded. I don't think I'm not not going to play along with that at all. >> Um, and it's shocking that they would even be throwing that out there uh at the most patriotic in the world. I bet you have. >> So, let me I mean, you look at this and it's so heartbreaking and it's so potentially catastrophic that you keep thinking, all right, point made. Can we pull back? Can we just pull back and declare victory and go home? And the famous phrase, are we at a place where that's possible? Well, I'm reminded of a 2004 interview that Donald Trump gave to your old colleague Neil Kavutoo, and it was during the Iraq war at the height of the insurgency. And at the time, everybody made fun of Trump, but I thought it was brilliant. Trump told George W. Bush on that interview, he said, "Listen, just declare victory. Bring everybody home. We got Saddam. You've won. Let's just call it a day and let the Middle East figure out the mess." Now, people mocked him at the time, but I actually thought actually that's probably the best at that time way out. Well, he could do the same thing right now because get this, he got rid of Kamani. He got rid of very top bad IRGC guys. He's he can claim that. He has done what he can to help the people. There is a way forward. It's a golden offramp, but he's got to take it in the next probably 48 hours because if he doesn't take it, Tucker, this thing takes on a life of its own. The Iranians are not going to surrender. They're not going to stop popping off missiles. They have planned for this, like I said, for 47 years. Yeah, they're degraded. Yeah, they're hurt, but so are our allies, by the way. And the oil coming out of the region is not coming out of the region. We are now looking at spikes in the price of energy. Um, I saw a report from Seeking Alpha, which is an investment uh publication, saying that by if this continues for four to eight weeks, this could take oil over $200 a barrel. That's recession territory going into a midterm election. >> Yeah. Well, I think 200 is depression is I mean, well, who knows, right? But I think >> that's the extreme. Yeah, that's the extreme. But I mean, >> listen, the listen, they're destroying not they're not just blockading the straight. They're destroying the refineries in Qatar, in Saudi Arabia, and the Qataris are saying they're not going to get this stuff online for months, if not years. So, that's going to be a gaping hole in the global economy uh for for oil and natural gas. So, even if Trump gets a quote victory here in Iran, and I don't even know what victory looks like anymore, um we're going to be cleaning up this mess economically for many, many years thereafter. that all of that is awful. All of it is man. >> They don't call me Dr. Doom for nothing. [laughter] >> All of it is manageable though. You can imagine working through those problems and convincing yourself that it was worth it somehow or you know you could concoct a story to tell yourself. There are certain things that are not uh possible to recover from and one is the use of unconventional you know highly destructive weapons that just change the calculation forever. And I worry about that and everyone I ask about is, "Oh, no, no, no, that would never happen." Do you worry about it? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, and I think I tweeted about this in the last 24 hours. Trump Trump responded to what I've been writing. Um, and I I'm not going to get into how I know that, but but he he somebody told him what I've been writing, and he's quite cross with me. And, uh, you know, I'm a I'm a three-time supporter of Trump. I'm saying this out of love, you know, not not out of hate. Um, but I was told that the statement he made yesterday in the Oval Office was partly was responding to my claims about the stock piles. And he said something very specific. He said not only we have enough weapons to fight a quote forever war, which holy cow. Um but uh he said that we you know we're depleted a little bit on the and I'm paraphrasing he would on the lower level weapons but we've got pl we've got enough higherend and m middle tier weapons to fight forever. Well, the higherend weapons would be things like, I don't know, uh, lowy yield nuclear weapons, right? >> Um, and you know, you don't want to think that an American president would go there, especially over something like this where we weren't attacked, which we were not, and I I'm not a fan of the Iranian regime, and they do support terror, but we were not attacked. The Israelis weren't even attacked. Um, this was all sort of the machinations of Netanyahu's worst fears. Um and uh I it is my concern that if we truly are reaching depletion that we might have a a an incident where a a nuke is used and um you know it's it's not the likeliest, but it's no longer impossible. It's now moved into sort of the realm of it could happen. And the longer this goes on and the more that we run through these stockpiles um and if we start losing planes to some of the remaining Iranian air defense systems then we're going to have some problems. And I want to also say something about the uh strategic side. I was on an uh I was on Bannon show earlier today and there was one of the guests was saying basically saying I was wrong and maybe I am but you know who knows. Um, but he was saying that we've got local air superiority and from there we'll be able to grow out and go farther. And the only reason you get local air superiority is because you've degraded the enemy so much. Well, yes and no. But that's just a small slice of a very large country. um they probably in Iran if they've decentralized those missile capabilities to the local commander level anticipating that we would degrade command and control they likely have hidden and decentralized their air defense capabilities uh and that means we have to do sort of a long-term air defense hunt and in the meanwhile the Iranians are still combat effective uh and the longer this lasts the the longer that straight is closed down the more the oil is disrupted and basically the more we get to these really nightmare scenarios. In my book, I said a war over Iran will likely trigger a World War III. Now, that book came out in 2022. Um, I I remain convinced that we are at the the opening salvo of a true world war. And it's happening because of our actions and the actions of our partner, Israel. I would say even more precisely, it's happening because of Benjamin Netanyahu and the hammerlock he has over the American government, including MSAD officers at CIA headquarters and IDF officers at the Pentagon. >> I mean, >> that one came from a you you would know this individual. He's a very famous CIA guy. Got off the phone with him about an hour before I came on with you and and and uh it's scary. It's scary. I mean, remember though, Gary Voggler, who wrote a great book uh for the Libertarian Institute, it was called, I think Israel was the winner of the 2003 Iraq war, something like that. He was an oil guy working for the Coalition Provisional Authority. And he identified this guy named Macakovsky who was a Pentagon bureaucrat who ran the Iraq war desk for the first part of the Iraq war in 03. And he was a MSAD officer, not just IDF, he and he was Doug F's son-in-law. So, you know, this is uh you know, our our country is is is unfortunately not being run entirely by the United States and the American people. >> No, it doesn't. You don't see a lot of sovereignty. >> I'll get emails for that one. >> Well, it's true. It's factually true. And the Secretary of State, God bless him, admitted that two days ago and said, "We did this cuz Israel made us do it. They were going to go anyway." >> So, what about the question of hypersonic weapons? You read that Iran has them. They've been given them. >> Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. They've got them. Uh, in fact, I got an interesting report from overseas yesterday. And again, you know, these I'm sort of I I I take with a grain of salt, but they've been right. And when they're right, though, they're really right. Uh, this one came from our friends in Russia. So, take from this what you will, but the the report that I received was a retired Russian general is telling the press over there that he knows for a fact there's a cluster of Chinese um high techch officers or or technical officers on the ground in Iran right now. uh perfecting and maintaining Iran's growing they're still building them uh growing hypersonic weapons capability. And the reason is because the Chinese want to test these systems because they're basically very similar to the Chinese ASBM, which of course when and if, and I really hope it's if um the war with China erupts, the first thing the Chinese are going to do after they knock out our satellites and disrupt our electromagnetic frequencies is they're going to use thousands of ASBMs ringed in those man-made islands to either keep our carriers at bay so that we can't launch planes and range or to sink or destroy the carrier's flight deck. Uh, and the Iranians are the te the Iran rather is the test bed the same way that we've been using Ukraine as a test bed against Russian tech. Uh, and so the the Iranians have them. Uh, they're buried in those underground missile cities. They have not really fired them. I I I believe they fired four ballistic missiles at the carrier after Kamani was killed. That was a symbolic attack though. If the Iranians really wanted to go ham on the carrier with a missile swarm, they absolutely could. The only thing that would be preventing them was if we had degraded their C2 functions enough. And I at that time I don't believe we had. >> What's a C2 function? >> I'm sorry. That's command and control. So basically their ability to control their systems uh and issue commands. That's why before the war began, the Iranians um basically the the government said to their local field commanders, "We're going to give you permission to take command of your individual missile battery so that if something like killing Kamani happens, you can just start going and you won't have to call in for orders or for range." And by the way, the Chinese are using their Yaoan I think I think it's their Yaoan uh satellite constellation to do surveillance of the carrier and of the US air bases in the region and they are providing increasingly accurate targeting sets to the Iranians. In fact, I believe the reason the Iranian missiles have been so effective in damaging our bases and boy have they done a doozy. It is not being reported accurately. They have done a real doozy to these bases. Um, it's because of the fact that the Chinese are providing direct real-time signals, intelligence, and and electronic assistance to the Iranians. >> So, we're fighting a proxy war with China right now. >> It's a world war. I mean, this is a world war. And um the Chinese are more than happy to see us stew. Now, there's this there's this like story that uh the politicians keep telling us. It's really the Republican side that keeps saying this that well, you know, we went after Venezuela and we went after Iran and that's going to really kill China because they they rely on these countries for their oil. It's not really accurate. Um the Chinese got less than, I think, 4% of their oil from Venezuela. It it was a nuisance, if anything, to lose. If anything, they were sinking more money into rebuilding the refining capacity because the communists had ruined the oil industry in Venezuela over 25 years. And then with Iran, they get at most, I think, I think 14% of their oil and natural gas from Iran. What they were doing is the Chinese knew because they could read the room, they knew we were going in. So what they started doing was shifting their purchases of oil from Iran to places like neighboring Russia and to other Middle Eastern countries. In fact, I think that the largest amount of oil purchased by China in Saudi Arabia occurred 2 weeks before the war began. So, while this will hurt the Chinese absolutely economically, it's not going to trigger a collapse. It's not The Chinese were prepared for this just as the Russians were prepared for what we were going to throw at them in 2022. These regimes have been studying us for years, for years. and they know our pressure points and uh you know we're like the gentle giant. We're like the lovable giant. We're just too stupid to realize you know these these people are serious and they're killers. They're killers and uh you know we're trying to lecture the world about you know transgendered rights in Namibia and uh you know these guys are are playing hard ball and they're playing for keeps. And I was actually speaking to Brendan O'Reilly who's probably one of the foremost uh China scholars uh real real world intelligence type scholar practitioner. Uh he wrote a great book called Everybody Is Everyone Is Wrong About China. And um I just talked to him this afternoon and he tells me he's convinced that at the end of the day the real winner of this conflict is China. >> Of course >> that we are going Yeah. And I think actually this this this conflict worst case scenario because you you laid out a pretty bleak scenario too. Um, but worst case scenario is this is the end of American military power for a generation. >> I mean, I think that's clearly the goal. Um, and that's up to us at this point. I mean, to, you know, the second you, it's the same in a fist fight. The second you punch someone, >> everybody standing around finds out how tough you actually are. What you say? What' you say? >> But the second the blows start, it's like, we know. And you don't always want to reveal that. It's better. >> No, >> it's better to keep it mysterious, I would say. Same with nudity like you know none of us [laughter] look better naked. Um so but I would Okay. So the hypersonic weapons missiles which they possess. Um >> you suggest they might be deployed against >> surface craft right? >> Yes. >> What about Israel? Would any of them wind up >> so Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you've got you've got two classes of of hypersonics is I apologize. I was fixated on the carrier because I got that text. Um but yeah. So, you got the you got the maritime targeting of uh surface warships, but then you also have what you've seen a couple of times in the last year where the Iranians did deploy hypersonics against Israel and it did an incredible amount of damage uh to Tel Aviv if I remember correctly in the 12-day war. And I think although this might have been AI, I think in the last 48 hours they deployed another the Iranians did another hypersonic against Tel Aviv that did a lot of damage. So the the these hypersonic weapons, there is no active defense against them. Our our air defense systems cannot and the problem is it's really what makes them very interesting is they come in fast and then they sort of zigzag unpredictably right before they land. And this is the problem for our AD systems, our air defense systems, because they sort of just track and then go. But if you've got a target coming in and then they, you know, those AD systems are not because the AD systems are older and they they're they're based on older generation being able to track incoming regular ballistic missiles. Uh so this is where we get real concern because we I don't think we really know how many hypersonic weapons they've got. I would imagine they've got at least I would say at least a hundred or so because they've been just churning them out and the Chinese have been helping them. And of course, the Chinese have overmatch with us in terms of industrial mass production. >> What is the damage right now to to to Israel and to and to US bases in the Gulf, do you think? >> Well, well, the the the bases in the Gulf, um, you know, I I I wish I had kept the window open that I was reading, but basically at least three of the bases have been devastated. the uh fifth fleet headquarters. I I am told and if you look at the satellite imagery that you can find on open- source information, it looks like actually the base in Bahrain looks like Gaza. It's completely uh moonscape. Uh so the the American fifth fleet now I don't believe I don't know if there's any cuz I I think we might have evacuated that base before this started. So I don't I don't want to say there's casualties cuz I don't know. But just looking at those satellite images that it looks like that it's been flattened and that's a very expensive base that you and I paid for. Um, and that was the sort of the hub for the US Navy in the Middle East for many years and it has been completely taken offline. And I I have serious doubt. I was talking also to a Middle East expert not long ago and he was saying that with these bases being obliterated basically to use a term a term um essentially he doesn't think cuz he thinks the Arabs are going to be so irate with us for having kicked over this hornets's nest because it is not going to end anytime soon. His belief is that once the war does end or settles down enough for us to say, "Hey, we're good. We're done." The Arabs are going to say, "You're not building back in our in our countries anymore." So >> why would they? We didn't defend them. I mean, that's this is a reciprocal relationship. They're not doing this because they love us. They give us deals on they billions, hundreds of billions in foreign investment in the United States, all this. But in exchange, >> we promised to protect them and we didn't. >> That's right. And in fact, there's there's reports and I think they're credible. Um, in fact, a Saudi official was complaining about this two days ago. basically whatever air defense systems were in these Arab countries were sent over to Israel. >> Yeah. >> And they actually left our own bases and people um vulnerable. Our own government did to protect Israeli targets rather than to protect our our men and women in uniform. >> Do you believe that's true? Do you believe the US government prioritized Israel over our own troops? >> If you had asked me this a year or two ago, I would have said no way. But after seeing that Huckabe interview, by the way, bravo. Uh after seeing that Huckabe interview, uh I can't imagine how we didn't do that. I mean, it is very clear the United States is being led around the nose right now uh by its by what should be its proxy. I mean, let's get it real. I mean, it should be, you know, so >> they're the housekeeper. We're the homeowner. Like, what is this? I don't I don't get it. No, I'm serious. I don't understand. >> I agree. I agree. So, so I do believe Yeah, we probably did. And the worst part here, one of the worst parts is uh I have a colleague who's who's in the Gulf States and he tells me he sent me a picture uh of the the warning he got from the State Department to get out. And to cut to cut to the chase, it basically said, "You're on your own to get out. Like, we're not doing flights. We're not True." And meanwhile, I I hear that until 24 hours ago, the British government was evacuating their people. No questions asked. So, you mean to tell me that the sole superpower is picking a fight with this missile city that is Iran and we're not even going to provide exfiltration for our people? That's not an empire. That's not a superpower. That's a power in decline. That's what the Chinese see, by the way. And the Chinese think their time is at hand because we are committing national suicide with this insanity. >> I I wish I could disagree. It's the one of the saddest things I've I've ever >> I wish I didn't have to say these things. No, I totally totally agree. And you think of the men whose lives are going to be taken, Americans who are like the best people. >> Already have been. >> Well, already have been. And you look at I think the DoD's only released the hometowns of four of them, I think. But it's like Iowa, a couple from It's like the best people we have. >> These are our pe these are our people, right? >> No private equity kids in that group. I noticed. Um >> that's right. And I I just want to just say something. I and I and I probably shouldn't, but um >> I was I was, as I said, a very early supporter of Hegsth as Secretary of Defense. I thought his takes on hypersonics were good. I thought that he was a war fighter, so he understood in a way that maybe you and I could never understand. But I was mortified by his press conference this morning, the glibess. Six Americans are dead because of a political decision that was made. Obviously, I don't expect him to challenge the president on this publicly, but at the very least, it's a solemn day and we should probably not be acting like this is just another walk in the park because this is not this is not this is not going to plan. Now, hopefully we can pull it out of the fire, whatever that looks like. But right now, this is not going the way we were told it was going to go and certainly not the way the president assumed it would go once he once Kamani was whacked. So the the question I think is do we commit ground troops? Americans on the ground on the ground. Okay. So explain what you know if you don't mind. >> So this is again I don't have any but just for the record because I know I'm going to I have no access to classified information. I am an open- source guy. Um but I can read a freaking room. And I can tell you right now if the president went into this air war thinking I'm going to be over in three or four days. I don't have to worry about the stock piles. And now he's waking up and going, "Holy cow, everything's running out and I got to keep fighting." He's talking about now opening up a front in Iraq using the Kurds, which is lunacy. What are the Turks going to do? >> Well, but by the way, the point is because Israel's next priority is Turkey. So, the point is to diminish Turkey. I know all about the truest. Yeah. >> Yeah. And um Yeah. And so there's that. And then there's the fact that the president wants to be seen as quote unquote winning. And winning means you've got he's already outlined what the objectives are. And this was this was also a big bugaboo of mine. War and strategy is about objectives. Attainable political objectives. Clausitz war is an extension uh of politics through other means. Trump came out on Saturday. He's repeated it since. The aims are regime change. The aims are denuclearization. and the aims are getting rid of the ballistic missile uh system. He's now added on getting rid of the navy of of Iran. So those four objectives, what is the objective of the Iranian regime? Survive. That's all they have to do. Survive long enough because they know because the Chinese and Russians are giving them the intel. They know that our stock piles are about to be depleted. So all they have to do is hold out until we have to start cannibalizing Indopaccom. And there's going to be a real political fight at that point. I'm told that Indopaccom leaders are already raising quite a stink behind the scenes because they know once those systems are gone out of their arsenal, they ain't coming back anytime soon. So, uh, the question of ground troops, this gets us to that. Um, I don't believe it would ever be an invasion like Iraq and 03. First of all, we don't have that capability anymore, which should scare every American because we don't have that capability anymore. Second of all, uh there the the way the country is arrayed, Trump is trying to do this in like a light footprint methodology. So he I think is going to replicate the uh US strategy in Afghanistan in 2001 where we sent a bunch of special forces a teams and CIA paramilitaries infiltrated the country, linked up with already organized locals. It was the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan. This time it'll probably be the mujahedini kulk mek uh to try to basically organize a movement with the Kurds coming in probably from the Iraqi side uh in the I think it's the north I think it's the northwest of the country uh and will be coming in from the south and it will kind of link up in whatever's left of Tyrron. That's the plan I think using air power as an interdiction like we did exactly like we did against the Taliban in 2001. Well, first of all, the the MEK is not the Northern Alliance at its height. It's not. >> Second of all, you're talking about far greater ground that's going to have to be covered and a logistics tale that is going I mean, we're talking like this is not going to work. Then you're going to have to deal with the rugged terrain of Iran. Iran is basically like Switzerland. It's just surrounded by mountains. It's a desert in the middle. I mean this is not good geography for the kind of tactics we're talking about. Uh and again the size matters. This is a much bigger country than Afghanistan with many more people. Um so we're talking about a much longer end uh commitment on our part. And I think the president knows this and I think he's sort of like the frog boiling the water boiling in the water. He's just sort of slowly getting us used to the idea before he has to send troops in because he wants to quote win. And well, winning for him is regime change. The regime is not going to change on its own. It's not going to be the people who can do it because they're not organized enough. They're too divided amongst each other. So, he's going to need to send in special forces and CIA to basically do the organizing on the ground and to do force multipliers. And uh I'm sorry to say that the likelihood of this working is very very low. And now we're talking about being seen in this region as strategically defeated uh by what we were told was a backward military uh force in in Iran. >> The first American to die in the war in Afghanistan was a CIA officer Johnny Michael Span. >> That's right. That's right. Um so these forces, the CIA paramilitaries special forces uh would be deployed to do what? The goal is what here? Well, that's exactly what Well, again, the the goal that we are told and that Trump continues to say is regime change. Regime change. We don't want the Islamic Republic of Iran in charge anymore. We want, I don't know, MEK or the Shaw's son, who's a lobbyist in Northern Virginia. I'm sure he'll do great. Uh or, you know, any of these other uh you know, groups. The thing is, we don't really know. And I think it's very interesting that >> Wait, can I just ask? So is the problem I mean I do detect I don't detect I I notice it's very obvious efforts by Israel and its proxies in the United States to ferment a religious conflict in our country. Hate all the Muslims, deport the Muslims. As if that's better than saying hate all the Jews. It's not better. It's the same thing. >> But they're trying to turn religions against each other in our country. And I I see the same and which I resent more than anything I've seen in a long time because it's it's not going to make a peaceful country for my children. >> No. >> But I see that in this effort. So the idea is like they're not allowed to have an Islamic country or something >> like half our allies are Islamic countries. Like what what kind of country are we calling for? It's their country. >> Just clarify. I was just using the official name of of the I don't know if this I'm sure for for some people it is but but they just want to replace it with anyone other than the current crop of of leaders and I believe that that is not possible because this regime is deeply embedded. So you know we killed Kamani and a dozen new leaders replaced all of these other leaders. This is this reminded me a lot of the early days of the Ukraine war when the Ukrainians and the NATO types would be, "Oh, we killed this Russian commander. We got this guy." Well, within 24 to 48 hours, the leadership was replaced and the Russians kept going. So this is, you know, who knew a nation of 96 million people would find other generals and people to [laughter] promote, you know, you know, you know, it's like, >> well, also you wonder like how much, if you really believe that killing an 86-year-old cleric >> is going to topple the government, how much do you know about the country and how much of what you think you know, well, that's my point, >> is filtered through some CIA source who wants to be president like the former king. Exactly. Like, do we know a lot about Iran? I don't sense that we do. >> Well, I I know a lot about Iran, but you know, I was boxed out of the administration almost from the beginning. So, it's like, you know, and people like >> um I think well, I think there's some personnel in the White House that doesn't like me and I and I think that they don't like that I don't play ball and you know, I moved I got out of DC, moved to Florida and I never looked back. But um there are people like me as well who were boxed out who know a lot about these things and we are not >> Can I ask you who if you can say who because you're clearly very knowledgeable. You seem sensible. You seem pro-American. What boxed you out? >> I I I'll tell you offline. I really don't I'm really not looking to start a mixture rating. >> I understand. So but let me ask you a broader question which is and I know the answer but I want to hear you say it. Was there from the very beginning of this second Trump term an effort to exclude anybody who might conceivably stand in the way of an Iran invasion? >> Yes. Yes. >> Even though I again again understand I I hate the regime, you know, I don't like that regime. I'm It's not like I'm some lover of, you know, but I I wasn't I was a friend of mine joked I wasn't sufficiently on board with this program >> with this Iran invasion program, Iran war program. >> Yeah. Because I think it's this is the stuff of of lunacy. And this is literally this is like the mad king, you know, this is this this doesn't make any this doesn't make any sense. >> Yeah. >> It doesn't unless you know what you were saying in your monologue, which I think you're probably right. I think that's definitely at play here. >> Yeah. I mean, I I just want to be clear. I don't I don't think that most US policy makers have any idea what the foundation stone is or Alexa or dome of the rock or the third temple. This is just so far from the concerns of average people in this country. Even >> their minders are not paying them to know. Their minders are not >> well that's it. But there are people who do know and certainly in the region in the Middle East and the rest of the world people are religious. They're not Americans. Like they care. So these are big questions to people around the world. just not >> I well I care these I'm I'm a Christian and >> well I care too actually. So let me ask you since you said that you're constructing most of your analyses through open source materials. You're reading publicly available things on the internet. Have you noticed an effort to clamp down on videos? Okay. Tell us what you've noticed. There's also an interesting effort, Tucker, to and I think this is coming from our guys to spread AI videos of what look like war scenes and then you share it and then they say, "Ah, that's AI. We got to get him dinged now. We got to get him." You know, this is all, you know, we have it is a um >> Tucker, it is a sad day in this country when we have official and I and I have a feeling I know the group that's doing it. We have official US intelligence people being paid with our tax dollars to sit around a basement in Langley or Arlington, Virginia and harass American citizens online for sharing their opinion. But that is where we are at in this country. That is where we are at. And I can tell you right now, I have been the victim of bot attacks. Um I have been the victim of cyber attacks in the last 24 hours on my personal email, which I didn't know people had, but apparently they do. Um, we have been I had to file a police report in fact yesterday with my local police uh on this ever since coming out in the last week and and sharing my my opinion. Um, and this is not an organic phenomenon. This is either ours or Israel or the British. Uh, you know, because they're always in there somehow. >> Or the French. That's right. >> Or the French. That's right. That's right. So, this is, you know, this is where we are. This isn't really America anymore. This is some sensorious state. Um, and I thought that we were going to be cleaning that up, but we're instead we're instead giving the keys to these guys and telling them to go start World War III. I wonder if we're going to see, this is purely speculative, but wars tend to create an environment where there's actual persecution of critics of the war. >> Well, I was told, and again, take from this what you will because I I have no way of proving it. I was told two years ago that the Biden regime had concocted a list of high-profile MAGA supporters that they were going to basically go to and say if Camala had won uh say that hey you you got to leave the country as a you know you got to get out or we're going to basically prosecute you until you're broke and can't lawfare and uh thank god that never happened but those lists are still around and you know in 35 months we have an election coming up and if this keeps going the way it is, uh, Tucker, I don't think the Republicans stand a chance to to win the next election if things keep going the way they are. >> Last question. >> JD or if it's Marco, >> I Yeah. Well, this I unfortunately agree with you. Last question. It's a put and I hope you'll come back because I think this has been >> anytime you need me. I live near you apparently. So, [laughter] >> thank you. So, here's my question. I saw video, maybe AI, of the governor of California today, Gavin Nuome, saying point blank, Israel led us into this war. Israel leads us around by the nose. Israel's comm genocide in Gaza >> and we can't we're not getting anything out of this and we need to reassess our military support for Israel. >> And >> yeah, that's probably your next president right there. >> Well, ex and and I don't I know him and I wouldn't credit a single word he says with sincerity. He doesn't believe anything, but he's smart. And I know that Donald Trump thinks he's formidable. He has said that in public a lot. >> I mean, if that's real, >> then I mean, that guy has a shot. Do you think? >> Yeah. Yeah. I think I wouldn't be surprised. Look, this can all be I just want to make it clear. This can be reversed in the next 48 hours if Trump's victory and just gets out and says, "Look, I got everybody we needed to get. If the people of Iran can't do it, then they're never going to do it." You know, this is this is it's it's an easy out. It's a golden offramp. Mr. President, it's a golden off-ramp with your name on it. Take it and you'll be a >> Can Israel will Israel allow that. >> I you know I I don't I probably they'll they will probably try something. But um you know I all I can't dictate what's going to Israel is going to do. All I can say is the president has got to make it clear he's getting out now. We've achieved our objectives. We're done. That's what he needs to do. Um, in terms of uh in terms of Newsome, um, you know, I don't I he he will probably be the nominee because he is wily enough. Uh, he kind of reminds me of Bill Clinton a little bit in a weird way. Oh, yeah. Um, but I wouldn't be surprised if his ve is uh, in my old state where I used to live, Virginia, is Abigail Spanberger because the CIA wants to have one of their own sitting in the White House. >> Man, that's not democracy. That's really, really dark. I hope you're right. >> No, it's a deep state, man. I mean, you're supposed to dismantle it. >> Brandon Warder, I That was great. And thank you so much for doing this. >> Thank you so much for having me. >> Great to meet you. Thanks. >> And thank you for joining us. We'll be back next Wednesday. >> Thanks for watching the Wednesday edition of the show. We stream live every week, Wednesday, 600 p.m. Eastern on tuckercarlson.com. Members can watch the show live, join the membersonly chat, and take part in the conversation in real time. We're grateful to be doing it and grateful that you watch it. Thank you.