Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night! All day! What's happening? Good to see you. Same. We were just talking. Sorry, I had a pause Jamie before the podcast. So you were telling me that LeBron James is not going to go back to the Lakers. How old, how old is he now? 41. 41. Yeah. What is the oldest that a elite athlete has been? Tom Brady's 44, I think. Gonna feel QB. That'd be pretty high up there. How old was the current? How old was was Kareem? That's a good question. How old was Kareem? He retired. Turned our Hopkins, I think we'd be the next. But not Hopkins is number one. Yeah, but not Hopkins. Definitely. We were talking about how he'd be Kelly Pavlich, 42. But but not, I had a couple of years to incubate a little bit. Oh yeah. You know about that. Yeah. Not take damage and steal up the mind. He had the most intense discipline. That kind of never got out of shape, which is also a giant contributor to longevity. Never never was building back. You know, he wasn't like a 42 year old who was like, you know, he took six months off. I haven't been in the gym. No, but no, no, no. It was every day. It was running nutrition. Everything was always on point. Never buried. Cream was like 42. I think. So he might be the oldest of the past guys. But this is before all the science. Right? Yeah, science. Change his things. Science. So we were just talking about the science. So Jamie, what are they allowed to take and not allowed to take? I don't know. It's like the NBA used to like, I think for like weed stuff, they used to say that it's like a, they'd get tested, I think like October 1st, which is like right when preseason starts. For weed? Yeah. And so like if you as long as you were clean on October 1st, that you're good because they went to the rest of the year. That's ridiculous. But now I know in the NFL, if you have a crazy game, you're going to get tested the next day. They're just going to check you for what was going on with you. Yeah. Why would you play good? They were diggills. I don't think the NBA does that specifically, but I don't know. Honestly. So what are the rules of the NBA terms of marijuana now? I thought that was part of the thing that they negotiated in the contract to make sure because a lot of players like to be high when they play. I think they might just have just stopped testing for it as all. I want to mention names, but I'm friends with some guys. They tell me they can't play unless they're high. That's the thing through the pool players. I know a lot of pool players. They like to get lit before they get on the table. You know, pool, you should be lit playing pool. Yeah, you feel things better. Here we go. NBA can randomly drug test each player up to four times during the season and two times in the offseason with additional tests allowed anytime there is reasonable cause, but marijuana is no longer part of the standard testing panel. Yes, sir. Yeah, so they can smoke weed, which makes sense. Let them put, it's not, what are you doing? It's not hurting anybody and they play better with it. I think they leave them alone. That's what I think. Unless they're doing, what's they doing, math? Unless they're doing, you know what I mean? They also have another big betting scandal that's kind of broken recently. Oh, I know. Oh, no. Or hours there. Oh, no. The player has been called out for throwing at least four games. And then where that's going to go from here is kind of being speculated online. I'll tell you where that goes. If people find out that goes to bullets, that's the problem. The problem with someone throwing a game is somebody bet on that fucking game. A lot of people bet on that game. Cases I've seen know are like the over. So like they had player props and like he needed 4.5 rebounds and he has four and he's just trying extremely extremely hard to get that extra rebound. Which is like, no, it's wrong. Wait a minute. That means he's playing well. The other one, which was he was fixing a spread at like in the last second. Like he sprinted down the court to get an extra basket with like three seconds on the clock when they were down by 10 or seven technically to beat the eight and a half points spread. Yeah, but so what? He's just scoring. How can you ever? It's just a it's when you're watched basketball enough. You go like that doesn't happen that awful. Why would you do that? That's like looking close. Yeah, it's awesome. Yeah, you used to be with throwing the ball and I just throwing it down there. Not you running down. I know, but if you can do it in score, why would you do it? I don't even understand why anybody would question that. You down by 10 is five seconds to go. The game is all on the net. Fuck you man. Whoa. No. What why? That's not going to change. Oh, we lost by eight. But it's just you competitive to the end. You never give up. And you even know you know you're losing. And no starters on the floor at this time. You down by 10 is five seconds to go. No, no starters on that. But it's not like he's missing on purpose. So it's one thing if the guy's like missing on purpose, but if he's scoring on purpose, five seconds. Five seconds. I'll talk along. All right. I'm like two three nights ago where they just got under the knockout round. You know, so that the big tournament was every team plays three games to figure out where you figure where you end up to play the next part of the tournament. Ten teams get eliminated. Uh huh. Third place team for the first time ever can make it through. And so there was a I think it was Algeria and I forget the other team. Sorry. But if they both tied, they both moved through. If one team wins and one team loses, one team goes through. And then the like with four minutes to go into game, they're kind of just passing the ball around the scores tied and one team goes ahead and scores. And it kind of starts to fight on the field where you see the other team yelling at the other team like, fuck you. Like I don't know exactly what they're saying, but like what like. And then it was like two minutes to go. The other team sort of just stops playing defense and kind of seems to like let them score. Oh, God. It's like, is that. Oh, they just were like me. I remember. How did what don't they have mics on those guys? It's such a good deal. They have to have mics on somebody. They have strong mics now and they have people that can lip read. They can pick up, hey motherfucker, you're supposed to leave this a tie. Yeah. If that happens, like you can't play anymore, right? Like what happens to those guys? They have to get suspended for that be the entire, that be both teams, the coaches. It'd be everybody. Oh, I don't know. Well, I don't really know how it's going to pan out, but it was very. What a conundrum. Yeah. How could you do that? Like, I hate that. This is what I don't like about sports betting, not that, because that's about advancing. But about sports betting is the even the consideration that a person is playing a certain way because they're worried about a spread or because they've been paid off to not score or they've been paid off to foul. You know, like there's the problem with these things is you could bet on anything. You can bet on anything. Anything. Anything. So if you're a crooked and what has been like the most crooked aspect of the fucking human race over the past like 100 years other than the legal system, the most crooked aspect has been sports betting. It's always crooked. Sports and politics. Politics. They damn near. They're all the same. It's the same. It's money. Anytime it's money involved, and decisions can be shifted, influence can be used to make something happen. But it seems like that with most things that people have some type of high-archy desire for, they 100%. They gonna put something in, you know, like even with like awards and games. This is a who can promote the best and who can if you can take all the people that vote to dinner and you know, smooth them at dinner. It's gonna be a thing where who's gonna beat you when you have all the voters or you have a situation where you have people that work for your company that can vote. And then who how are you not gonna vote for the project that the company put out? Right. Yeah. You know, we got 60 voters, you know, though we at least got 60 votes. I think you said it best when you said the hierarchy. That's really what it is. It's in anything that has any kind of a hierarchy. Politics is the ultimate example. Politics is the ultimate. Yeah. Ultimate example. But there's that hierarchy shit in everything in the world. Everything. And it trips people up. But with politics, it is a little more detrimental than with sports. You know, sports is, you know, you gamble and people trying to win things. But with politics is like if you not, somebody that's not qualified can be in a position where, you know, they they make a decision on the masses of people's lives. Not just that they're gonna point judges, which is they get a point crazy judges. Like there's obviously judges like they have disputes. Well, why do they have disputes? Because they're ideologically captured on both sides. But there's people that are like, you know, like certain right wing judges. You throw some case out there that's a right wing case. What abortion rights, whatever it is, immigration. You know how they're gonna vote. Same thing with left wing people. Like hardcore left wing people, you guarantee trans women and sports, trans women or women, let them play in sports. That that was a recent Supreme Court order. Three judges said that trans women should be able to play in women's sports. The rest of them said, fuck no. The six canceled it out, luckily. You know, those people are not taken to account the sport. Like it's a it's a difference if you were was originally something and now you're playing and something else, your strength is different. Everything. And you know, you don't feel that until your daughter getting knocked out the ring, which is supposed to be. Fuck somebody that that the same gender. Then now she's a whole side of Facebook from, you know, it's insane. It's insane. It's and it's not cruel to not let that happen in sports. That's what Title IX is about in the first place. Give women the opportunity to play in an equal time as men. That's that's good thing. Having men that think they're women play with women is fucking crazy. That's like what do we it doesn't mean you know, you need to cast those people out of society. It doesn't mean eight that you live and let live. I agree. But get the fuck out of the women's room. You got you have a dick. You get the fuck off the team. You're you're running track at a literal women's Olympic level. And you're 15. You why? Because you have a dick. This is crazy. You're not really a girl. This is nuts. Yeah, that's the that's the world we live in. And what that's not I'm going to say as to where we live in. That's the world that's being presented to us at this point that that's right. You know, and it's you know, that's a lot of things like this. And you this is why in comedy, I choose not to go the current, the current affair or the political route. Because I don't have time to separate the room. I'm too busy trying to do things to bring the room together. And that's more of a righteous aim for me. Well, you I said this before I'll say it live publicly. What you've done is very extraordinary because you've made a giant following online completely organically. It's very inspiring because all you do is just do your thing the best that you can and put it out there and it just keeps growing. It's amazing. It's very it's very cool. It's very inspirational. And it's you should be proud of it because what you've done, like I said, it's totally organic. Like you don't have a bunch of production companies pushing you and trying to make you more popular than you are. No, it's all just putting it out there and getting this gigantic following just from your work. Just the work. Appreciate it. And then, you know, even with that, you still have some type of responsibility to not see things the same as other people. Like with I just got all this flack about me talking about the how this business of people inflating things has caused depression in comics. You know that we supposed to be a happy craft. But now it's this big push about if you're not on social media, not on this, you know, there's a lot of these comics on, you know, going through this mental health thing where they always sad about their numbers. Or, you know, or this thing. The third is like, yo man, it is a it's a thing. And some people inflate things. And everybody wants to be on the same level. So sometimes you you can't be. Oh, well, you can. But people look at it as a certain way where when you proud of the steps that you've taken. And if I played in the G league, that's not the NBA. So I wouldn't say that I was playing. I played in the league because I know what the league means. I know, you know, I know this says this to G league. But when I present myself, yo, you know, I'm playing the league. People automatically think the NBA, you know, it's not, it's not, the G league is not knocking the G league. But that's not the first thing that comes to my mind. You know, you know, it's just a plan for the Washington generals is not the NBA. Even though you played against the Globetrotters, they were great players. But we know how this game goes. But people that's how people see things now. Well, the number things is real. The number thing is, is a real problem with people because it gives you a quantifiable measure of whether or not you're doing well. And if you already have anxiety, which a lot of comedians have, you're already like socially awkward, which a lot of comedians are, you don't feel accepted. Which is how a lot of comedians feel. And then you look at those numbers. You're like 2,400. I only have 2,400 followers. I've been doing comedy for seven years. Why do I only have 2,400 followers? And then you go to someone's page that you've never even heard of that 1.2 million. You're like, what the fuck? And so this is about being grateful in the position that you're in. I remember when they were people pushing me, you need to get on it and that you need to be on social media. Okay. But I would see those people that had all those followers. And that same year, the year before that I did a half hour special comedy central. Then, you're 2018, I did a full hour special comedy central. I had 500 followers on Instagram. I had 300 followers on YouTube on a page that I didn't own. I had to fight to get this page. I had less people on Facebook. But I was efficient in what I was doing. So the numbers didn't pick me because I had these numbers. They picked me because I came and I did what I did. And then they, oh, he's great. So then we started going, you know, a route to build it up. But we were already getting things prior to the numbers. Right. What year is this again? This is 17 and 18. Okay. So the difference is that in 17 and 18, people were just starting to be aware of the power of social media and then they were really concentrating on different comics that had a large social media following. You know, I think that was like right when it first started happening. Dang, cook it blew up before that. That was, yeah, that was a my space. That was a my space thing. Yeah. Another industry. That's true. That was different. But the difference is like he had gotten so huge just from that that he was already doing like arenas. Yeah. So he was already huge and then they just went with them like, but he was like super popular. Now it's like super popular on social media. It's one of the most important things. So now now moving up to this because I have a strong role with this. So I have a million followers here. Me and followers there are all these specials. I still been getting invited to the BT Awards. I still didn't get invited to a bunch of things. I still get looked over four things. I know I have no business. It says, but I don't worry about it. I'm just in mind. I'm not watching to judge myself against what somebody else is doing. It's guys who have less everything but they're in this in this round what they they had every day and everything. I see guys is that everything with no with no specials and no proven thing. They just around and I'm like, okay, but it's I'm not I think the point that I'm not judging myself up against what somebody is doing socially. But that's also easier when you're successful and you're successful. You're very successful. So the difference is like when you sell out these shows and you put out these specials, like I've seen your specials, they have millions of views. So it's like obviously you have a following. If you didn't and you were doing the same thing, then it would be a problem. But then it also that it's like comedy in a lot of ways, not always, but a lot of ways is a meritocracy. If you're good, people will come. It's that simple. Fight Night is here. Title shots, debut killers and the rising contender. Nobody's talking about yet and only draft Kings has you covered every step of the way. The draft Kings app is now available in all 50 states and includes all markets bringing the games straight to your fingertips wherever you are. No matter where you're watching, you're always connected and in the game with one app. New draft Kings customers sign up with code, Rogan spend five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days. That's code, Rogan in partnership with draft Kings. The crown is yours. Bet with DK Sports book, gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLAR 1-800-MIRY-SET, Connecticut called 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. On behalf of Boothill Casino in Kansas, Bet tax pass through may apply in Illinois, 21 and over, void in Canada. A vent contract trading with draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss, availability varies. Bet to get bonus bets that expire in seven days, trade to get $50 in predictions dollars that expire in one year. Issued every seven days via click to claim for 21 days, one non withdrawal reward, redeemable. Predictions offer void in New York, and July 19th, terms at DKNG.co slash audio. But I also have no desire to inflate things and compare myself to some of my make myself seem like I'm more than what it is. Like, guys, I mean, I got I'm at this room. I got 50 tickets. So, okay. How much the room seat? I don't see 300. Okay, cool. You have 50 people more than you had. Then if you didn't play the wrong, it was that good. Who knows you in Utah? Your bill is a building thing. Yeah. Like, I got all of this, all of this going on. But if I go to Utah, I'm in a comedy club. It doesn't matter what happened the night before. I was just an arena, but in Utah, it's like it takes me back to on trading places. And I mean, this is he gave, he gives all this elaborate what this watch is. And that man said, this is what this guy was insane. Look, I don't care about you bonding to watch. And so I don't have that. And I'm not if I it's like you, you own a color. Okay. It's guys that can come to your club and sell your club out. And then it's guys that come to the club and you pay for the room. Okay. And then this guy's like when you in the theater, some you can scale a theater down. Some theaters hold 4,600 people, but you can scale it down to 2000. But then the, I'm not going to say if the room holds 4,600, I put 2,000 tickets on sale. I didn't sell out the theater. I sold what I put on sale. It was there because I'm not to the point where I can get the 4,600 yet. If I could sell the room out then I will need to relish the real accomplishment versus the lesser accomplishment. Inflating. Yeah. And that's and because I don't have this thing where I'm in competition with what happened before me. You know, so with other people. So I'm in San Antonio. We had we had the theater and because people can make you feel bad about anything. If you, if you a person that feels bad, this thing. Um, Minnesota, it's, it's all these people that's on the team that, that play for the Boston Celtics that are millionaires. They already millionaire. They play in the league. Boston traded 7 people to Minnesota for one person. They've been going in. They got rid of 7 human beings for one person. So it's like if I was a person that felt bad about my career, this would make me feel bad like they, like the first person that they at, they also, okay, I'm a trade. This person for that really like no. Well, I'm gonna give you 2 more people. They're like no. And then I'm gonna give you 4 more people. Okay. And and a lottery pick. Okay. I'm gonna feel horrible. They traded me for 7 people. Y'all didn't want me realistically. So Boston went. They got Kevin going that, I mean, um, oh, it wasn't. Yeah, Kevin going that and 7 other millionaires. They got all this money. They just got all this, they went to Minnesota. It was. And so if somebody wanted to make you feel bad about something, you know, they, they could if that's how you are. So I'm at, I'm in San Antonio. The line is around the block. The place is sold out. It's the same. I'm still out. No matter who comes there is sold out. Then lady said to my face, come on. You should have saw it with Matt Raifcane. I am a mile. I'm like, and I am. I'm saying, was it a different thing? And she said, no, I'm saying, did. So when Matt Raifcane, he sold it out. I sold out 2 nights. I mean, 2 days and the same night. But her thing was, you should have saw it with Matt Raifcane. I was like, okay. She probably wanted you to feel bad. I'm not good for you. Good for you. But the thing is a lot of people would. That's what it is. A lot of people are in competition with other people. I think you should be inspired by other people. You know, if you want to compete in that way, be inspired. But the moment you turn it into a negative, it's like, are you, you're, you're a fool. You're being a fool. Compute, also inspiration is power. It's fuel. You see someone doing well. So you see someone set and you like it. That's fuel that makes you want to go work. It makes you want to get some shit done. It makes you, it gives you energy. It makes, or it could cripple you if you're a dummy, if you're a dummy and you get angry and you get bitter and then you just put all this negativity on the person who's doing better than you, which a lot of people do. That's, that's so weird. That's a weird dynamics in this business when you know that it's going to be people. No matter what you're doing, it's going to be somebody doing better than you. When I was in comedy clubs, I remember being there and they were paper in the room. Okay. I wasn't saying I was selling out. They was paper. No, I know, out of all it is 300 people in there, 240 of these people came because it was, it was freezing. They sent out the email box. But then what I looked at was they wanted to come. Yeah. They're probably comedy fans, which is why they're on the email list in the first place. And then those people, you give them a great show, they'll come back. Then the next time I came, they didn't pay for their own. They sold, they sold the tickets. That's, that's how it used to be, man. That was the old days before social media. You would build a market. So you would just show up and fill it out for you once a year, show up, do your homework, like make sure you got a tight set, even practicing, you ready to rock, fuck these people up and then leave. And then they'll like, can't wait to you guys are back again. And then next time you come back, you know, all right, I built an audience now. I got to, I can't disappoint these people. I got to get fired up. And that's what it used to be. And it used to be a totally organic thing across the whole country. Is it a, is it a thing? Is it a difference in your opinion between me bringing my audience to a venue from whatever or other thing that I do versus people coming that don't know anything about me and me winning that person over versus the person. Yeah. Yeah. It's a different thing. You know, people are coming to see you specifically. You've already won them over. It's a different thing or they want to take a chance on you. That's a different thing because I've heard about you. But when, you know, that's a completely different thing because that's your, you have an audience now. You have fans. And you are just performing in a club and it's a paper room. You have an opportunity. You have an opportunity to turn these people into fans. You have an opportunity to give these people a great night and have a good time. And also you're doing your fucking thing, which is the most important thing of all. Everybody is results oriented. I try to be process oriented when I, with everything I do, I'm process oriented. I think about there's, there's a goal that you got to reach. But how do you get to that goal? The way, the way you get there is not thinking about the goal. The way you get there is thinking about what you're doing. What's the process? The process is writing bits, performing them, tweaking them, getting them tight, knowing, reviewing tapes, going over your material, going over your writing, talking with friends. And then every day it gets a little bigger. Every day it gets a little better. Every day that knife gets a little sharper. That's the process. That's the process that leads you to become whoever whoever you are. And then you add other little pieces in that process. I was talking to Bobby Lee and me and Bobby Lee talking. I said, Bobby, you don't realize what you meant to be at. And he's like, well, it's just, this is going to be a good story as a bad story. Bobby's getting a lot of bad stories. You met me at Houston improv and they called me and asked me, did I want host? A room that I already sell out. In saying they asked me that one host. I said, cool. So I came and I hosted and I was not trying to, but I was destroying his feature. I'm just hosting and especially at the Houston improv. But my thing was this is just go. But I say, Bobby, you can understand when I was hosting at the Houston improv, I was doing something that most people didn't understand what I was even doing. Well, like what? And they would see, like why would you be hosting? I said, because I'm not going to be in front of Bobby Lee's audience. But it's people that really been Houston that his audience that I have no idea who I am. I said, Bobby, but before you, I said, I was coming to the Houston improv hosting for multiple people and I was just winning over fans that would never had seen me if they wasn't coming to see you. They wouldn't be coming to my show. I said, so before that it was, you were last, Bobby. It was you and the week prior to that, it was March your Brownie. And the week prior to that was, was my girl, Angela Johnson. Before that it was some random white guy. I said, I just came and I want to do a comic. So me hosting was no big deal. I wasn't working. So I said, well, let me just come hosted. That's what they want me to do. So I gained fans from four different audiences in a month. So when I came back, they was like, yo, I saw you with March your Brownie. So I came back, I came back to see you when you put your show up. I'm like, cool. So my process, that was a part of my process. It didn't matter who I hosted for. And I was like, okay, cool. And let me go like when I hosted for Bill Burr, Bill Burr was like, this is crazy. We in Austin at the Paramount is in like, and I said, I said, the worst thing about this was that at the time I was wearing all black. And I went to the show. And when I walked on stage, the first thing I said is, hey, I do not. was that at the time I was wearing all black and I went to the show and When I walked on stage the first thing I said is hey, I do not work here Don't it like a People asked me where's the bathroom. I don't know. I don't work, but it was like I look like a usher My god, I'm like, yo, this sucks But it was a cool day that's a smart approach. I mean, that's a great way to build Especially if you're already headlining Yeah, I think I think that that thing about concentrating on the process People should try to apply that to everything You know My friend John Dudley who taught me archery He's a big believer in that being process oriented Like I say you get better at archery and he used to compete all over the world travel to be in archery tournaments I think that's I think that applies to everything. I think applies to music. I think that applies to everything The most I think one of the things that trips people up about social media a lot of these young guys in particular Young people in particular is that they are thinking about other people and they are comparing themselves to other people And they are looking at those numbers and you're looking you're spending all of your energy if you have an allotted 100 units of energy in a day you're spending a Disproportionate amount on Things that don't empower you and actually kind of fuck your head up not good for you at all Instead of saying wow, I am chasing the fucking dream right? I am out here being a professional Comedian and I have a real chance to develop a real following if I put my time in I put my effort I really care and I really work hard. I could sell out a theater one day That's possible like that's a goal It should be a goal just like getting your PhD in chemistry or whatever the fuck it is your goal is But the process is what's important the process is like Appreciating what you're doing why you're doing it and just Baring down and doing your rest. That's it. That's it. That's it. Then in other people you look at them as inspiration other people that are kicking ass You know don't go don't become a hater. That shit is so bad for you I know so many dudes who have like hater tendencies and they never excel Never it's the the counter thinking of an an excellent person is a hater Someone's always trying to diminish people and downplay people and look at someone in the least charitable way and the worst possible way Does somehow know they're trying to make themselves feel better, but it doesn't work? It does the opposite of work it robs you it robs you of yourself a steam it robs you of yourself respect You're spending so much time thinking about this other dude like why it's a lot of energy And my dad is once this is one story that I did not put in the special that I should have and My dad had all these these thoughts and he was I Lived to say he was a crazy man But when you think about the things that he would say Makes sense my dad and why would you be telling me this at the age that but he just gave them? I think I was like 11 and my dad I know it is that you know some People been to spend the same time and money on being fake when they can put that same time and money and to being real Yeah, and I'm like I don't know I understand what that meant but as I got older if you spend any money or time Faking something You could probably spend that money and time being real. Yeah about something. Yeah, you know why go buy fake necklace Like you rich when you can go buy real necklace it was then at some point it was an and You know be actually be rich, you know if that's what if you get compared to necklaces But I just didn't Understand it at the time but then as I got older. I understood like why put this why put this time in to Pretending when you can Put that same energy and then become real at what you do. It makes no sense my uncle Vinny when I was Six or seven years old. I was staying and hit it out in his house with my cousins and We were we were supposed to brush our teeth and I didn't like following rules period And so I wouldn't brush my teeth instead. I would take toothpaste and smooshing around on my teeth And so that when they smell my breath it would smell toothpaste and my uncle explained me he goes He goes I understand why you're doing it I go he goes but the amount of time that you're spending pretending to brush your teeth You could have just brushed your teeth and I thought about that when I was six. I was like damn I was just a little kid, so but I was like, huh? He's right Why am I faking brushing My uncle video like super patient super calm out of all my family members He was the the strangest out of all these wild crazy Italian people like He was he was an artist and he was like very soft spoken and never got angry about anything I'd always speak really rationally Oh, my god. He's so smart. He's so peaceful He just but he lit the way he laid it out when I he didn't say hey I know you're not brushing your teeth you little fuck What's in that? It was the time you're spending pretending to brush your teeth. You could have just brushed your teeth It's just but it was like sometimes adults will say something to you like that when you're six And it just gets in your head and you're like whoa Okay, that just saved me a whole lot of time Just fucking teeth stop pretending stop faking. It doesn't help anything. It does the opposite does the opposite and you know people The truth sometimes is hurtful to people The truth doesn't feel good, you know to a lot of people unfortunately, but you know you have to look at it You have to have perspective, but that's the ultimate hate right there. That's the ultimate hate is for me to give you a false hood Instead of taking you to truth, right? That's the ultimate is the ultimate hate I especially if you're like you're making up a background for yourself You're making up a story about your life. That's not true. You're Pretending you're somewhere in life that you're not You know, yeah, man. Just do the thing Just do the thing Do you put it's hard for people? It's hard for people and then there's a lot of people that think you just fake it until you make it and then You hear stories. Oh, it's guy. I had $500 in my bank account But I told them I got this I got that loan and next thing You know my business is making all this money You go wow, he faked it until he maked it and it worked and you think That's a few of our team didn't they never tell you that that guy goes to jail later for 100% 100% It was the fast busting my house three years later and took everything like okay Exactly like when they arrested Carl's been see you recently for like all those counts of tax fraud. I was like, okay I don't want that to happen to him, but There it is Right I mean, that's what I'm not I'm not laughing at call of the I was laughing I think I do like yeah, yeah when he was busting I mean, I didn't I wasn't didn't bring me any joy to see that. I don't like anybody getting arrested for taxes I think I think taxes until they have an accurate account of where the fucking money goes and until you Completely eliminate all fraud and waste What the fuck are you doing? Locking people up for not paying taxes like you guys should get locked up for not doing a good job with our money So what you think about all the new purchases and redoing the White House and all this with tax dollars Do they do with tax dollars? I think how much money did they spend in tax dollars to do the ballroom? Let's find out what's that um, they need a ballroom though That's how that guy snuck in with a gun because they tried to do that White House correspondence dinner in a hotel Dude who got arrested a few months back. What's this this this resolution? Pool something fuller algae right now that we spit on me. Yeah, I don't know about that that's something about making the pool look nice that But whatever that is reflecting pool Yeah, the reporting reports indicate the new White House East Wing ballroom is projected to cost about 600 million with roughly half just over 300 million coming from taxpayer-funded government accounts despite earlier promises That it would be taxpayer-free 300 million sounds like a lot until you find out how much money they spend on other things When you find out how much just how much fraud It is in NGOs. How much fraud is in non-profits. How much fraud is in insider trading and propping up companies so that they can get better deals Well, the whole thing is fraud the thing is if you spend in Understand how much money goes another thing to use if you spend in any money that That's my money that I don't know that I need it or that's not really the aim to go Should be able to vote on it. You should be able to vote on it. You should be able to vote on where all your tax money go How much money is how much tax money is being spilled on getting smart people in place and getting smart making smart children? That's the big one. That's the that's the thing the big one is If you look at our country as a community And that's what we're supposed to be doing. We're supposed to be the United States of America All that bullshit aside That was the one good thing that happened about 9-11 When 9-11 happened after that we were all united. It was crazy It was crazy. We realized like we are actually on a team. So for our team Why do we have these deeply impoverished neighborhoods for decades and decades that are riddled with crime and drug abuse? Why? Is it impossible to fix that's crazy. That's not true. It's just no one's tried to fix it No one's done any effort to fix it and if you did fix it you want to make America great Here's the best way less losers And how do you get less losers more opportunities for people more opportunities more support more education More everything that you need if that was your neighborhood And if we did that we'd have to switch the way our system runs, but that could be done man That's a don't have losers. That's not that many. That's the thing about make America great, right? If you're trying to make anything great don't you need intelligent people to do that? Of course so number one thing so when we have all these divisive people that that's on a low evaporation How is that making the the the country Great if we're putting People in position that don't have the experience or the education and those things and then we just saying a bunch of divisive things You know, you know, it's it was if I'm watching The extravaganza that happened in the White House What was the thing Michelle Obama is a man like how did that help how did that help that guy says that every time? But what is be what is the the thing first of all? It's it's really divisive because you're know that a large portion of the country is gonna take this that's gonna have a problem with this You know clearly she's not a man it was and but it makes no sense like to I've never seen this many people say so many damaging things about a past president. It's like he's still on the forefront and It's not like we have a president that's doing the greatest job for this this country You know, which is which is weird or weird thing to me and people gonna ask Is that what's the belief? If that's the that's the real belief of people that's the real thing out with us And there's some crazy people that believe the world is flat. There's a lot of dumb beliefs There's probably people that do believe Michelle Obama's a man what that guy does He's like a pro wrestler like he's got a character called the incredible Hulk. It's very Corny in a lot of ways sometimes it's You know cringey, but the point is he gets a lot of attention a lot of attention because of all this That's what he's doing So what he's trying to do is maximize the amount of attention that he can get for a very short window of career It's not how he really feels how he really thinks when he talked him in real life It's very reasonable. This is an act that he does like a pro wrestling act But what he can do is fight. He's really good And that's what's so confusing about it all so you got this guy who's created like this fake persona Where he puts on an American flag bandana comes out the Hulk Hogan music does all his interviews with sunglasses on has a bunch of crazy Silly rhymes and says ridiculous shit just trying to get attention the most amount of attention So it is very divisive don't get me wrong, but that's by design So he's Hulk Hogan and Randy Savage in the same in the same actual fighter Well actually fucking good one Matt. He just knocked out Derek Lewis at the White House Derek Lewis has the most knockouts in history. Don't do that. Don't do that. Don't do what? That's this don't don't don't say that so excited because Derek Lewis go to the same Jim May issue boxing Jim Houston. I'm very close to that. Dude. I love Derek. I don't like the fact that Derek Lewis lost their fight I think it's Derek 10 years ago would have been a real fucking problem for that dude because Derek of 10 years ago You couldn't hold him down. He would just get up He had there's a whole compilation of people trying to hold Derek Lewis down We just gets a hand on you and just whoop your his grip They did that UFC grip thing where they test the grip everybody's like 140 the strong ones are like 160 One not Derek just squeezed it casual to 18 So they were like what the fuck? So you see how problematic this was for me. You already beat my friend then you turn around and say he beat a 40 year old Derek Yeah, a 40 year old Derek Lewis didn't turn around and say Michelle Obama's a man. I was like, okay, you know No, I'm pissed You're right, I'm like, I'm right, but I'm telling you if you met that dude in real life You would get it. He's just a dude. He's just a guy who's a competitive wrestler played in the NFL And he's like I got to do something to figure out how to get people to pay attention to me Because it can't just be fighting. It's not enough if you look at Conor McGregor You look at Sugar Shauna Mallee you look at these guys that if these flamboyant personalities these big personalities They get cashless clay is the original example They get a immense amount of attention and that translates into much more money and much more opportunities There's no fucking way that guy would have gotten that fight at the White House If you couldn't fight because the fight that he had before that he fought Curtis Blades who was a top 10 UFC heavyweight Huge wrestler and they went to war dude I mean he put it on him for three fucking rounds like Curtis just has an insane heart and survived it But that guy can fucking fight, but just that alone is not enough, but will you got to get attention? I don't agree with it. I don't I wouldn't do it. It's not my thing. I don't like it Right, but I get it in it's smart. Well Muhammad Ali though He was very respectful in his in his in his act You know to get attention, you know, just like wasn't I mean he wasn't with other people But he would show up at fucking Sonny Liston's house and scream about him on his fucking front lawn at four in the morning He did wild crazy shit He he did it. He did a lot of why he was just all about getting your heart rate up getting your emotions in there He was so fucking smart. He knew before everybody that you could just get somebody into a frenzy And they wouldn't be able to sleep the whole life revolved around fighting you and I can't let this guy beat me in the fear of losing He's gonna keep you weak. It's gonna keep you you're not gonna be able to eat as much food You're gonna feel nervous what you see what happened was a mic on him. Can't he's clean? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah Was that who what fighter was that I'm kept punishing Maman a great I'm good, but that didn't work out for no, he beat that he beat the sleeve his out of him and carried him He carried him always beaten his ass Dude, he was a Special special guy it's you know, I'm not comparing him in terms of his cultural significance to Josh Hokett because you know He was my parents my mother and my stepfather were hippies They never watched fighting but when he had a rematch with Leon Spinks that's how much of a cultural figure he was They wanted him to beat Leon Spinks Hippies sitting in front of the fucking TV in like 1970 whatever it was Like because I heard it was like my family Well, they were hippies, but you know my grandmother went to jail for running numbers for the mob So it's like there was a lot of okay, there was a lot of Real a lot of yeah, grandma went away for a little bit She wouldn't rat him out so she did some time. I was at a I was at a show one time and I said um while the Africans and in here and This Italian dude he's from Sicily he raised his hand and I said and The people like why is he raising him like he knows He knows He knows Yeah, it's really reason why Sicilians of darker hair curly hair darker skin He's like yeah, you know, I said and worse and that's all I said was he knows in it and and people who got it It was like And at that point it's like when people don't know that that you have some sort of level of intelligence Like it's like information Okay, yeah, it's a it's a big the best that's funny though. I'm Italian hippies But it my my mother also well, you know, there was a lot of hippies back then man And I think the original idea behind it was great That was just watching this thing today about the CIA and LSD and what they did it was really funny man It was a Animal day too, isn't it dope see if you can find it put it up because it's kind of cool I've been eating an MK ultra hearing going on right now in the oh How convenient Colson bro that they I got it right here Jammy also in it too They 100% are still doing that and no if ands or buts if you think they did that in the 60s and then 100% did If they're doing mind control experiments on people and their influence and people's opinions and Half of the reason why people were at odds with each other all day long on it online is probably government intervention Hey at one point or some governments intervention. This is not hours Russian China This is wow that The Moms favorite band probably helped them in the 1950s the CIA bought up the world supply of LSD They brought it to the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly who reverse engineered it giving them an unlimited supply and a Complete monopoly then the testing started one early volunteer for these tests was Ken Keesey Keesey wrote a book inspired by this experience which became a bestseller then Keesey went on to host events Which he called acid tests and he wasn't charging anyone he just wanted people to show up and do acid For these events he hired an unknown house band called the Grateful Dead These events became wildly popular and with them rose the popularity of the band So the Grateful Dead begins touring and Keesey follows them around and a bus from show to show and everywhere he went He brought a vat full of cool a lace with LSD this guy had a seemingly endless supply exporting the hippie culture all around the US Meanwhile the CIA is flooding college campuses with LSD under the guise of research and the Grateful Dead was just one of many Bands in this movement at the same time in Laurel Canyon came a wave of musicians with something in common They were all children of high-ranking military officials The biggest names in music Jim Morrison of the doors was the son of an admiral Frank Zappas father was a chemical warfare specialist Even Crosby stills in Nash Yeah, all three of them and all of these bands as well The theory is the CIA orchestrated the hippie movement to steer a very real anti-war movement into something a little easier to combat Descent without teeth the hippie slogan was literally turn on tune in And drop out In other words do acid and remove yourself from society and a lot of them did drop out of society to go live in Communes in the woods this intersection between hippie culture and the CIA could all be a great big coincidence Maybe military brats naturally want to rebel and maybe the CIA was giving away acid because they're chill like that Maybe CIA created the hippie movement and your mom's favorite band probably helped them Yeah And that wild that's crazy. That's wild. They also had a big influence on gangster rap big influence on promoting gangster For sure a hundred percent proven one hundred percent 100 percent. Yeah, you rather wanted to fill prisons You want you want to push that over? Anything else you know because we can look at high rap music change in the change you know in 1992 Yeah, at the 1992 they was like no more positive Rap well, it was whenever straight out of Compton came out because I was in Boston at the time I would remember to the day it happened, but straight out of Compton wasn't a Drug-filled and do something it was if you look at some of the so you look at a lot of the songs that was on that album it was rebellious songs against The system you know fuck the police and then 1992 man when they decided you know we don't want no more daylight so We're gonna more trial-caught quests. We don't want no you get them leather medallions We'd be like yo, they went like self-destruction and West Coast West Coast all-stars. They was like what they coming together Hell no, you know, we need this to be divisive. We need them to separate and that's crazy that that the the biggest times that I've experienced this country being together was the Olympics when the dream team came 911 and Colvin That's the biggest time that we the three biggest times I ever even seen us together Yeah, because we need something we need something that's real If we need some sort of an event that makes us realize first of all the fragility of life that's important and We have to realize that we're all supposed to be a part of a team and and We you can't play on a team if your team may something that you that you valuable not only that You can't play on a team if your teammates are poisoning you If your teammates are allowing you to eat rotten foods that you can't play and maybe giving you inferior gear on purpose and Maybe keeping you in a place where you can't get sleep so that you're not gonna evolve You're always gonna be tired you're gonna be fatigued So you're never gonna get better at whatever the fuck it is you're doing you're never gonna advance in life You're gonna be tired you're gonna be on drugs you're gonna be poor This episode is brought to you by armor every week There's some new wellness hack that people swear by and after a while you start thinking Why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why armor a colostrum caught my attention It's something the body already recognizes and it has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff immunity metabolism etc I first noticed it working around training especially workout recovery Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this if you want to try armor is offering my listeners 30% off plus Two free gifts go to armor Dot-com slash Rogan. This is how I see that's not a good team. This is how I see with parenting It's hard to parent it if you're your number one goal to survival Right in saying this is hard to parent, you know you you got a parent from a comfortable space you can't parent from nervous chickens really don't lay eggs in it. It's true so the thing is You if like the way I parent now versus how my mom my mom was strictly survived So my thing is survival first it was and then the rest of it, you know, I don't remember going to Um on vacation With my parents, you know like vacation You know why we're getting two jobs and going to school trying to better than she's just taking care of you So I'm not my kids Going vacation You know, it's different, you know, so I see things from both sides All the time because I'm in which makes me grateful I'm grateful that I can do the things I can do with my family in saying versus Parenting from a place of frustration. Yeah, you know, but I understand this this frustration thing, you know, I'm trying to take care of you and you know, and then sometimes I look at my kids like You know something you have it really easy because if I wouldn't have watched them dishes My mom would have destroyed me Because her mindset is hey, I'm trying to take care of y'all got to help in this, you know me like yeah, but housekeeper I Housekeeper coming in four days out the week, you know, and now I'm like so you just gonna throw that stuff on the floor And you making it hard for the housekeeper You know the reason why she's here four days a week is so to make your life easier But you you're adding on to by being lazy by being lazy like like I don't This a balance in that right you want to protect your children But you don't want them to develop Soft you want them to be able to take care of their own problems and you want them to be able to understand the consequences of their actions So this is like fine line of like encouragement and punishment and like Explaining to them how your life was different and you have to appreciate this life This is very unusual. You're super fortunate I think ultimately what they learn from is how you behave That's a giant part of being a parent that people I don't think are totally aware of until you start doing it That they understand you whatever the fuck you say is one thing. That's great. What you do is what they really say If you're a lazy fucker who's always making excuses your kids are gonna not have respect for you They're gonna know like real early on. You're kind of full shit. This is the craziest thing though You know how hard it is to put some of my own punishment and then say hey Pack we going to Cabo Am I on person? We going to go get your iPad for 16 hours We get the Cabo you stay in your room Overlooked ocean Think about your consequences and you order room You're the birds chirping You looking at the waves It's rough and it's a being it's a certain part of success that you almost can't Punish because it's like I'm not standing at home Got you on punishment. See my mom with she's it's just different. You know different my mom's going her room and Turn on not smelling in a dynasty and I'm in my room with no TV because it was only one TV It's a TV in every room The punishment was coming here and watch Falconcrest with me Why? Don't watch no Falconcrest and then you start watching film christ and now you love it. You like so You get a big dog character. That's why I like mash is it I would be I'd be in trouble and you watching mash and Bonanza and then I was saying you love Mash I cry with match when I was Like that's over the dude who dressed up like a girl. Yeah, Ash Jamie far. Yeah, he was my neighbor. I was a neighbor. Yeah Wow back in California. He lived right next door two houses down Wow Clinker it used to be just me and him and then another guy built the house in between us Who's cool very friendly guy? Play the play the character. Play the good character. That was a good show in him, then another guy built the house in between us. Uh, who was cool? Very friendly guy. Play the, play the character. Play the good character. That was a good show. Yeah, the match was a very good show. You know, and I said this other day, they're a friend of mine. I said, like I listened, I used to ride and take my kids to school and listen to morning shows, you know, really Tom Joyner, you know, listen to Tom Joyner. And this is something I could listen to with my kids. Now there's, there's no morning shows that I can listen to with my children without them putting in a different element that I don't want my kids to be a part of. And though that's a weird thing that they're cursing on radio and doing all this. Well they can't curse on radio still. Oh, yes they can. Can they? They're dropping B word in a minute. Oh, a B word. Yeah. But that's it. I think you can't use, you can't say fuck. No, but the rest of it, you know, my, you know, you got daughters, you're in the right, right, right. And you're hearing some shit. You don't want them in here. Like, that's a weird thing. You like, so they go to school and, you know, at the, in a safe, you're watching the B, you like, man, that was the ending of the show. Right. It's fun to think it's okay. So now you just, we riding and listening to Kijiko. You're then with no talk. Oh, I listen to MP all. I listen to urban, urban network, you know, within the listen, not a got all these political questions and, you know, when you're five year old like, so why aren't we voting? No. Oh, that's what you've been listening to Karen on. Is that the whole time on the way to school or from school? So it's, it's weird how you, you know, what shows would you sit down and watch with your kids now? You know, they had to watch the shows that I grew up watching. You know, got to go back. You got to watch Perry Mason and family matters and, you know, the college the show, you know, different world. We had to go back and watch good times. You know, we can't watch the current things, you know, so, you know, even with, with comedy, I took, I took our son to a comedy show with me to see some friends. And it was 14 at the time. And we left because it was no, it was nothing. The things that were being said, it kind of made me go back to when, um, Cosby did the, the story about his song going to see Eddie Murphy. And he's daddy said these things and I was sitting there like the, at the first two minutes, I'm like, yo, we got to get out of him. How old was he at the time? 14. That's too young. And I'm like, yo, man. But I mean, the guy who's doing comedy is doing comedy for adults that are drinking in a nightclub, right? No, we had it. We had a event where it was all these bodybuilders, the gym. Um, next level had did a, um, a show for all the, the, the people that work out there and the trainers. And I'm thinking, okay, this is at a ballroom. You know, it's probably going to be pretty cool. And I, I stopped in, you know, we said the back and then it went left. And I was like, Hey, man, let's get out of here. And he's seen me. And so he's like, no, this ain't, that it, this ain't the same. I'm like, yeah, I'm not, I'm not going for a certain type of life. I'm not doing shock value. You know, so he's watched almost all the specials. You know, so it's not the, it's not the, the same for, for him. You know, and he, he knows a lot of comics. So it's, it's not, this wasn't conducive. I was like, how's something we out? We out of here. He's like, but it's some comics you can go and you can watch. They, they whole show like a Marcus D. Wiley, he can get a understanding of Lee's marriage. You know, how, how marriage goes to give you some, some fuel. But I think that the landscape of, of comedy is different for different people, not, not in the people who do shock value or, or a lot of sexual content that, that's there, that's their stick in a, and they probably young and, at some point they grow. Hopefully they grow and it'll be more things in life to talk about people like, well, how do you have as many specials? Because I have a life, you know, I had a life before that I talked about and then I have a life, a current life that, you know, I'm still experiencing things. So I'm going to talk about things that, that's, that's a little different because I'm, I'm living and I'm not stuck in sex is not the, the number one thing. I remember when I, when I figured that I was sex wasn't that big when I went to, you know they had to think Netflix and chill. And I actually wanted to watch the movie. I'm like, get you out of my leg. I'm trying to watch this movie. It was, it was funny. So it's a, it's a thing about the development in this game, how you grow and what you think about. Well, I think comedy is just the one of the problems with the label is that there's no genres. It's not like blues comedy, rock and roll comedy, hip hop comedy, EDM comedy. It's just comedy. You don't know what it is. It's just different people's perspective on things. And there's different kinds of comedy that people like, you know, some people are giant rich of prior fans. Some people are Sam Kinison fans. Some people are Jerry Seinfeld fans. And some people love Bonnie Rate and some people love, you know, whatever James Brown, and they'll learn the blank. There's a lot of different styles of music and there's a lot of different styles of comedy. And all that I care is that you enjoy what you're doing and you're doing it because you enjoy it. And if you're doing that, I don't give a fuck. I don't give a fuck what you're doing. I don't care if you have props. I don't care if you write signs and hold them up for the crowd. I don't give a shit what you're doing. I don't care if you're doing impressions. I don't give a fuck what you're doing. That, that was a huge, so when talk about the scope of comedy, you know, I'm, you know, I can start with Carol Burnett. And I, I watched that. But the guy who I watched on HBO a lot, I knew I wasn't going to do that type of standup. It was, that was just a whole different thing. But Gallagher was crazy to me. Crazy. That was crazy. Nobody wore plastic in garbage bags around the next one. What six rows? Yeah, just getting splattered with watermelons and pineapples and coconuts and whatever the fuck you's cabbage. Ridiculous, ridiculous, but he also had some good jokes. Some solid jokes in between then. Dude did a ton of specials. Yeah. You know the crazy story, the Gallagher story is Gallagher retired and his brother took over. His brother was Gallagher too. So he had a brother that kind of looked like. I remember that. Right. And then somewhere down the line, Gallagher decided he wants to start doing comedy again. And he's like, hey, Gallagher too. The gig is up. And he's like, no, no, no, no, no, I'm making money. I'm Gallagher too. I think there was some sort of a legal dispute. Point of that's correct. There was a legal dispute between them. Gallagher's younger brother, Ron, who shared a strong likeness to Leo, asked him for permission to perform shows using Gallagher's trademark sledgeo-matic routine. Leo granted his permission on the condition that Ron and his manager clarified in promotional materials that this was Ron Gallagher, not Leo Gallagher, who was performing. Ron, typically performed in venue smaller than those of which Leo Gallagher performed after several years. Ron began promoting his act as Gallagher too or Gallagher, TOO or TOO. In some instances, Ron's act was promoted in a way that left unclear the fact that he was not the original Gallagher. Leo initially responded by requesting only that his brother not used the sledgeo-matic routine. He can't use the fucking, he can't use the sledgehammer. Ron nonetheless continued to tour as Gallagher too using the routine in August 2000. Leo sued his brother for trademark violations and false advertising. The court ultimately sided with Leo and granted an injunction prohibiting Ron from performing any act that impersonated his brother in small clubs and venues. This injunction also prohibited Ron from intentionally bearing likeness to Leo. Imagine you can't look like your brother. You can't cut your mustache. You got to change your mustache. You got to get rid of the beard. That's crazy. So did Gallagher continue with his career after he kicked his brother out? Did he come back? Probably did. Was that part of it? I think nobody means to say it there. It doesn't say it specifically in this paragraph now. When did Gallagher start performing again? Put that in a search. I think he did start performing again. He was rushed to the hospital after performance in 2011. What year did he sue his brother? 2000. He did start doing comedy again. That's it. He's like, hey motherfucker. He had a special in 2007 and 2014. You can't be doing that with Gallagher too running around. Sifing it off of your crowd. He wants to spend 50 bucks and see Leo. Oh, he wants to spend 20 bucks. See, bass could the same shit. See, Ron, smashing fucking cabbage. You can't be mad. Yeah, carrot top. I'm just saying, yeah, you could perform, but you can't use the slash hammer. I will use a mallet. What about a mallet? Can I use a baseball bat? You could just have someone pitch me things and I smash them into the crowd. Yeah. You can't own that. That's a different thing. I'm handing out oranges and tomatoes in the oil. Yeah, I honestly, I don't give a fuck what you do. As long as you like what you're doing, it's like I love certain kinds of music that's completely opposite to other shit that I love. I mean, I like all kinds of stuff. I don't think you should pigeonhole yourself with anything. But I would not take my kids, especially when they were really young, to see someone who's like very sexual or really rowdy or really raunchy like I don't want to know. You know, the caveat to this is he was in the green room and they were looking right at him. Like they didn't do the like and I'm like, tell me what you're, I didn't know they act. He didn't say, hey, bro, you got young kids. Yeah. Because I would say, hey, man, tonight, you know, right. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He said he did vent. Oh, I would definitely do that. Especially if you were another comic and you brought your kids out of your brow. Yeah, because while I'm going to reel you, you never get to drink sucking. We go. But yo, you got to get him out of here. They don't need to know about all these techniques. Yeah. So that's weird. You know what I mean? Yeah, that is weird. But you know what I mean? It's like time in a place like who was he doing it for? I mean, they probably knew what he did before they hired him. They probably wanted that. Someone's a fan. Which is fine. But just don't invite kids. And like I said, I didn't. All I did was hey, how's on? Let's go. And that's it. I didn't. I hate y'all. She's a man. I'm like, man, do what you do. But I'm getting my kid out of here. Man, you get the phone call. Amen. Why you leave? You don't really want to know why. I'm leaving because you are terrorizing my child's name. Yeah. So yeah, it's no, but I definitely wouldn't take my girls. So took like, no, I'm like, no, no, no, no, no. They don't need to see that really. Not, not at all. My wife got mad at me when I think one of my daughters was six. The other one was eight. I had to watch the movie Alien. You ever see the movie Alien, the original movie? Yeah. Fuck it. Terrifying. And this is too young. This is too young. I fucked up. You know, I think how fun. Watch Annabelle when he was young and it was creepy. It was, he was traumatized. He watched somebody else's house. And you know, with some other kids and they were like, I guess they understood. But her son was, it was a whole problem. Like you tell my sleeping with all the lights on the house. Like I want all the lights on. And I'm sleeping in your bed. Like do you ever go to that place in Vegas? It's haunted me, Zach Baggins haunted me. He has the Annabelle doll there. Wow. Yeah. There it is. Which one is one on the right? Oh, I don't know. That's the real one. That's right. Is the one on the left movie one? Oh, really? Interesting. Wow. So that Annabelle is both on creepy as hell to me. But there's something extra creepy about the one with eyes like a person, the left one. That's insane. You believe in ghosts? Yes. Really? Have you had experience? No. Oh, no, no, no, no. I have. Let me go back. And let me say that. I do believe in ghosts. So my old house, when my mom say that now, it's a girl that lives there. You know, I don't know what happened at this house. But it's definitely a girl that lives in the house. But she would only come from like the hallway bathroom to the kitchen. And I remember doing the painting. Wait a minute. You say a girl. You mean a ghost? Yeah. That's a girl. Okay. She's definitely a girl. And I remember being doing the pandemic. I was in the den and I was working on, I was working on something. And literally I just turned to sit. So you up. Huh? And cause I can feel her. I was like, yo, could, but and I have to go back through my family. A lot of people in my family have experiences with past relatives that passed on. My uncle said he saw his dad, which my grandfather owned in his shoes. And my mom said she saw my grandfather before it lived in, they died in the house that they had in Mississippi. But yeah, I believe in ghosts. I believe in unsettled spirits. But he definitely had a girl that lived in the house. My grandmother, the one I was talking about before, she was very interesting. And she, she really strongly believed in ghosts. And there was a guy that stayed with them for a while. They had a, like an upstairs area that they weren't using once the kids left. And so they rented out like a, I was like an attic space that they had converted. Or so I forget exactly what it was. Anyway, they rented out a room to this guy where, where the circumstances were he died and my grandmother swore that that dude stayed in the house. Yeah, I believe it. I think it's possible that if something happens to you that if you're dying, it's a very traumatic experience. And I have a feeling that we don't totally understand memory. And we assume that memory is something that only human beings have, or that only animals have, or that only creatures are living creature self. I don't think that's real. I have a feeling there may be a type of memory from particularly traumatic experiences that stays in a space. And I think this is one of the reasons why they have to disclose within a certain amount of time someone's been murdered in the house in a lot of places before everybody, because people don't want to live in a house that's got that energy in it. Yeah. Because I think, I think things keep energy. I think they do. They, I think there's something more to memory than just as simple as, oh, remember when we were five? I think there's something else there. I think I think that's our memory. But I think there's a type of memory and things. That's what I think. I believe in the unseen world. So I believe in genes, you know, I believe in angels. It was an answer. It's on scene world. That's not, you know, I would think, but it was things, that was things here before us. You know, so I think there's things here with us. Yeah, definitely with people who don't think that haven't smoked DMT. I definitely get old. Gen get old as some DMT and you're like, okay, I don't know. Shit. This, this things around me all the time. There's things that are influencing you all the time. And this is like when we talk about like good energy and bad energy. One of the things you experience in psychedelic states is a clear recognition of like good things that you've done and bad things you've done. Good, the good way of thinking, the good way you think about things. So a positive way and bad. I remember having negative thoughts in experience once and it was all these like dark fractals. And then I realized it was trying to show me that these dark fractals, these crazy geometrics, these like scary patterns that I was saying was because of my own thoughts and then I released them and it turned into beautiful geometric patterns over and over. And it kept saying like, look at this and look at this. And I was like, oh, it's actually the way you think changes the world around you. It has an effect. It might not have the ultimate effect. It might not be a hundred percent of what happens to you and in your life. But it has a meaningful effect. We just can't measure it. And there's things that are out there. Whatever they are, they have some kind of consciousness that are around us all the time. We just don't have the senses to take them in. Just like when you wave your hand over an earthworm and there's no fucking idea you're doing that. We don't have the senses to understand that there's things around us. And people have been writing about these things for so long to discount them all. They're all liars. They're all delusional. They're all crazy. I think that people discount on do the thinking that they were on drugs. Well, they probably were. But it doesn't mean the wrong. It doesn't mean it doesn't mean it wrong. You know, like a drunk, a drunk really don't tell a lot of lies. That's a drunk. A drunk don't tell a lot. They're going to, that game, I'm drunk. I can't even remember all that. I'm just saying what it is. Right. It was in. But when you, when people like LSD, you know, you loosen it, you know, or mushrooms or these things people like, well, you only saw that because you was on this. But maybe that's the portal on how you see certain things. I think there's certain things that we block ourselves from being able to see. By our own, our own protective instincts, we protect our thoughts. I mean, this is why people I think at paranoid when they smoke weed. One of the things that weed does is it dissolves all these artificial barriers that you put between you and the thoughts of real danger. They're all, they're all there. You realize your vulnerability. You realize who you are. So just think of how years ago, how we was viewed, I marijuana was viewed. Um, it was taught that marijuana is a gateway drug to crack. Like, right. I didn't believe that. Like, how did that even correlate? But it's for those who are trying to find an ultimate high. Maybe you just smoke weed. And that's all you ever did, you know. And you wasn't trying to find another high. I think some people try to find another high like now. Man, a lot of these young people are on so many different things at the same time. Like, what are you searching for? You know, they pop in pills, doing coke, drinking, lean, doing everything, all at the same time. Like, what is and drinking? Like, what, what, what are you trying to escape? But what are you searching for? You know, and I just know people who just smoke weed and steal smoke joints. They don't smoke the, I know people who grow their own blood. They're not even trusting what's going on now. Now, not any fine and fitting all and all is marijuana, you know, and pesticides. Horrible pesticides because what people don't know is that a giant percentage of all the drugs or marijuana, rather that people are buying in places where it's illegal, they're growing them in national forests in California. And the cartels doing it. And the cartel uses a bunch of pesticides and herbicides that are illegal. Like real toxic shit. And they find them doing it all the time. They find these growops in the forest all the time. Because it's a misdemeanor. So because marijuana is legal in the state of California, growing it is just a misdemeanor. So you could have a full scale grow up in, you know, public land out in the forest. And these guys find them. They're all the time. A friend of mine found one in a ranch that he works at. He followed these PVC pipes and he realized that some guy was diverting water into this little area that was on a, to hone ranch, which is a big ranch outside of Bakersfield. But this dude that was on my podcast for his name is John Norris. He wrote a book about it. He was a game warden. And he had it turned into a tactical unit. They had to get like dogs like Belgian mountain walls and shit with bulletproof vests. And they're going in there having shootouts with the cartel. Because the cartel had set up these marijuana growops in the woods. And it was his job to police that area. So like, okay, I guess that's what we're doing now. And then it's a crazy story, man. It's not like moonshine. It's not. That's why you go. It's not. Exactly. And this thing moonshine, moonshine, and developed into NASCAR. Exactly. They had to outrun the cops. Yeah. Yeah. That's what NASCAR came about from. It's fun. It's, I mean, listen, also it's Al Capone. You know, it's all the mob. They were all running alcohol. And there's a lot of people that were connected to them. You know, some people believe that JFK's dad was involved in alcohol. But that's disputed. But the point is, like, a lot of people were making money, selling alcohol. And they were all criminals, all of them. And so what are you doing? Are you stopping people from getting marijuana? Nope. What you're doing is you're empowering a criminal empire. And you're giving them an immense amount of money. And they're probably going to have to kill a few people because people get in the way. They're probably going to have to rob a few people because people are competition. There's a little bit of problem over here. We got another guy growing. When we live in, we live in a society where the bad guys definitely romanticized. Right. So how do you stop people from wanting to be the bad guy when it's so romanticized in everything? It's romanticized to the point where John Wick is a good guy. Yeah. John Wick is a contract killer for the Russian mob. He kills who knows how many fucking people and he's the good guy. But but you got a problem with the Ice Man. Right. And Ice Man was a terrible person. You know, he didn't want poison. John Wick at least looks sexy in that suit. But you can not wait for John Wick to come out. Wait. I love those. Well, the John Wick movie though, he had a reason. They killed his dog and they stole his car. They fucked up. They fucked up. They stole the wrong guy's car and they killed the wrong guy's puppy. And so you're rooting for him. You're rooting for him to kill all these bad Russian guys. But you don't realize like there has been a contract killer for the Russian mob. For who knows how many dads is he assassinated? How many fucking people that have families that will never come home to them? Because of John Wick. And yeah. And sometimes it's not a time. You know, people don't care. We don't know. That's weird. Well, we're weird. We're a weird animal. We're a weird animal and a constant flux of thoughts. And we, you know, trying to figure out what's the right way to think and the wrong way to think. And people join religions for it. They'll join cults for it. They'll join political movements for it. They just want to find a way to think that makes them feel better than the way they think right now. You know, with, with the need to feel better outside of yourself, you know, or your family, you know, or being, you know, great to society. I think that's detrimental to this society. Well, I just, I personally need to feel better, but I don't want the community around me to feel better. And in my mind, if everybody around you in the community feels better, I think it makes for a more harmonious, you know, environment than me just being the only one. Yeah, because you're a wise person. The problem is there's a lot of people that aren't wise and there's no one wise around them. And that's, that's the real issue is that there's a extreme lack of like a good direction book of how to lead a solid life. And you're not taught at school, school, you're taught to sit down and learn, especially if you don't give a fuck about learning. Memorize this. Do good on the test. You got to get a job. What's a job? Well, you got to sit there and do some shit. You don't want to do to get some money. And with the rest of your time, you can do whatever you want as long as you keep showing up every morning, the same spot. Okay. And then that sucks. And so what do you want to do? I want to escape this suck. So what do I need? Cold syrup? Okay. Give me some of that. What do I need? We need, give me some of that. Adderall, ooh, Adderall makes me like the job. Okay. I'll take this shit every day. Now I don't give a fuck. Now I'm trying to get ahead. Next thing you know, I'm moving up the corporate ladder. I don't know how fucking animal broke because I'm on Adderall. You're basically on that. You're on a well designed slow drip and fed of me. And you're out there fucking sleeping four hours a day. Getting shit done. You know, driving a Jaguar. And this is the problem as society. Like people don't have a real, there's a lot of people out there that don't really have a purpose that I'm a real feeling of purpose in that life. You are very fortunate because you've found a thing that you're really good at. You love to do. And you make a great living doing it. A lot of people don't have a thing. And they never were never were taught to pursue a thing or they never saw anybody else do it. And they realized they could do it too. And then next thing, you know, they're married and they have kids and they're in their 30s and then they're in their 40s and they feel like shit. Ask your question. You have a team, correct? Team of people. Team of people. They're sure. Okay. With do you think your team is happy doing whatever they do for the team? If I didn't think that they wouldn't be working. Okay. So you don't want to be that only one happy on the team. No, that's terrible. So and you don't want to also have someone on the team that is one of those people that just are never happy. That's a problem too. Yeah. That's a problem too. So there's people there. You can't fix. So with like I produce other people's specials now and comics that hit me, amen. I want you to just my special. I want you to do this for my special. And the hardest thing, cause I'm a small company. The hardest thing is when I have to explain to somebody why it's a no, you know, on this particular special. And it's not just my no, it is for other people's no, because I tell people and I explain this. If we don't have special with you, you have to get the approval of all five of us. Cause we all five do different things. And I want everybody who's involved in your special to want to do it. Not they have to do it because it's a part of the company. No, I want them to want to do it. And I say, I'm not putting you through a process that I'm not putting myself through. And I'm saying, and I've tested this team with me, um, giving them a special that I knew that wasn't special. And I'm the head. I'm like, I sent it out and they, and then we brought it back to the table. And it was a lot of silence at first. I'm like, so what we think what we thinking? And then he was like, I know, like, I think this is our role. Like, now I'm just listening to everybody's, you know, opinion on it. And it was like, I don't understand the direction. I want to say what you're going with this. I just, you know, we don't have to fix a lot of it. I'm like, and I'm just sitting there listening. And we took the vote. And when we turned the vote in, it was five notes. And it was like, so did what was your thing? I said, I know it was a note from the beginning. I just wanted to make sure that y'all wasn't going to try to fluff me with the, because he's the head. I'm, we're going to say yes. And I'm like, good. So anytime we do a project, if that I put it on the table, just like I put it. because he's the head, we're going to say yes. And I'm like, good. So anytime we do a project, if I put it on the table, just like I put anybody else's project on the table. And you gotta get all five people. If you want me to finance, you gotta get me, then you gotta get the market in person that's gonna market, then you gotta get the director, you gotta get the manager, you gotta get everybody. So they can feel good about pushing your project. I don't want anybody pushing the project that they don't like. That's very smart. Yeah. So you can make it a democracy. Smart. So you got all five of us, then now we ready. Right. And now I'm gonna feel good about somebody coming to me and saying, this is gonna cost this. Right. Because I know they're doing it out of, hey man, this is what's gonna cost me, gonna figure it out. And I'm like, cool. But even when I do a special man, it is a lot of, you know what I'm talking about this part? Like, no, it's like, we should talk about this part. And it's been some decisions that have been made. That was, it was my call at the end, but it was somebody else's idea, like with Domino fact. It would have never been a Domino fact, two, three or four, if I were to stuck with the name that I started with. The name was 1983. So what it was gonna be, 83, 86. Right. Turn around, turn around. It's like, it's like, and I've rugged, which one, three revenue awards, rugged was, was the original name was, I'm not handy. And Eric Collins was like, no, we're, I've listened to it, I watch this on the time, I think that we should go with this name. And he gave me the name and I said on it for a day and then I called him back and was like, yeah, you about right. Yeah, I'm like, that's good. That means you got good people. And I think that people should put, like right now I'm on the custom fit tour. Well, I'm, I'm often to August because I'm gonna take six weeks of vacation. But custom fit is not going to be a special. It's just the tour that I'm doing now, because the specials that I'm writing are different than what I just wanted to take this time to just do some material. I didn't want to be working on the specials. But the theme is about people then custom fit is about clothes. It's not about clothes. It's about tailor making the people around you, in saying that you can be a benefit to it, it can be a benefit to you. In saying not just having these people around, because you know, some type of people around that secretly despise them, you know, and secretly despise their success. And that's a, that's detrimental to anything. Hey, there. Yeah. Sometimes haters will get real close to you. Stay, stay next to you. It's a problem. I mean, when you're in position, like you're in too, when you're producing other people's specials, you're gonna get a bunch of people to come to you that you don't wanna do their shit. It's just like owning the club, the same issue. The way I bypass that, I put all the power into Adam. Adam E. Get decides who's there and who's not there and how the club gets scheduled and, you know, who passes and who doesn't. And he's really good at it. You know, he's really good at it. I trust him implicitly. So I don't have to think about it. And I like it so that when people say, I wanna work your club, like, well, you get to talk to Adam. I just prefer, I might be the owner, but I just perform there. I don't think about it in terms of like, how the scheduling is. I often have to check the website to see who's there. I don't know who's there. You know, it might be mine, but I got a guy who does it and he does it really well. And so why would I get involved in that? When I, it's easier to not. When I had, when I had a club in Houston, I couldn't be funny in the club at all. When I, cause I was actively working the club. So I'm on stage and I'm worried about, oh, I see. So many other things. You know, going on like, yo, did you just drop a glass on the ground? Like, I'm, I didn't have enough help. So you gotta get the right help. I got very fortunate in that a lot of the people that I took to Austin, they were from the comedy store and they were out of work. So the comedy store closed because the fucking stupid government of LA, they wouldn't even allow them to do outside shows. Wouldn't, you can do an outside show in the parking lot of the comedy store. They wouldn't allow it. It's so stupid. They were closed for like a good solid year and a half. They couldn't support paying all these people. So they had to get rid of them and I moved here and it's the same time. It just bought a chance. It happened at the same time. And so they were all out of work and I said, hey, let's get the band back together again. Let's, let's, you guys want to move to Austin? So I paid for everybody to come out here and I paid for them. I gave them a full salary with everything for like a year and a half or so. Maybe even more, maybe two years before anybody had to go to work. Because the club wasn't open. So it was like, I want to give you a job. Like so you could settle in, get used to Austin. You're going to get paid like you're working but you don't have to work. But I love you. I know you and you know, come here. Very admirable. With the store, I just performed at the store, main room for T, they had a thing before BT was our pop. And the comedy store has a certain politics to it. That, you know, I like the other one a little more. You know, all they service pop. Yeah, prop. No, the other comedy store. Oh, the whole, yeah, the whole, the whole. The whole is the shit. Which is that places the shit. What a club. They just don't have food. I don't pop on drinks. I don't believe in food and comedy clubs either. Yeah. So, but it's just a different environment. La Jolla is like very nice, beautiful place. That club is awesome. I love performing there. And with the store in LA, it's like you get there. And it's very, it seems very, you know, segregated. This is now to me, that's when I- How long ago was this? I just performed, but last week, last Wednesday. That's, that's sad here. Because it wasn't like that before. It seemed like the main room in the room around the corner and the belly, all these rooms are different spaces. And that's to me. And I made just, it may just be that feel because I'm not there a lot, you know. But when I come, before I came that time, but the management walkthrough was very pleasant. What do you mean by different spaces? But obviously the different rooms, what do you mean? What do you mean? It seemed like the main room is different from the room around the corner. Well, it is different. But what do you mean by feels different? It feels a little different. Well, I mean, just by its design, it's a big showroom. It's brighter, the ceilings are taller. And then you get into the original room, which is just tight and perfect. The original room is like, that's where you find out what's real. You know, I've seen a lot of people have rough sets. They're real confident going into that room. That room is a true serum. I like a tight room. Well, then then then there's the belly room. The belly room is the ultimate true serum. Trying out new jokes in the belly room is the place. Because you know, only seat 70 people. And you can't bullshit those people. That's the, that's the, the crimped out of the crimped out. Oh yeah. Is a tight, small, the belly room is, because that's what I can't do from a good room. I came from small audiences. They're the best. It's the best for finding out if jokes are real. There's nothing like a small crowd. Like in our club, we have the little boy. The little, we have our rooms are named after the bombs. They dropped on, on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And little boy is only 110 seats. It's super low ceiling. This is when, you know, it's those times in comedy when you knew that that's what you actually love to do. And I remember I was in San Antonio at this, just plays called Santa's. He, he literally owned a whole strip. The club, the Washington, the corn store, everything. The guy named Santa. I didn't know that he owned it, but it was like a rain storm or something. And he got the show got rained out. And it is literally three people in this room. It's two ladies in this Santa. And I don't know that this is him at the time. And we had to go on to get paid. The product was like, I'm not paying nobody, who don't go on. We're still doing the show. I'm like, okay. So this is a $100. Just getting paid $100. And he was like, who, who going up? I'm like, I'm definitely going up. And I'm going up first. Like I don't, I don't care. I did like an I went 30 minutes for three people. And I was like, because I kept looking at like, anybody else going up there's like, no, we good. I'm like, I and Santa, I remember he finally revealed that he was the owner of the club. And he was like, well, let me take you to the bed. He took me to the back and he gave me like $700. He was in for performing. He's like, yeah, man, you wasn't scared of me and my friends had a good time. And it was like three people. It was literally they do name Vans on put the show on. It was like three Vans telling anybody. So he was like, this is when I knew Ali was different. When he went out three people, he went first. And he's like, I went 30. And he was like, and it didn't look like he was coming down. I'm like, yo, bro, I'm here. This is what I do. I don't, and I need that $100. So that's definitely some extra motivation. He's doing no and else wanted to go up. They's like, no. And another time I was at Wiley, I was at Wiley College. And Marcus was performing and the mic went out. And it's like all these people in this auditorium. The same place they shot, didn't show up to move with the great debate. So we in this auditorium and the sound goes out. And they started ribbing Marcus and I was in the back. I was like, what's going on? And he's like the sound went out. And I walked out. I was like, what's happening? And I said, hold on Marcus. Yeah, it seems like, wait a minute. I don't damn well y'all not even trying to get somebody in the product. We didn't bring this down system. Got us in fair east side high before broken clock. And so I say listen, Marcus said down in the back. I was like, yo, that's what we going to do. I'm going to talk, y'all going to laugh. Then I'm going to talk some more. But y'all can't be laughing all along. Because we're in those sounds. I'm not supposed to use my real voice. In this, well, I'm in like 45. And now look back at Marcus saying, hey, man, you want to come back up, Marcus like, no, like you got it? Fuck, dude, like I went 20. He's like, I leave nuts. I'm like, no, this is what I do. And I'm a figure it out. We did a show at the improv once in Hollywood. And the power went out. And they were going to cancel the show. And we were sitting there talking. And I said, why don't we light the stage somehow? And they said, yeah, we can get a emergency light attached to a generator. And we could put a run the wires through the crowd and put a emergency light on the stage. I go, that's that. We'll do that. And then we'll just do stand-up with no mic. And we did the whole show with no mic. It was the opening, middle, and then me. I did a full hour. It was amazing. Everybody had a great fucking time. It felt special. It felt very unusual. Yeah. You got to see what it's like when you don't have a microphone and you're projecting to the back of the room, change my pacing on things. But it was great. It felt cool. It felt like you were doing something. And the audience was into it. I go, look, we're going to have fun, right? Like, fuck it. Who cares? This is going to be this is never going to happen again, probably ever. I've never, I've been doing comedy 30 something years. I've never had that happen where I did a show with no microphone except that one. So this is the thing. These are the experiences that as a comic going through the trenches that some comics will never have. Because they didn't come up that way. And you have a different set of chops. When you come up a certain type of way, I've come up and just joking had to be the craziest place. Because some nights you're coming in, it's like nine people. But these nine people are into comedy. And it's like, you got to do the show. Like, it's not a, we don't have a limit. We've got to do these people that's here. Because the thing is that whole idea that the show must go on regardless, regardless too. Well, I learned that from Paul Mooney too. And one of the things that I did a show at the comic store. It's like the first time that Mooney ever complimented me. I was always scared of him. Because like, Mooney didn't like he was terrifying. He was a legend. He was a legend, wrote for Richard Pryor. And he was like, the way he carried himself. Like, he didn't like you. Like, yeah. And I was 27. You know, I was young and stupid. And I went up because I would always go up last or late. I had late spots. And there was like 15 people in the room. But I did my act. And I heard in the back of the room, oh, oh, oh, he was laughing, having fun. And then he grabbed me after it was he goes, you're a real motherfucking comic. He goes, that's what a real comic does. He goes, all these other motherfuckers, they went up there. And they did all the way from bitch. I know where I'm from. Tell me some fucking jokes. Do your fucking act. And that's what you did. And I was like, wow, Paul Mooney likes me. Whoo. Me and Paul had a different type of relationship. I think you and Paul not get along. One, I always say, I love Paul into I met him. Like Paul was also a bullshit when he went out met Paul. Man, I was at the end problem and I was featuring for him. And the end problem got me to feature for him. And I was like, cool. I'm excited. I get to meet one of my idols in this game. One of the people who changed the course of my pacing because my lineage just sitting down, I passed through Paul. So it's when I first started, I was a crazy man. I was all over the place. I thought that you had to have this all this energy. And then this guy named Dair's white walked into the club one night. I was there and Dair stood in the same exact place. He never took the mic out the stand, put his drink down the stool. And Dair's just stood there. And he was destroying this room. Never took the mic out the stand. And people, any of you always have my people say, Dair's, Dair's, why you don't take the mic out the stand? And he's like, because there's a stand. And let it all the mic go. So my favorite comic, so I'll take the mic out of the stand. Ron White. Yeah. Ron White just stands there with a drink on a stool. Sometimes with cigar. Just kill it. With the microphone in the stand. Oh man. He does. Joey Diaz keeps the fucking mic in the stand. And he makes me laugh harder than any fucking human being to several live. That, so I'm gonna go to, finish pa, then I'm gonna go to Ron. So what did he do though? So I'm in the green room. And at the old end, probably they had a down stage. You can come through the, it used to be a rainforest cap. Yeah. So it was spell binders at first and then it changed. I'm sitting in the green room and it's a main part. And it's a small part. He walking to the small part and saying, hey, go count the room. Yeah, go count the room. I was like, I don't work here like that. I don't count the room. And he's like, yeah. All right. Did he walk out? And then he came back, maybe 25 minutes left. Yeah. Tell you, you little white friend that's packed out there. I want my bonus. What, like what light train, what he's done, why? Raymond cook is the manager, the club, he's talking about Raymond. And I was like, yo, Pa, I don't count the room. I'm the feature. Why would I be counting the fucking room? Like, and then he said something else negative me. And I'm like, yo, Pa, you say something else to me. I'm gonna kick your ass, Pa. Like, what is road to? I'm like, I'm a fucker, dl. I'm like, yo, I'm about to fucking beat up Pa money. He's like, you can't beat up Pa money. He's a legend. Even if you beat him up, you're still not gonna win. It's gonna be a lot of fun. So I'm like, yo, so then another time, oh, and then lay down that same weekend, he had this lady with him, and she was sitting at the top, and I was sitting up there, and she got up, and she left her purse. So I didn't wanna leave and leave the ladies purse there. So I grabbed the strap, and I got the purse, like this, I came in, and I'm like, hey, man, you love your person, Pa, turn on it. What are you doing with her purse? I said she left it, and then I, then what, only thing in my head is deal, you cannot beat up Pa money. So I just walked, I'm like, I'm gonna fuck Pa up. What year was this? This is like three years before he died, and this was the, this was the, oh, and Pa. This is what I heard, just for clarity. He was struggling in the last years of his life. So you probably didn't get the best version of Pa money. So then we hear, no, we performin' at the theater that's right next to the Paramount. It's another theater that's connected to Paramount. The black heritage, the black art, something, and both of us not knowing that, oh, we at odds. So I'm in my green room, and the lady comes in. Hey, she's very nice. Hey, I leave, Pa money's next door, it was the end, and you like to meet him and say, and I was like, no, cool. And then she goes, Pa, I leave his next door. You know, I don't know if y'all wanna meet each other, and Pa was like, no, I'm cool. And I went up, I'm in my green room, and the host is on stage, and Pa was getting ready to go up. And this was his apology. He walked by the room and came back like on Purple Rain. Came back and leave the room to what? Hi Ali. And then, I'm in Pa fucking nuts, man. And yeah, but he, that's, you gotta take that. You know, there's certain people are just eccentric. That's Paul. I mean, I wouldn't have counted the fucking room either. I would've been like, that's not my job. But Ron White, I was in Orlando. Mangeol and El exe. He said, hey, I leave, I know you have a, I know you have a, or feature. But Ron White would like to, you know, feature feed. And I was like, I don't know, no person ain't Ron White. And she's like, you don't know Ron White? I'm like, wait a minute. Like, Ron White, Ron White, I think it's like some other guy who's using his name or something. Like, his name happens to be Ron White. Like, Ron White, Ron White, he's like, yeah. I say, you wanna, you wanna feature for who? He's like, you, he called and asked. I was like, the fuck, I say hell yeah. So I call Marcus my young Marcus. You gonna go up and then you're gonna be gone Ron White. When was this? This was like maybe four years ago. That's crazy. And Ron shows up in this huge tour bus. Like, I'm, I'm walking to the club. And I'm like, who buses this? And I'm like, oh shit, it's Ron's, but got the keel of brand on it. And he's in his bus. He's not even in the green room. Then he, then I get knock on the door. And his, his, his manager, he's like, hey Ron, like the no, can he come in the green room? I was like, it's like Ron White, yeah, he's coming in the green room. So it comes in. He's like, yo man, I just wanna, I love what you do. I just wanna do some time. Ron went up there and was destroying this room. And I couldn't wait to get up. Cause I wanted to just talk about fucking Ron White just beat it for me. And I, I just destroyed this room and Ron. He said I didn't watch his like, it was fucking amazing. And like, in my mind is I'm still in all that Ron White wanted to fucking, want to work with you. I was like, that shit was crazy. That's so cool. Well, you know, when he's working on new stuff, that's what he likes to do. He likes to go around and does a lot of sets. He's constantly active. He's at the club tonight. We're working tonight. He's one of the main reasons I moved here. Ron moved here before the pandemic. So I called him up in like 2018. I loved having him at the store. So he started coming to the store around 2014ish, something like that. And oh my God, we had so much fun for years and years. And he had a beautiful place up in Beverly Hills. And then he just got sick because he's always traveling. He just got sick of the long flights in the traffic. And I called him up. I go, why did you move to Texas? He goes Austin's amazing. The food's fucking great. Everyone's nice. It's in the middle of the country. If I want to fly to Florida, it's quick. If I want to fly to, oh my God, damn it. Can I live in Texas? And then the shit at the fan with COVID. And I was like, I heard you get the fuck out of California. This place sucks. They're telling me what to do. There's not one I signed up for. You tell me I can work. You tell me I have to wear a mask. Fuck you. I'm getting out of here. And when I came to Austin, it was one of the main reasons why I was willing to move here. I'm like, if we never do comedy again, at least I can hang out with Ron. That's amazing. Yeah. And then everybody else came. And then once, I mean, everybody says that I got everybody to move here. So I got a lot of people to move here. But Ron got me to move here. That's the most important thing. Like, Ron got me to move here. And then I realized how nice people are here and how disconnected they are from show business. And I was like, oh, this is so refreshing. Everyone's just normal. My neighbor's a normal guy. Everyone's normal. They're regular people. Just people living their lives, having a good time. And for me, because I love hunting, because everyone hunts out here. It's normal past time. I tell people I bow hunt in California. Oh! Texas is Texas. We have been a gem for a long time. And we just let other people feel like they up ashymo. Texas ruled forever. I mean, you can think of kennison and Hicks two of the greatest of all time came out of Houston. And when I was coming here all the time, I knew it. So one of the things that was good about doing comedy is a lot of people that moved during the pandemic just wanted to get out of California. But they had no idea what the rest of the world was going to be like. They'd never been to Nashville. They'd never been to Austin. I'd been here a couple dozen times. I knew I loved it. So I was like, look, this will be all right. Like, I'll be fine. Like, it looks like I'm never doing comedy again. I was like, it looks like comedy's done. It looks like they're going to fucking make us just stay indoors, especially in like blue cities. Like, this is crazy. You have to have a vax card to eat at a restaurant in New York City. I'm like, this is fucking bananas. None of this shit makes any sense. I remember you guys came. Mothership was coming. The next thing I know, Kreek and the Cave was here. Kreek and the Cave was here first. Yeah. It was in there. I was saying how I heard about it. I was like, oh, yeah. And like, Kreek and the Cave come like that. Okay, Kreek and the Cave is coming from New York. And then Mothership is here. And then, but they had rooms, you know, the main thing was, what was the room that was so hard to get in there first? Austin comedy club. Damn. Forget the name of it. Velveeta room? No. No, it's the actual comedy club. Cap City? Cap City. Yes. Cap City. That place was always packed. Yeah. You know, I almost bought that place. Yeah, I heard that. Yeah, I almost bought that whole mall. But the guy was trying to sell it to me wanted way more than it was worth. And then he got roped up in some FBI investigation. I was told while it was going on and he was being investigated. And I was like, oh, OK. And then he went up getting arrested. But that building was for sale. The whole thing was for sale. And I went in there. I thought about how many shows I'd been there. How many shows I'd seen there? How many shows I'd performed there? Over there. I'm like, I could own this place. Oh my God. Cap City was the first place that I did on the road with on D.L. That was a great club. You know, fucking great club. Perfect club. That place was amazing. Such a fun place to work. I think that people didn't realize how the rich history of Houston Dallas Austin. Laughs. Laughs. Laughs. Laughs. Laughs. Laughs. Laughs. And told me that that building still exists like that. That it's still set up like that. There's nothing in it. Is that true? Yeah, nothing in it, though. But it's still the same room? Yeah. Man, we might have to do a mothership Houston. Yeah. That's, yeah. We see if there's another city that could support like a large group of talented up and commerce, Houston's one of them. Yeah. So, you know, we have a secret group there. We have on. To have the other cap city that was upstairs. Remember they opened up the second one. They closed that one. And the lab another. To my lab. No. The cap city. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, no, I'm sorry. Laughs. Laughs. Last spot. Oh, they checked. No, no, they had that already existed. The last spot went upstairs. They were on wall. They had more. I thought there was a, the last stop. Yeah. I thought it was the same group that knows. The same group that owned the last stop in River Oaks. The last spot was another place. I knew that because when I was working at the last stop, Ralphie May was working at the last spot. And we got together. We're hanging out and he dinner. But that was, that was the old spot. Then there was the other last stop that they put upstairs. It was a new, but it didn't last. It was only for the odd of a years. Yeah, I didn't go there. I didn't go today. It was a good spot. Then it went under. Yes. Yeah. I should fear did it with a Hitler mustache once. He trimmed his mustache to look like a Adolf Hitler. All right. All right. All right. Is, is by far the craziest person that I know. Like I thought my uncle Mac was the craziest person. And I'm, and I'm, and I'm, and I'm, and I'm like, this is the craziest person I know. He's awesome. Yeah. And he just moved to England. I'm like, brother, gonna stab you. He moved to England. They will fucking stab you. They stab people there. Oh, don't get stabbed. Ari is nuts, but he's such a cool dude. But he's fucking nuts. I said, I would go see him at the Creek and the K when he was getting ready to film his special. And I like, you know, Ari is so crazy. If you just, if people took time, just go through the, the many looks of Ari should feel in the net. The one that killed me was the half. Yeah. He was just bald on one side. Yeah. You know, and I was like, you know, he's doing two things like, he's insane. He did two things for Batman. Yeah, he's out of his mind. But, but that's really who he is. You know, he ain't, he's not trying. Yeah, he's not trying. He's not trying. He's out of his mind. Yeah. Complete man. Yeah. When he tore a bird, when I heard about him there, no birds chick, he was like 25,000. He's like, he just made two of them. He just tore the chick up. And they, they wrote you another one. I'm like, are you insane? I'm like, he's, he's the greatest person. But he's fun. I've had some great conversations on the phone. I mean, he's just, and I was very fucking smart, dude. I was very smart when he called me to do the, um, his last, the endless, you know, I was like, that's cool to say. that that's where I, that's a pivoting point, a major point in my career when I did. Um, this is just not happening. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was a great show man. It was a great idea. I remember when he started doing it, you started doing it at the lab at the improv. So do you remember the lab? Yeah. Another little room. Cool. It's a cool little room. Um, they should never got rid of that room. They, they changed that place and they fucked it up in my opinion. That's the room, the, the main room still awesome. But the lab used to be in the back. They changed that place and they fucked it up in my opinion. That's the room, the main room still awesome. But the lab used to be in the back and it was like, there wasn't a big bar there. I think it's still there because of that. Yeah, the other car, I will last on the Dion code. Yeah, but it's different. It's not the same setup. It used to be you went through a door and it was like another small room. And in that small room, it was separated from the front door. They moved the front door and now everybody went in through the parking lot. Right? And so they went into the lab through the parking lot. So the front door was back there that now. And when you would open it, it was all this noise from the street and they had a curtain to block off the noise. Indeed, here people, they were like right next to your stage where they were buying tickets. It was annoying. And then there was the bar which is right there. It's still a cool little small room once everybody settles in. But the original setup was way better. And Ari started doing it there. And I was like, what are you doing? And he's like, I'm going to do a storyteller show. I was like, look, what the fuck is that? That's what I thought. I was like, why are you doing that? And then he said, well, it really helps you without having to have punchlines and setups and have everything really tight. You could find the beats in the store. And I was like, oh, well actually that's brilliant. That's pretty fucking smart. It's a good alternative sort of way to develop bits. You know, you develop bits by working it out but into a more loose format of a telling a story. And I didn't even know that that was the premise behind it. Because when I got it, it was like, it's going. He tell a true story. And I was like, okay, cool, that's my thing. And I had just won Comedy Central's Comic to Watch in like 2013. So you get a package, you get an album, you get a half hour and you get a chance to go on one of the shows that's already on Comedy Central. So they was pitching me at the Adam Divine show. And I was like, I don't like it. And it was another show. I was like, no, I'm cool. So every show that they would say that they wanted me to go. I was like, no, that's really my thing. So then Chase DeRuso, it young comic, call me and say, hey, listen, you might want to go on. This is not happening. I was like, what's that? He's a show start on the internet. You know, I went on it. I watched both, I think both seasons of it on the internet. And I was like, yo, this is the one. So I called Anne Harris that kind of say, this is the show that I want to do. And already know me. And I was like, I don't know him. But Eric Abrams is one of the co-creators of the show. He's like, I know him. So he pretty good. He should bring him on. And already with Ari Dylan, but he's like, I didn't know what he was going to do. But I don't know. It was a true, all you had to do is tell a true story. And I was like, perfect. Eric thought that I was going to do the story that I did on the second time that I was on. And I was like, when I got there, I was listening to people stories. And I was like, now I'm going to do a lighter story because the second story is Mitchell. It's like when I was going to kill this CEO. And I was like, now I should do a lighter one. And then I did the prison ride, which is affectionately known as mixing God on boobs. And Ari's like, best fucking story I ever like, me telling the story about a riot or prison ride. And I was telling what happened. And I only did like 16 minutes of what happened. That that was a whole, that was a whole ordeal. Like it wasn't a 16 minute riot. It was like nine hours. Like the whole thing is like, man, I only told the beginning part of it, which was, you know, pretty cool. You know what happened? I already lost the show, right? Yeah. And so that so when the show came back as with Roy Woods, they called me to do it. And the loyal spirit in me, I called Ari first. I was like, hey, they want me to do this show. I'm really not fucking with it. And he's like, no, no, do it. I was like, what? He's like, I heard about all the stuff. He's like, man, do it. Eric is still shooting it. He was saying, so you should do it. Because we wanted you to be the host, but they didn't want you to do it. You know, they got Roy, which is cool. I don't think they wanted anybody affiliated with Ari to do it. Yeah. So we're punishing Ari. So when they asked people why? So for people who don't know, they Ari got a deal. He got an offer to do Netflix special. And he wanted to do it. And they wanted him to do the special on Comedy Central. And he said, well, I don't have to. It's not in my contract. They said, well, if you don't do it, we're going to cancel your show. And he was like, wow, I can't believe you would do that. And that ain't what you did. I already know. No. So we were trying to figure it out. I offered the host it for free. I said, I will come in and host it. I'd already done it. I saw a comment. I'll host it for no money. I go because he wanted to make sure that everybody was paid. He was going to take out a loan. And Ari was going to pay all the grips, all the camera people, because they, you know, these people, they chart out their year. They're like, oh, I'm doing this. This is not happening for the next six weeks. And then I'm doing this for five weeks. And that's their year. And that's how they budget their life. And Ari decided that he was going to take out a loan to pay everybody. So then I'm like, wow, I go this and man, it go. Tell Comedy Central that I'll host it for free. They weren't interested. They weren't interested in anybody affiliated with him. He tried to, he offered up a bunch of other comics. Yeah. They weren't interested. So I was in that group of the, the, the bunch. Because I know of you. It was Joey, me, Bert. And they just got me to do it once. Ari told me it was cool. He's like, man, do it. Yeah. Ari would never try to stop anybody from working. So what I, what I went on into, indeed. And my protest of, you know, eating one. Ari. So what I did was told a story about Ari. I just told it like, okay, go with it. Like my story is mushroom story, which is an Ari. She was on the second and I thought I was, you know, second season I did the show. Ari gave me mushrooms. It's that. I went to the whole thing of what happened when Ari gave me the mushroom. I ate the mushrooms. I didn't know they were mushrooms mushrooms. I thought they were something else. And it was like, I had an eighth of mushrooms. And it was a long day. And I, through things to not tell you to not eat all of them. And I remember Janice, Janice was my assistant. And I remember I had to fly the next day. And I'm still, I'm still going. I'm out of my shit. So I get to the airport and I call Janice. I said, Janice, people are going through this machine. And then I'm not seeing them anymore. That's like he's not, he's going like, and Janice said they probably go in the various places. And I was like, but I don't want to go to various. I want to go to Houston. So then when I get up to the TSA, I said, hey, I'm seeing a lot of people go through this machine and then I'm not seeing them anymore. Where they going? The man said, man, various places. And I got out the line. I called Janice. You all right, they are going to various. That's like he's nuts. Like he's losing him. I'm like, yo, I was so toasted and just getting on the plane. We're still full of mushrooms. It was, I just, I wanted to just close my eyes, but she just wasn't working. It was like, I was out of it. I never, as much of it was the crazy thing. It was a crazy thing. And that same week, um, because I was there for a couple of days, Joy Diaz gave me a black star. And I remember calling somebody, he was like, yo, don't you eat that shit? You say, if you want to lose it, don't you? This episode, I'm going to enjoy. This is back when I was smoking. I took an edible with the on the flying Jew and me and him. It's like you literally see us. I was fine at first. And then you joined the only person that's in this studio that's, that's still together. And you just slowly see us just melting. We both did, and then I know I was speaking very good English at one point, then I was the news like, yeah, so is it. Does it, does it, joy is like, no, I understand. I don't understand. The church of what's happening now has some of the greatest overdose on weed moments ever in the history of the internet. Just Lee, just seeing Lee saiyan just melting. Because he can't keep his eyes open. He's just melting his chair. It's good. You know, it's like, at first I was like, yo, he's tripping. Then I was like, I'm like, this is not happening to me. Like it was crazy. Joy Diaz does what you have to fuck. And then there was, I want to see the devil. The other side of the story is another comic with me named Billy Sirels. He had taken some edible, but he ain't on the show. So he's outside. He didn't just melt it. Like he just sitting on the ground outside and doing like, yo, those black stars are 500 milligrams. Yo, that was, yeah. I saw Joey eat two of those ones. Just took down two of them. I'm like, that is so crazy. That's so much. You know, Jamie doesn't feel it. Edibles don't work on him. Well, Jamie's got some weird fucking biological condition. Throw that man. I'll try it. Yeah. I'm not afraid. He doesn't, just doesn't give a fuck. He's not scared of edibles at all. I've, I've done two different types of mushrooms. I didn't know that they were. It's like the ones where I was really on one. That's the one that's already gave me and then there's some other ones that made me very talkative. Right. Look at me. He drew on his circle. He's in his other dimension right now. They can't keep the headphones on. He's going to do. Joey's the best. They're back. They're doing it again. They're back together again. Yeah. Oh man. They're doing it. They're doing it out of New Jersey. Is that what they're doing? Yeah. He's the best. Yeah. I remember my car was Malone for, um, Joey, because he's the big most of them all. It's before Moses died. I call him like, you know, Mos Malone, no fucking way. You know what I'm like? Yeah. No fucking Moses. The most, Moses was nuts too. Like, Moses Malone was like a net. Have you heard about these new mushrooms that make you see the little tiny people? I don't know. No, I haven't. The talkative ones were like, I call it a lot of people on my phone and everybody's saying report was, you know, you call me like three and a month or a month or something like you want to talk to me about my life. And which ones are those? What did you take? It's not so Simon. It's something different. Yeah. It's something different. Yeah. It may be very talkative delay. I told delay about them. What the hell was that? Commenting delay. I told him about him because I called him and I talked to him for like hours. Just about. So then he ended up taking the same mushrooms. He called me and I knew what it was like. Go ahead. Just talk. He was talking his ass all I put the phone out and with the sneeze, I woke up. He was still talking. I'm like, yo, this it is crazy. What is it? I don't. Man, I got a jam. Let me put that into perplexity. I got a call put that into our AI sponsor. Find out what mushrooms make you talkative. Yeah, I know who gave him to me. So I call her an ass. What is insurance that you gave me? Because she went in bottlenecks. I was a fucking tug of this mess. I don't know what that is. I've never heard of that before. Most of the time when people take shrooms, they can't talk. And it's like, uh, no, I was all one. That's crazy. I was the one. Because the ones that already gave me. It's just magic mushrooms. It's just in general. Huh. Some people's response to it. Yeah, but he's it seems that there's different responses to different ones. I know I'm saying on the screen says what I just said. Huh. I don't do this enough research for perplexity to have a. Right. How much research are they doing out there? Talkative social on magic mushrooms. But there's no specific mushroom reliably proven to make you talk to them. All right. Ask if there's a mushroom that makes you see little people. Yeah, that's different. I know. I know, but I want to see what perplexity I have to say about it. What does perplexity say? Ask it about is there a mushroom that makes you see little people. Let's see if it really is up on its psychedelic science. Pete, the article I just put. I, I, I, I want to see what it says though. That's just a question to see how it handles this. Yes. It's a bit specific edible mushroom called. Lan moa. Uh, asiatica has been reported to cause very vivid hallucinations. You say hallucinations. Maybe they're really little people right there of little people when it's undercooked. A phenomenon known as little, a pucian hallucinations. So the thing is how do you know it's a hallucination? And maybe you're just now can see these things that people have been writing about for eons. How, how ignorant are people and how arrogant are we that we know everything that's going on all around us all the time? We don't. People have always thought gremlins are real and gnomes were real. And fairies. Studying that since the sixties. Of course they have been. I'm studying it right now. What's study? Let's go study mushrooms. Man. Yeah, they've been studying it. But like the real problem is there's got to be a bunch of, I know for sure there's other strains that are much more potent because I know a guy who is a mushroom guy. He's like deep in the world of mushrooms and he was explaining to me that there's one that's like 10 extraonger and there's one. There's new ones that they found. I think they found a new one. I want to say in China, they found a new hallucinogenic mushroom. But this one, this little pucian one is weird because it's not so aside. So it's cooked. This has something to do with cutting it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Once you're on my, you'll see them all. No, it's that I think this might be the Chinese one because I think it's a, is it? Yeah. Okay. So this is a, I conflated the Chinese. So they eat it if you cook it and you do a real good job cooking it, you don't trip. But apparently some people have not cooked it and eaten it and go, oh, wait a minute, what do we cookin out of this? When you're, you might be cooking out whatever the mushroom is giving you to let you see the the spirit world or see the fairy world or the no more older, whatever it is, with restaurant, you can get in a restaurant. Let's go. I'd be like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey. Undercooked my, just put it on some salad dressing. I said, that shit out. Let's go. I don't have, unfortunately, I don't have a problem with mushrooms. I think that, and I just like, unfortunately, what do you mean? Because you know, some people like you shouldn't be on that. Like, but I don't have a problem with mushrooms, and especially if I'm in a safe environment, but being at the lows on mushrooms, that's not the best place to be. Like, also trying to fight it if you fight it, you're fucked. If you, if you, if you start going and you start, no, I don't like this. Like, uh-oh. It's going to get dark on you. It's going to like, I've tried to wrestle with it. I've had them in chocolate, like a little chocolate squares and it's been, it's been a time. I don't, it's been a time. But sometimes you can get right to see little people. I definitely want to be somewhere. What I don't, I just need to be somewhere safe. Brian Simpson has a lyric story about someone getting my mushroom chocolate bar, and he put it in his freezer and forgot. Forgot that it was a mushroom bar, and they just ate the whole thing. And just went to Pluto. He's like, Dr. Manhattan sitting on Mars. I'm fucking lotus position. This one's kind of strange. It says, doesn't matter who you are or what you do. You're going to have the same experiences. Everybody else has done it. Okay. At that point in time, when do we start to say, maybe there's something in this substance, this compound, this molecule that lets you interact with something that's real. That's around you. If it's repeatable over and over and over again, all these people see the same thing over and over and over again, and people have been writing about it since the beginning of time. They've been writing about elves and fairies and gnomes and magic people in the woods. What do you think they were doing? They were probably eating these fucking mushrooms. So this is show that I watch that I still don't know what this show is about. But I watch, I'm going to see the number four, and I have no idea what it is called. It's called from. Ah, I've been watching it. I love that show. I'm in the middle of season four right now. And so you know he's taking much room. The one guy did. Yeah. Well, you spoil earlier. No, but you know. But you know, all right. Big spoiler. I know, but the people that listen don't know. Hey, the people that don't, it's, it's, it's, it's, don't fuck this up. It's good. And I saw MZ. No, they moved. It's on, they moved. They moved. What are these new shows that's been talked about to get moved? No, no, no, that's still on Paramount. Yeah. Well, it's MGM. I think it's an MGM. Yeah. Yo, great fucking show. Yeah. Very original. I still, people are on this officially on Netflix. There it is. I don't say. Oh, they are. Oh, wait a minute. Hold on. Maybe it's on Netflix as well. Yeah. That's, yeah. That's all I was saying. Oh, that's what it came on. Oh, I saw. You're on epics and then. But you watch all these things. Good show. But you have no idea what. There's no rules. It's in, and so I, I call my director of Hey, I want to make a show that is about whatever we're doing. And he's like, we'll give me an example. I say, watch from like I watched all of a sudden, I, I cannot tell you what this show is about. Like, I just know the people that do it for people that don't know that want to watch it. It's, it's people that trapped in this town. They're all the same circumstance. There's a down tree in the road. They can't go further. So they back their turn around and they find themselves in a loop that keeps leading them through the town over and over and over and over again. And no one in the town can escape. And at nighttime, monsters come out and they look like people. They look like a mailman. They look very normal. Scary ass milk man. Oh, that milk man is insane. That old lady. Oh, that knocks in the window. Terrifying. Terrifying show. It's, it gives me anxiety and I know it's all fake. It's, it's like it's a crazy show. Yeah. And season four is even more bizarre. Yeah. Like, everything that I be thinking, I was like, yo, I think this is what it is. And then it doesn't be that but then it that come and it like see and I, but I'm like, see what, like what, what am I? It's like, I don't know the prick the show is going. And I know, no one knows where it's going. But it's like lost. The same people that made lost made that show. Word. Yeah. That's why it has that same sort of feel like crazy doesn't make it that not not, not you can't predict what's going to happen. Nothing makes sense. And very entertaining. Lloyd tickles this shit. I'll be Lloyd is mad about every guy. But it's so it's a crazy. It's crazy. But it's very interesting. Like I don't miss it. I love it. Yeah. I've been, um, binging it. So I started. Like, yes, me and my wife started about a month ago or so. And we burned through the first three seasons. And now we're into the fourth. Yeah. It's good. And I think the next season's coming out in 2020, but I don't only, how they, I think the next season's the last season, unless they decide to keep it going. No finale. It's the finale. So they just announced that it's going to be the last season. And maybe maybe when I'm on it, I'm rolling. But the thing about this kind of show is you could do whatever you want. Like, yeah. You go back in time. You could do wild shit. Like, I don't want to give anything away. But there's no rules. There's you can make anything happen. You can make anything. It's a very strange show, but it's very entertaining. It's all man. It's a very entertaining show. Yeah. But if you want to just sit at home and watch it and not do anything, man, you never picked a better time to be alive. You could waste your whole life just staring at a screen. It like when I asked people, because my palette for what I take in is different than a lot of people you and I turn people on to a show like when I turn my boy on the pinky blinders, I was like, you're a pinky blinder. This is a great show. I was like, yo, you got to watch pinky blind. He called me and was like, yo, this is crazy. And I remember my boy D leg, I so invested in, um, was the first show, the motorcycle show that I turned him on to. Um, I know what you're talking about. I never watched it. What is that show that motorcycle show that everybody liked? You don't talk about jamming or that's it. Son of a man, okay. I turned him on to the sons and okay. And it's a person on that that you kind of get invested in. And I remember he called me and said something about him. And I was like, yo, who? Like who? What would you say? And I'm putting on my shoes and then I noticed, but you talking about the person on the, on some of that. Yeah, that's fucked up what they did. I was like, yo, you're crazy man. He's like, no, I'm so invested. I was like, yo, man, you are a wild person. But you know, sons and archie, pinky blinders, like I was big on Yellowstone. And now the two spinoffs of Yellowstone, Marshall's and the doesn't range. I can't not watch it. Like it's some good shows out there. And I just can't watch the typical stuff. I gotta watch something that has a little more to it than what normal people would watch. Because I like to see normal people in shows, like something I can relate to. The doesn't range. You know, being Texas, this I don't, how ranching is this is how I always, experience how ranching goes with cows and, and how you keep your land and how these different fights that people have over land. I'm like, shit, shit is pretty interesting. It's very interesting. Taylor Sheridan's a friend of mine. He got me that. He was on here the other day, talking about it, but Taylor's show that I love his land man. Same kind of deal. It's all about the oil industry. You just realize like, oh, Jesus, is this how all this works? Yeah, it's other things happening in life and it's way more notorious people than a drug dealing show. This is man crude oil is a business. So it's such a big business. Of course you're going to get devious shit going on. You're going to get shit happening. How's to? Yeah. The real world of oil must be nuts. It must be nuts. I mean, that's why we're in war right now. You have to be ruthless with oil. I guess a big thing. And I don't understand. Fake meat. Why would people be given somebody fake meat? Because they make money selling fake meat. That's why. I mean, that's a lot of people were trying to push while they're saying that cows are bad. Cows are methane. The environment. It's bullshit. But while they're doing is trying to, someone is pushing this idea that we need to stop beating meat because they're profiting off of us not eating meat. That's what it is. It's all it is. It's not bad for you. It's good for you. You need it protein. It's super healthy. One of the best foods in the world for you. This is just a bunch of horseshit out there saying that we need to eat less meat for the environment. No, we need to figure out how to not pollute. That's for sure. But regenerative farms aren't polluting. You're full of shit. It's not true. If you want to say we need to stop doing factory farming, maybe. Yeah, that's probably a good thing to do. But you need to figure out how to feed all these fucking people. You've developed a system that's entirely reliant on massive amounts of animals moving through. The amount of chickens that people eat in America every day is crazy. What are the amount of chickens that get consumed in America every day? Let's guess. 20 million. At least. At least. I must say 50 million. 50 million chickens a day. How many billion chickens a day get killed? That's a question. Oh, okay. How many do we eat? How many millions of chickens do we eat every day in America? I know. I can account for three in my house. 22 million chickens every day, son. That's nuts. That is a crazy amount. That's way bigger than the entire residents of Los Angeles. If every person was a chicken, every we eat that amount in this country every day. It's crazy. In my home alone, if we roast in chicken, if we going to get a roast chicken, we're going to get three of them because it's going to, I don't even know that I could eat a whole chicken by myself until I did it. It's like, yo, man, Muslim grocery store. They sell them in there. It's already roasted. You get two garlic sauces with each chicken. Once you dip a piece of that chicken, that garlic sauce, it's not going to survive. It's like I bought three of them because I know if two are going to make it home, I have to eat this one by myself and they put on a piece of pita bread. It's already roasted and it's insane that I would eat a whole chicken by myself. Estimates suggest 24 to 26 million chickens are killed every day in the United States for me. That's a ... So if you don't want factory farming, you've got to figure out a solution where you can get 26 million chickens a day or you convince people they need to stop eating meat. But if we look at ... If I'm looking at a show on Game of Thrones or House Dragons, when I would see them sit down to eat, it was a lot of meat on that table. Very Asians of meat. It's a whole ... I've never seen the king sit down. It wasn't a whole entire pig on the table. Most people haven't bought a lamb and you think that a lamb is enough. It depends on what you own who's there. If it's eat and it's after the fast and you put a lamb on a spew and all these Muslim families come your house. That's not enough. You need another lamb. You need two lamb. Like a whole lamb. Like it's ... Man, it's ... Meat is delicious. It's great for you too. Don't anybody tell any difference. And they can't, but I'm not really listening. When somebody tell me about a vegan situation, I'll listen to you, but none of it is going. It's like ... I say something comes in one ear and go out the other. It's not even going in the ear. Like I've already made my decision. Okay, I'll be. But I'm not really listening to you. I'm eating the lamb. Go. I mean it. Life eats life. It's just the factory farming thing is the uncomfortable part. That's the gross part. And if you just were on a ranch, it's natural. It's natural. You want to get overtaken. Just let the animals just do the thing. Chocolate. And see how ... see, don't you see ... I am legend. I taught you that. Yeah. Like, y'all, how many antlers ran through a play with a stampede? Like, it's ... So even like with the thing that happens in the ocean sardines, right? So mass, all these mass sardines come one spot. Then the whales come first. Then the sharks come. And then we still get sardines. But the all of these, this ecosystem is eating. We still get sardines. It's ... We're not running out of natural. If you let everything do it, do this thing. You know, you do not have any jellyfish. It is somebody who's just all eating them. You know what I mean? Because that is a crazy ... out of natural, if you let everything do it, do it thing. You know, you know how many jellyfish? It is somebody who's just all eating them. You know what I mean? Because that is a crazy jellyfish can mob out. Like mob out. And they can kill you. And they can kill you. Yeah. Somebody eat them. Something eats them. You can eat them at Chinese restaurants. I've had jellyfish before. Was it good? I don't remember it being good. I don't remember where I ate it. I remember someone cooked a specific type of jellyfish. And I was like, OK. So I didn't even know you could cook that. And Texas and jellyfish are edible. Fine, I don't know. And Texas and Louisiana. The amount of crawfish that we eat in two months is literally insane. Imagine if they didn't. Imagine when crawfish would be. You'll cuz imagine. I know I can account for at least 50 pounds by myself. I know. You can how many crawfish there would be if people weren't eating them. Like when I was a kid, I grew up in Florida for a while. We lived in Florida in Gainesville. And there was alligators there. They were Florida. But they were protected. Back then the alligators were protected. Like the Everglades. Well, it wasn't the Everglades. OK, hold on. Edible jellyfish. Best known edible species in using Asian cuisine. Oh boy, try to say that word. Robilema escalentum, often referred to as the Japanese edible jellyfish. That's a lot easier. I don't think they're. Plain jellyfish. So there's a few different species of jellyfish. Anyway, my point was when I was a kid, alligators were protected. And they were at this lake. And you could see them. And people would throw marshmallows in the water. The alligators would eat them. And then now there's too many. There's so many alligators there now. Like they can't get rid of them. They're in every body of water. Everywhere you go, there's alligators. Yeah. The entire Everglades filled with alligators. Golf course is filled with alligators. I remember when they got eaten. Oh, Disney World? And I was like, yo, that's insanity. Because I don't trust a puddle of water in Florida. No. I'm a puddle. It could be a puddle. I'm like, is the alligator in there? But what they removed, 400-something out of games from Disney World. Oh, they removed them all the time. They have to check every day. They have to go back there and make sure that there's no alligators. It's like a huge number. It's a huge number. Like maybe 24-40 or something this year. But it's 400 or something. Wow, that's insane. You know, Disney World has a bass fishing lake. You can go bass fishing at Disney World. There's like a little trip that you take. You go there. 414 alligators removed from Disney World since Toddler's death 10 years ago. Oh, that's a lot. It's a lot of monsters, man. They're legit monsters. I remember when I was in Guam, I was in Guam doing a show. And I think the military had moved there. And it was a bird that they was trying to protect. And so they killed all these snakes. And this is how when you change the ecosystem to something, something happens. So the snakes, not only were they eating that bird, but they were eating and controlling the toad population. So when they got rid of the snake, we were coming back from the show. And it's like, it's literally hundreds of thousands of frogs that come out at night. They everywhere. It's like you just see on flat in the street where you can't miss them. It was hundreds of thousands of frogs on Guam. And I was like, yo, man, they get fucked up everything. They got to do something, man. People metal. Yeah, they got to bring the snake back. Yeah, kind of bring the snake back. Stop. Stop. Stop your bullshit. People just metal. I mean, there's so many countries that are infested with animals that people brought in to kill other animals. Australia is a giant feral cat problem. They brought in feral cats. I think to kill it, I forget what species. I think it was a toad that were trying to kill off. My neighborhood, as it got down, cat problems. My neighborhood is like, one cat has a baby. And my family has something to do with it. We fed the cat, the name. Of course, shit. Of course. You want to be nice? I mean, while they're killing billions of birds every year in this country. Cat, so I love cats. I love cats too. But they kill billions, house cats, kill billions of birds and mammals in this country every year. You don't have a bug problem if you have a cat in your house. Because we had these water bugs that come across us. But I've watched it before I left the cat that just outside. He was just slapping one around. It's like five of them dead out there. He's just slapping one around. Like just toying with him. You know, but I don't mind because then they never make it into my house. It's like cats. I remember the Fort Pass campaign that happened in China. What is that? What did they do? It explains it to you in this these little Fort. Undermount, aimed at exterminating rats, flies, mosquitoes, and sparrows as a part of the great leap forward. It was framed as a public hygiene and agricultural protection drive, meant to reduce disease and protect grain from being eaten or contaminated mass mobilization methods included trapping and poisoning rats, swatting flies and mosquitoes and organized efforts to scare and kill sparrows. It's like that. Before you get to the end here, they had one little problem. So they introduced something else to fix that problem. That created a new problem. So they introduced something else to fix that problem. Yeah. They ended here with tens of millions of people dying from a famine because they didn't have the natural ecosystem to fix it. This is great. Wow. Sparrows were targeted because they ate grain seeds, but they also consumed large numbers of crop eating insects. Their near extinction caused an ecological imbalance leading to insect population, booms, lower crop yields, and contributing to Chinese famine, the great Chinese famine, which tens of millions died. Wow. You got to give some naked something. Yeah, man. You don't think you're smarter than nature. You dumb fuck. Yeah, you got to give some nuggets a good. There's a balance out there, and we don't totally understand that balance. What's this fish that we have now? Asian carp. The one that's infested all the different lakes. And then the snake head, that's another one. Then the jaunt that torpedoes up. Oh, that's Asian carp. Yeah. They fly through the air when you're in a boat. Yeah. They just, for whatever reason, when you're in a boat, they just try to throw themselves onto the boat. I like giving the fuck out of this lake. There's so many of them. And they don't have a natural predator. And they bring them into places sometimes to clean up the algae. And then also now, now you have a carp problem. Now to carp eat all the algae. They eat everything where this, like your whole lake looks like a swimming pool. There's no algae left. Look at these fucking things. That is crazy. That's the Illinois River. I mean, this is just hundreds. A fish just flying through the air. Everywhere they go. How nuts is that? You ever see people, they shoot them with bows and arrows? So they wait from the hop up in the end. They try to catch them in the air with a bow and arrow. Shh. With the string on it. Oh yeah, there's a bunch of people do that. That's a very popular sport. Yeah, this is edible. I don't. We've never heard of anybody. I know people eat regular carp. I don't know if Asian carp edible. Yep, there you go. It's lean and nutritious. Clean mild flavor. So how does it have a net rolling behind me? Fellet fish, there you go. Don't you guys need product? There you go. Get out there, which bows and arrows, get it done. How many crawfish does Texas and Louisiana consume in crawfish season? That's a good question. I guess you would have to do it in pounds, right? Would you do it in pounds or millions of actual crawfish? Because they don't measure them in individuals. They wait, may I buy weight, right? Because they're kind of a little. They go by weight. How many pounds of crawfish do you think? Texas, just say Texas and Louisiana in a year. 50 million? Whoa. I have to ask again, but it did give me 90% of the farm crawfish comes from Louisiana. Yeah, I understand. How many pounds? How many pounds is I went way too high? How many pounds does Texas and Louisiana consume in a year? I'm going to say 2 million of pounds. No, we've got to be more than that. Really? 2 million pounds? A lot. It's fucking way more than that. What is it? What is 70% of the consumed amount of zeton in Louisiana? And the total is upwards of 150 million pounds? Yeah, I'm talking to you. 120 to 150 million annually. Whoa. Yeah. Justin Louisiana. 70%, which is almost 100 million pounds of that, is just in Louisiana. That's between crawfish, boys, and crawfish, too fake. That is fucking delicious. Hey, that's delicious. Thank you. That is a crazy thing. This doesn't have a number. It just says 10 million. Oh, we need it. We've got the Louisiana. We've got this. It's always thought they'll be to double with the whole country. That's crazy. Like Maryland actually thinks that they are being on cry out. And we just be shaking our head like, OK. I think we ship crap to them. Right. The Chesapeake Bay cannot outdo the Gulf of Mexico. No. Gulf of America, no, by the way. It is. We still, we still, we still do. I don't think Mexico agree. It's like, no, you're like, that's what they do, either. Like, no, you know, it's not the Gulf of America. We still, like, we not seeing it. That's hilarious. But hey, brother, it's great talk to you again, as always. So it's fun. Man. Very good to do. Thank you. Do more often. Man, I'm here. OK. Let's do it. It's always fun. Tell everybody where they want if they want to consume more your specials. All of it's on YouTube. All of it's on YouTube. Well, you can go to AliCedique.com. The new special out my father is getting busy right now. It is a great, this is a great special. It really is. Did you record this? That was in Detroit. Beautiful. Like I said, I love what you do. I love the fact that you're so prolific and that you've built this whole thing just on the hard work. So congratulations. Congratulations. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Bye.