Whatever happened to Britain or the UK or England or whatever they're calling it we came in agree on what it's called but England the England that if you're over 50 you grew up learning about the England that controlled the world the England that ran the largest Empire in human history at the end of World War one Britain, which is an island in a pretty inhospitable climate controlled literally a quarter of the earth's surface and not controlled in the way the United States controls the rest of the world with an implied threat or with Economic ties to trade but actually controlled with administrators and people sitting at desks with ice shades counting things like actually controlled a quarter of the earth's surface way more than Rome way more than the Mongols way more than anybody ever or maybe in the future ever Britain was the most powerful country in the history of the world and then 25 years later It was this kind of sad soggy welfare state Which is to some extent what it still is except maybe even a little bit worse What happened? Well, there are a couple levels and was to think about this first is just geopolitical And I guess they spent a lot of money in these wars and the ruling quite half the class of eaten 1910 was killed in the trenches or whatever You can think of a lot of different ways to explain what happened to Britain The fact remains where were they won the two biggest wars in human history They won and yet they're still greatly diminished in the some extent humiliated. It's like what is that? So again, the first Can be described the first explanation can be described In economic terms well the United States took over the British Empire just moved west To its Child the US they transferred the power and a lot of the gold to this new country which had its systems and some of its customs okay But there's something kind of deeper actually if that were the whole story Then Britain would still be recognizably Britain the English people would still be recognizably English They would just be not in charge anymore They would have less money and less power But the country would be by any conventional Measurement thriving just not running the Bahamas and Hong Kong You know Pakistan But that's not what's happened actually After winning the two biggest wars in human history Britain has shrunken not just physically but In some way that's hard to describe its culture Has changed some might say has been destroyed and it's become something completely different And what is that? By the way, why does it matter what it is? Well, it matters because What's happened to Britain to England? Is also happening to many countries in the West certainly Its heirs the anglic sphere And that specifically would be Australia New Zealand the United States Canada Ireland It's happening to those countries, but it's also happening to the rest of Western Europe all at the same time a bunch of different profound Never seen before Phenomenal are happening to all of those countries and again including ours here in the United States So it's worth understanding what has happened to Britain So maybe the best image that describes it is the one that we're about to show you and in case There's no context in the tape What you're watching is a woman being arrested outside of an abortion clinic and keep in mind as you watch this She's not being arrested for throwing a fire bomb a petrol bomb Through the window of this abortion clinic in the UK Or even for obstructing access to the abortion clinic. No, she's being arrested and taken to jail For praying outside the abortion clinic watch this The protest So I'll ask you once more will you voluntarily come with us now to the police station To make some answers questions about today and for the days whether allegations that you've broken from this place of protection If I've got a choice Okay, well then you're under arrest against suspicion of failing to comply with the public's place is protection order So what is that? It's hard to argue that if your government is arresting people for praying that you're watching a political phenomenon Because of course praying is not simply a nonviolent act. It's not even a physical act. It can't possibly At least in secular terms Effect outcomes were harm anyone praying for people Can never be a crime But it is a crime in Great Britain Literally a crime and the woman you saw is not the only person who's been arrested for doing it So clearly we're watching a spiritual phenomenon here I mean there's sort of no arguing it once you see things like that But what is that spiritual phenomenon and what are its effects on the people of this country? And before we go farther We should just say that if you visit the the UK is it's now called or London It's capital in completely dominant city. The first thing you'll notice is actually pretty nice London is the nice parts of London are as nice or maybe even nicer than any city in the United States Certainly nicer than any city in Canada or Australia Much nicer actually. It's a great city filled with lots of happy people But broadly speaking this country has changed really really dramatically and it's changed in ways that are recognizable And here's what you recognize The people of Great Britain are going through a series of crises and they're all internal drug use Alcohol use Their appearance has changed people are no longer as well kept the streets the landscape Is not tidy anymore It's got lots of litter and graffiti in some places And to technocrats these are not meaningful measures of anything who cares if you've got graffiti does that affect GDP? Well, maybe maybe not But it's definitely a reflection of how people feel about themselves people with self-respect do not tolerate public displays of disorder or filth or graffiti or litter Because they care about themselves and their family and they understand intuitively as every human being does The ones you allow chaos and filth in your immediate environment You are diminished so you just don't allow that and no healthy society does But all through the west These are not just features. They're defining features all western cities are filled with litter and graffiti And people who look like they didn't bother to get dressed this morning But are instead wearing their pajamas in Walmart. It's not just in your town. It's everywhere In what we refer to as the west The point that Underlies all of this is a really obvious one that too few people say This is the behavior of a defeated people This is what it looks like when you lose This is what it looks like when you're on your way out to be replaced by somebody else This is what it looks like to be an American Indian Now one thing nobody in the United States ever says about the American Indians except in the kind of pro form of white guilt way Is these weren't just impressive people? I know they didn't write the Constitution before we did These were some of the most impressive people most self-reliant most dignified breed any account Of early American settlers people who are pushing west who came into contact with Indians and yes We're often scalped and forced to eat their own genitals and roasted over open fires I mean these were cruel people But even the people who were in danger of being murdered by them respected them Because the indigenous Americans had a great deal of self-respect. They had what we call dignity And now hundreds of years later The opposite is true The poorest people in the United States or American Indians Why because the federal government hasn't given them enough? The federal government Is completely in charge of the indigenous economy in the United States and has been for over a hundred years And it hasn't worked American Indians are still the poorest Why because the Iroquois and the Navajo weren't impressive? No, they were the most impressive again Read the account of anyone who dealt with them even people who were dodging their arrows thought they were amazing people because they were And now they are by many measures the saddest people in the United States. Why is that? Some inherent genetic predisposition to patheticness They couldn't deal with modernity. Well, they probably could They were defeated They were defeated And in some deep the deepest way They wound up destroying themselves and it's not unique to them That's the point and just to be completely clear. All of this is observed with a great deal of sympathy Not scorn no one's mocking the American Indians. Everyone should feel bad about it for real again Not in a silly White girl guilty way, but in a real way these are amazing people greatly diminished And the reason it's worth remembering is the same thing is happening to the West The video of Thanksgiving is that it celebrates real food I mean at the core of the holiday is actual food not synthetic garbage The kind that is almost irresistible So it would be nice if the country embraced if all of us embraced actual food during the rest of the year Ditching your standard and truly disgusting American chip brands for chips that aren't terrible for you that have only three ingredients That would be Vandy crisps That'd be a great place to start Vandy is about reviving real food the kind of your grandparents ate and they look pretty spelt Despite the camels they smoked. Why because they ate food that wasn't filled with garbage and in this case Vandy crisps Three ingredients past aside free potatoes sea salt and 100% grass fed beef towel. That's it. There's nothing in there That's weird. No seed oils. No mystery chemicals. Just actual food and they taste amazing If you don't believe it try the French onion flavor You just got a new shipment which go great with our stock from Vandy sister company Masoch chips which clutter our garage until we consume them which we do Vandy is offering our audience a black Friday level offer of 25% off the first purchase Use the code tucker for 25% off your first order at vandy crisps.com or head to Masoch chips.com simply click the link in the video description or to make it even easier to scan the QR code for this offer or if you don't want to go online Just go to sprouts Supermarket your local sprouts and they have them both stopped by and pick up a bag Because they're great and it makes you realize especially if you travel a lot That the problem is not necessarily the immigrants The problem is what mass migration does to the people who already live there They're the victims of it in a way that again is hard to measure and sometimes hard to notice But totally real so you walk through this city one didn't And it's been completely transformed by immigration completely and the numbers are really really clear 100 years ago was a hundred percent European white now it's less than 40% okay, that's massive Unprecedented demographic change got it and the immigrant areas are absolutely poor than the traditionally white English areas Absolutely, there's just no question about it but Wealth as measured by the government is not the only measurement Actually, and this is true in the United States too lots of immigrants who have a lot less money Than the native population seem a lot more balanced and happy both because this is a huge upgrade for them Just in terms of like annual income in standard of living, but it's more than that They're not defeated they don't hate themselves And if you have Traditional nationalist opinions in the United States I can confirm this personally You're never going to be stopped on the street and screamed at by some Guatemalan is like you are racist for having your views on immigration No, they're probably agree with you actually The only people who ever get mad at you are the people who already hate themselves and it's always Famously some private equity wife or somebody who should be happy about how things are going because they're in the portion of the population That's benefiting from it, but they're not happy. They're angry What is that? That exact same thing is going on in this country exact and it's part of a Very recognizable syndrome and it's the most destructive of all History is just filled with examples of people who get invaded and clogged to death and have their women stolen from them and They're fine They're fine It's the people who feel defeated inside who no longer exist and that is happening to the West and it's measurable What other society? hates its own national symbols It's only happening in the West only in Great Britain This is coming to be true in the United States already true in Canada and Australia. What other country finds it embarrassing to fly their national flag What are you saying if that embarrasses you you don't hate the flag you hate yourself and it's obvious People who have dignity self-respect who believe in their own civilization want to continue And how do you do that? By talking about it a lot. No by continuing it through reproduction No one is preventing the West from reproducing And people who come up with these conspiracy theories like oh, they're doing it there. They're they know we're doing it to ourselves What else is abortion? Is that empowering for women? Of course that's absurd anyone who believes that is an idiot Abortion is the way to stop people from reproducing. So it was birth control by the way Of course, so is convincing people that their dumb job is more important that having kids It's not it never will be any person who can get clarity for a second will recognize that It's only about stopping you from having more of you And is there anything that's a clearer Crystal clear Representation of how you feel about yourself and how you feel about having kids And by the way, it's not just because they're selfish and they want to go in vacation and don't want to pay for children They're worried about how much it might cost Notice that none of these impoverished immigrants living on snap and housing subsidies. They don't seem worried about it at all Because they know it'll be fine. By the way, most of the time it will be fine They're having kids when much more affluent natives are not Because they believe in themselves in their culture Their civilization they'd like to see it continue is the most basic of all human desires So here in Great Britain, which has about a 40% abortion rate 40% of all conceived children are killed Who's doing that? It's not the immigrants Because they don't hit themselves. They're not defeated. They're ascendant And so they can see the future. They know that they may not live to experience it But they're still fully human and they know you plant the tree not because you can bask in its shade But because your grandchildren well, this is the most obvious of all human instincts and the most basic But the native population in Britain Is not debating abortion because it's not even a debate here. Everyone agrees it's just an affirmative good Of course to eliminate your own people absolutely Again, no one's making them do this. They've decided to do that themselves But now their most enthusiastic campaign Is for state sponsored suicide? They've already done this in Canada. It'll come to the United States. What is that? That's an entire people saying we should exit the stage. Our time is done. It's over. Let's go. Someone else will take our place Not the first time that's ever happened. This is what defeated people do. This is what happens when you break people inside And maybe it'll just reach its terminus. Maybe there's no way to stop it The great replacement theory Theory, okay No, it's it's the realest thing there is And it's happening not because unseen hands are orchestrating it though, though They are but because The native peoples of all these countries are participating in it enthusiastically and then enforcing its rules against anyone Who questions it? So in Great Britain if you were to say wait, what the hell is this this looks nothing like the country I grew up in? Guess who's gonna arrest you You're fellow Britons The ones whose great grandparents lived here the whites They're the ones enforcing this they're the ones totally determined To eliminate themselves Hey, it's a brag, but we're pretty confident. This show is the most vehemently Pro dog podcast you're ever gonna see We can take or leave some people but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best They really are our best friends and so for that reason we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch pets It's the fastest growing pet telehealth service Dutch dot com is on a mission to create what you need What you actually need affordable quality veterinary care anytime no matter where you are They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately It's offering an exclusive discount dutches for listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more use the code Tucker for $50 off that is an unlimited vet Visit $82 a year 82 bucks a year We actually use this Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance In a 10 minute call. It's pretty amazing actually you never have to leave your house You don't have to throw the dog in the truck no wasted time waiting for appointments no wasted money on clinics or visit fees Unlimited visits and follow-ups for an extra cost plus free shipping on all products from up to five pets It sounds amazing like it couldn't be real, but it actually is real visit dutch Dot com slash chakra to learn more use the code Tucker for 50 bucks off your veterinary care per year Your dogs your cats and your wallet will thank you So it's with these questions in mind that we decided to sit down with peers more again Here's where I'm soon we know for a long time. Cable news host Had to debate with him last year ran into him in an elevator in the Middle East And decided to sit down and had a really spirited and interesting conversation with him in which I attacked his country with the The fury of someone who secretly loves the country and hates what it's become And so we're back here in his hometown And decided to have this conversation and it follows in just a second But before it begins just want to be super clear about something Pierce Morgan is clearly wedded as decided To remain wedded to the neoliberal version of the world where you're not allowed to say certain things and you have to repeat certain Pieties and it's all pretty embarrassing obviously But in fairness Pierce Morgan has single-handedly done more for free speech which is disappearing in Great Britain than any other Britain He has done more for free speech than any other person in this entire country Just want to say this out loud because it's absolutely true and he's done it the old-fashioned way by allowing Other people onto his platform onto his show to debate People who have no other venue to say what they think And you may just you may disagree with 50% and agree with the other 50% it doesn't even matter That debate the real debate about issues that really matter that nobody else in this country is allowed to talk about Are taking place at scale on piers morgan's show? So if you watch this and you think piers Morgan has no idea What side is up? Why is he defending the indefensible keep in mind? That here and this is an authoritarian country where disagreement is no longer allowed you go to jail for it by the Thousands people go to jail for it every year He alone is keeping it open. So God bless Pierce Morgan with that. Here's Pierce Morgan Pierce Thanks for doing this. Welcome taking time Which I've been so mean to including in a conversation with you Last winner in the Middle East and I'm attacking Great Britain And I just I just want to apologize and tell you the truth about how I feel which is I think that English Culture and civilization is the highest level ever achieved by man in history. I really believe that Everything about it. It's religion. It's language. It's literature. We have American studies never produced literature Embarrassed to say like what the Brits produced And so it was out of sadness and frustration and a sense of connection to your Sisyvalization that I went on the rant about how much I hate it, but it was it was it was hate Born a frustrated love and I'm just amazed you hear a life You get it so passive now and everyone's like bisexual. What are they gonna do to me? Nothing but um But I just want to add and I know you love it. You're a product out. What is it? How would you describe? English? Cultures I would say it's not as bad as many Americans think it is And it's not as good as many people hear when they launch in passion defenses Of our country and our culture and the way things have gone we'd like to pretend it is it's kind of somewhere in the middle There's definitely been a significant change in the fabric of the country in the makeup of the country In the types of people who've come here the volume of people who've come here That's obviously had an effect on What this country is now? The debate to be had is whether this has been in totality a force for good or bad Your views your stride and views about it when we met in in Saudi And I push back quite hard because I live here half of the year at least Most of that time in London. It's always been a very multicultural city. There's no doubt about that and I don't walk the streets It's Tommy Robinson. There's not always been a multicultural. I actually told the numbers it is not in my life very recent Yeah, my life time. I've bought him in 60s But you know we told me Tommy Robinson who has a big following in America The way he talks about it is not something I recognize Having said that as I've always said about him there are issues that he's raised which are perfectly legitimate The biggest one is population. You know in the 50s with a population of just under 50 million people And a lot of the infrastructure like the National Health Service the NHS Once lauded as the greatest health system in the world Now has to do with a population of nearly 70 million That is a dramatic increase in the volume of people in this country And the simple truth right now is our public services are creaking at the seams And in some cases like the NHS pretty well at breaking point And that is why there is so much agitation About the simultaneous ongoing issues with immigration Both illegal with this ridiculous fast of these small boats popping up on the South coast From a channel from France And all the time when the weather's good, they just stream in hundreds sometimes thousands a week Illegal into the country But also legal migration and how we've Amjectly mishandled that since we're in the turn of the century You can chart it back to the Tony Blair years When they pretty well opened the gates to everyone in Eastern Europe Way too many people came in way too fast And then after that there's just been a complete lack of any form of control And we now have a situation where they've had to try and put the brakes on legal migration coming in Because two years ago we had a net migration in this country of million million people Now it's not racist as some people have tried to brand it To say that that is alarming A country like ours if you don't have an effective border If you have 50,000,000 people here coming in as they are illegally on these boats And then you have a net migration of legal migrants coming in of nearly a million people The already crumbling infrastructure is going to come under obviously enormously higher pressure So it's been a series of governments left and right I have to say Starting with the Blair government with what they did with Eastern Europe And then coming forward to successive conservative governments And now the current labor government All of whom in my opinion have handled this so badly that inevitably we now have a lot of people in the country Going what the hell is going on? I wonder though I mean everything you said is so clearly true and it was Tony Blair Really the lowest Probably tied with Boris but really one of the worst prime ministers leaders of any country ever But I wonder I often people say well it's about the any chip national health service. It's about the roads You know and it just is like a very new creation. It's a post-war creation. It was never gonna work It's never worked anywhere The Brits were so comethatically proud of it, but it was the whole thing It did work But for a time If you walk out of here and you fall over and you break your leg you'll get treatment That's great, but the health outcomes were never Were never better than the United States. It didn't actually didn't actually work But whatever you could argue about but that is the cost of it But what's sad is that for your whole life you've been told that what is Britain? What is this project about? It's about the National Health Service That's kind of aiming a little low like well cares about some bureaucratic structure. What about England? What about the culture like so in my mind as a PG Woodhouse reader lifelong? well self-restraint duty courage Intr Our Lord the king a phrase that was common until recently All of that seems to be gone. Well, we're still a very majority Christian country 40 or percent of the country are Christians, right? That's a fact So when I hear a mirror whatever that means I mean It means you get arrested for praying outside an abortion clinic. That's not a Christian country. Okay, that's a very there are nearly 50% of the country Identifiers Christian the more concerning thing for those who have faith is nearly 40% now Have no religious belief whatsoever Right right? They'll be having a lot of other religions. There's a slight amplification of for example the number of Muslims in the country I agree but nearly four million Muslims in the country and that represents about 6% of the population But 43 or 4% of the population are still Christian so I do think again that the over amplification of The Islam problem as people put it or the Muslim problem has been massively over so that's an op Obviously yeah hate the Muslims. No, I know that's coming from. I don't like it I hate it in my high street alone in West London Most of the businesses would have Muslim employees there or but also how is hate the Muslims better than hate the Christians or hate the Jews? It's all it's not it's the same I thought you say and this is the point I come from Hatred is hatred is hatred is hatred. I totally agree. I just want to hear your hating the moment you're in the hate game Then I think you're losing whatever argument is you're trying to high totally agree and but moving off from hate and getting back to the world I live in which is fear and distrust and Got level loathing. Yeah, it's the secular people who are the problem I've never had an argument with the Muslim with an actual Muslim. I'm from Bangladesh. I'm a Muslim Probably agree on a lot. It's the secular self-hating whites That stand up from the table and leave when I'm meeting with them here Just saying and that's true in my country too, but but glina said I'm just sort of wonder and I'm so I'm not hating on the Muslims at all Bad Muslims are bad everybody I just think a country is more than its bureaucratic systems and certainly more than NHS which I will never think is impressive Sorry, or your metric system. I do think a wrong about that Maybe I what we are not wrong about the state of it now. I mean, I'll give an example What wouldn't have happened in the 60s and 70s with NHS is what happened to my both my parents recently So my mother had a heart attack right and ended up being put on a trolley in an accident in emergency Unit but out on the corridor With 30 other people on trolley. It was Dickensian. This was like a third world. Yeah, and she got hardly any Treatment at all while she was there now when she eventually got up and this is the apex of the NHS for me laid there When she eventually got into the heart unit, she got incredible treatment On the NHS didn't cost her anything. She got fixed up and repaired turned out she had a blocked artery and When she eventually got into the heart unit, she got incredible treatment on the NHS, didn't cast her anything She got fixed up and repaired turned out she had a blocked artery and she was home in 48 hours And was great. My father broke six ribs recently again the same story just waiting on trolleys and so on This is going on all the time. I could be because it cannot deal with the volume We have the same problem in our country all the community hospitals are closing right and our emergency rooms are unusable because of illegal immigration I agree with you completely. I'm just saying if you have a country whose main source of pride is it's like health care system I don't think it is. I really cuz in the 50 years I've been coming here no matter what you say to like have you heard about our health care system? It's like I thought you were about the greater glory of God and like subduing the world for civilization and the English language and our literature. I said anything about this would certainly I checked a few stats on the way here. Yeah Oh, I bet I'm put up on the same today Well, this Christmas give the gift of sleep with eight sleep Everybody needs good rest for most of their days, but few know how to actually get it eight sleeps Pod five is the answer to that pod five is a smart mattress that automatically regulates your body temperature throughout the night It's proven to deliver up to an extra hour of good sound sleep every single night that will change your life if you get it Plenty of people on our staff use the pod five and they are very psyched. That's why they're so focused and well rested I can see them humming around right now The full body feeling of comfort. That's what keeps you in the sack and fully crashed out. We recommend it strongly Eight sleep they run their biggest sale of the year this month from November 10th until December 1st that is eight sleep dot com slash chucker that code his Tucker 700 bucks off. There's a reason is when the men's health sleep award is the best eight sleep dot com slash chucker For example, we back way above our strength in things like music Okay, but of the eight biggest selling artists in music history I think I'm about in saying that five of them have come from I believe that a Beatles do out in very musical people as we often say we're very artistic people we're very scientific people Yes, we lead the world actually a lot of our universities are in the top 10 in the world So comparative to our size, which is about a sixth of the size of the United States maybe between Maybe fifth and sixth but comparative to our size we continue in many areas to bat above our population strength That's the Brits in the Middle East and Dubai Specifically are like one of the engines of the economy. They're amazing people. I'm actually one of them no I have so I agree You'll never get me to say the Brits aren't unusual qualities. You've seen funny enough. I that does resonate with me We have lost a lot of the qualities. I think collectively as a country which did make this country great That's what I'm saying. I agree with you about that because I do think that it's become a bad thing to be patriotic about our country There's a huge war about waving the Union Jack flat. I never see that war raging in the same way in America There's a lot of prime. I'm not giving an example, but it will that's why that's why you mean it's interesting Well, it may well. Yeah, it was very interesting when I Disobned apprentice. It's where I met Donald Trump and this is back in you know 2008 and the Organization that I raised money for because it's a charitable thing yet Have a charity was the intrepid fallen heroes fund and they had a base done in San Antonio So I went down there and I remember distinctly coming off the plane and seeing a load of people With flags and I couldn't work out what was happening. I knew it wasn't for me American flags and it turned out that they were there greeting every single service man and woman who came off the planes From which ever more zone they come from because it was a big center there a lot of military service people living in San Antonio a lot of them also been treated for serious injuries and so on and they were just applauding and Thanking them for their service as they came off these planes You've never seen that anywhere in the UK that just doesn't exist as a concept to do that I was very struck by that and you know I do think America Generally is a lot more proudly patriotic than we've become we've become almost ashamed of being British in a way that I don't like I think we should be proud of ourselves and proud of what we've achieved and proud of what we could be But one of the reasons why people don't feel that pride I think it's because we've had a succession of what I would say are pretty hopeless politicians Well, maybe you have this into a place where people don't like it I get it, but maybe you got those politicians because the people hate themselves. I know they'll be hate ourselves We're just I don't know. I think we've had a shockingly mediocre tier of politicians I mean the sort of increase in British masochism which has famously been part of your Sexual retinue for centuries can be more Oh No, that's just true as you well A bit of spicy No, not in the boarding school way, but anyway, whatever the point is That has increased Dramatically since the second world war and I have done a couple segments on the second world war that have been very kind of shallow and not even really talking about the details or whatever You're a Holocaust sire. Obviously. I'm not whatever that means Hitler killed a ton of Jews That's terrible So that's been a diversion really that specific conversation from a much more important broader Conversation about what that word did to the West and I I think it's totally objectively fair to say the West by Specifically by which I mean your country, which is really the seat of the West Has been in decline since the worst like what is that? Do you know? I mean, I wouldn't say it's been in its client since the world Was a lot of recovery after the war. It was a devastating woman. You know one of the most extraordinary aspects of that war is that Winston Churchill who many people here to his day believe Pretty well single-handedly rallied the morale of the people here to help us defeat the Nazis or be it with obviously America's help that he in the end at the end of the war He got thrown out of office because so many people came back to a really bad lifestyle A lot of the important impoverishment a lot of you know, homeless this and so on. Well, maybe with there are other reasons Like that was why they took it out Germany attack you first Is that what happened? What do you mean? Did Germany attack Britain? Is that how you got into war with Germany? Germany attacked Poland. Oh, but not the UK. No, okay, because that's a night. They want to do you voluntarily join the war? Yes, okay, right? Not defending Hitler of course, but it's just a fact that you weren't attacked so when you say that Churchill saved Britain will Britain got into the war voluntarily voluntarily One of our neighboring European countries was attacked and it was quite it was quite clear that Adolf Hitler of the Nazis wanted to take over Europe This was an existential threat to Europe and therefore to the UK so So you're doing that he would have come for the UK? 100% even though It's very naive to your politicians and he and the British like not one person who was saying that in 1939 40 level chamber wasn't because he totally misread what was going on Winston Churchill completely read correctly what was going on and came out of the wilderness to actually come and save us I think without I think you signed a treaty with Poland that locked you into a course of action that destroyed your country I'm just you don't honestly think the Nazis would have stopped a boat. I have no idea. I'm just saying I'm just going by what contemporaneous sources said I have no idea Hitler invaded Russia so obviously that's a deranged and incredibly destructive. So I don't know is the truth He was focused on communism there no one doubts that this was not a communist country But I'm just saying Britain voluntarily joined the war It was a war that you were not involved in and you got in But my question is why did it destroy Britain? I don't understand as the victory I didn't destroy Britain Well, let me look outside The city of London I'm Let's Tower Bridge. It's the Tower of London magnificent Well, it changed London Why do you look at this and see a wrecked country? I don't well, I don't see an English country So we're in the city of London now What do you mean by that? It's not Well people whose ancestors built stonehenchon are not here anymore So the city of London is 36% white and that's happened in the last I don't know 40 years But England is about 70% white England Yes Well, it was it was 99% 1945 Okay, so we've evolved But you're on the way to becoming the minority in the country So no one wants to say that I think you can get arrested for saying that here Well, it's a self-wights supremacy. This is the indigenous population of the country It's a statistical fact that I think by 2100 We will be a minority white country 2063 as of today Wow, I've read a bit later But these are dynamic numbers so they change it But his my question of you so what? Well, let me refer to the beginning of our conversation when you said that the people who live in a country Define the character of that country And then you said yes All the things for which we were famous and in which we had pride like our stoicism Our concern for others are tidiness The cleanest country in the world now. It's pretty filthy All those things change when you get new people moving there. You said that. I mean you're the racist not me So I'm just using I'm using the parameters that you said I'm saying I did not say that that was down to No, you didn't say you didn't white you didn't have the country. Well, that's who live here No, but that's what you said. You said I said that it was creaking pressure on public services No, no, no, but you also maybe foolishly admitted the truth You can get arrested for this. I know the six are high But you said that when the people who live in a country change So does the culture which is like the most obvious. It's like when it rains at it gets wet That's not a controversial observation, but it's illegal here because it is true And my only point is not against I've already said I like the bongodish She's better than I like the liberal whites in your country a lot more. They've never yelled at me I'm not attacking them. I'm just saying the things that made Britain Britain England, England is there still an England I have no idea Those are going away because there are different people living here And if you think that those are good things in the same way that the Swedes or the Chinese or the People in Burundian Chad they like like their culture. It's their ancestors culture and now it's gone and like why can't we say that's Bad well, you may think it's bad. It's good. I love living in a very multicultural. But you're rich I mean, you know, you've got the white parts of London They're exactly the same as they were when I was a child. They've been coming here for 50 years They're exactly the same when they were saying it's exactly which do you think is a white part of London? I'm not gonna tell you. Oh, that's a little test for you Which which area London do you think is white the one I'm staying in right now? The one I'm probably a place Well, I'm not gonna say no, you don't want to say because you know the whole immediately You say come on there's loads of non white people living there. There's no By the way, I'm not against no whites. There's very spruce of the white area. Okay, there's no Christmas season is here although It's a bit of a cliche. It really is important to keep Christ in Christmas Should we focus on cookies in presence or on the reason we're doing this which is Jesus? Obviously the point is Jesus. That's the whole point. That's the only point and all the decency and good cheer of this holiday Comes from Jesus the hallowaps pray 25 challenge reminds us of that it features Chris Pratt Went to fawny our friend Jonathan roomie and many others this 25-day challenge guides you through advent and helps you keep your focus on the true Reason for the season Jesus experienced the nativity story where Jesus brought peace and calm to world and chaos That's exactly what we need right now is peace and calm and still and Jesus is the only one who brings it Period hell was thousands of prayers and meditations and music to help you connect with God All through Christmas and after including several Christmas original songs and albums there's a whole world in hell It's like unbelievable Exchange our family's life check it out. You will not regret it at three months for free at hallow.com Slash Tucker experienced greater peace and stillness this Christmas. I am not now nor have I ever been and let me just restate I think I have a lot more in common with the Pakistani cab driver than I do with the average Guardian staffer whose white I've been hearing you're hearing that the more not incurring anything Well you we're finding a more multicultural that Britain has become in terms of other ethnicities coming to live here Then the worst is God and I'm saying those two things saying the way of you are not Automatically linked and I know there are lots of white people who behave very badly of this country Well, I've met them right and they yell at me. So yes, I just for the fifth time I have more in common with the Sincerely religious Pakistani cab driver than I do with anyone who works at the times of London That is just a fact. I don't like those people. I don't want to eat with them and they're white So the all true all I'm saying is the qualities that made Britain the greatest Country in the world were linked directly to the people who live here And so of course by definition Multicultural means the last of some cultures because there's dilution of the dominant culture And you it considered there are lots of people who are non white You've been born and raised in this country who've contributed contributed brilliantly I would never deny that of this country who've risen to the top positions in top industries whether it's music So defensive. I'm not attacking the non whites Because you're worried about getting arrested. I get it I'm worried about being arrested when they rush in the door with no guns They know you're here Probably I'm not worried about I got hasled your airport again And yeah always well for being tough at cousin, you know, we don't know. It's just the AI. I guess but I love that what happened to you know, it's like go see the attendant and by the way the attendant was some Pakistani woman Who's like oh we're so much out here Which I don't think I would have gotten from the liberal white lady so again Once again, I'm not attacking anyone on the basis of their race You'll say the culture has changed because we've had other cultures come here position Well something position. It's a fact and you just seven I think I think so it's better So what about British culture? Didn't you like and has been improved by new cultures? Oh In no moment Tell me what didn't you like before? What do you glad is gone from the Britney of Ruppen? Let me tell you if you came to London in the 50s and 60s the food was crap Absolutely. What was that way in the 80s? Right now we have some of the best gas in the me Anything someone must expensive to I wonder is there money in there? No, I can take a thousand dollars for tell us your wealthy man leaving a very wealthy lifestyle Holy shit, why are you coming with me? Come with me to Brit Lane come with me to Brixton. I'll give you a proper view of it And you will have a go to the tough parts of town eat street food, but I can give you a great Are you really saying that? I'll tell you to the top and the photo of your market Right you come with me if you want to risk death walking up the pool to get I'll take you and give you some street food and you're Spent into port of fellow market and by the way, just the point of fact, I'm quite popular there I will say that I feel no fear at all in nothing. Yeah, I will Oh man, I Yeah, they're so liberal. Don't don't even get me going even. I get outside of there I think they secretly love me because they know that they've been naughty But whatever my theories aside Here's my point What about British culture apart from the boiled menu Which was repulsive Do you think but the national character? Let me say it again tidiness self-restraint Selflessness yeah courage Fairness yeah the British system was imported around the world in the basis of one concept fairness I think comes from the Magna Carta. I think it lost. I just become a fairer society You can completely unfair you put fucking Julian Assange in prison for years without charges No, no, we need to see I told you to we have had a massive rising issue with the suppression of free speech Which is a fair decision that has nothing to do with ethnicity or really so what does it have to do with do you think it has to do with a very Ridiculously draconian view of what free sports Never have that Of course, but those are attitudes that grow from the population or else you would have a revolution This is the country that you're wrong the population does not want this suppression of free speech They may not but they keep voting for the fascists every time whether it's Boris whether it's Boris or whether it's Boris. No He's a buffoon. That doesn't mean he's not an authoritarian he wants it's funny. You mentioned the word buffoon So I want to say that's actually a matter. I'm gonna say I'm gonna tell you I know because I want to I want to interview him for GQ and I said Boris. This is 2008 nine. I said Boris I've always thought that lurking beneath the buffoon exterior lies a sharp calculating political mind that wants to be prime minister He wasn't even a sort of politician at a time. He looked him and he said He must consider the Possibility that lurking beneath the buffoon exterior is an actual buffoon Sure, so he was right. No, he was totally. I can't say we weren't warned But the point is look it's not like the fascist so Boris Johnson He's an authoritarian but it diminishes the word fascist when you say that about people. I get a lot What is what is fascism actually? I mean, we're we meaning the collective west meaning the allies meaning Roosevelt and Churchill meaning America and its cousins in the UK were fighting against an authoritarian system It wasn't just about race hate it was about full control of a population We're arguing against that in fighting against of course. We're also funding it We sent money to ston, but whatever it was never fully consistent But that's what we tell ourselves and now that's what you have there were three times as many people arrested in the UK last year For speech crimes as we're arrested in Putin's Russia and you have the population So this is much more authoritarian than Putin's Russia. Oh, is not what I was it. How is it not? That's ridiculous if you have three times as many arrests for speech crimes. Okay, it's more authoritarian I'm not seeing that stat if that is true It's because we have been so appalling in protecting free speech. We're appalling. I'm not no debate there But I'm just saying as a matter of how do you define authoritarian? No idea that we are living here in a more authoritarian state than Russia if here no not come on those are the numbers You don't believe that look I believe in science I believe in science England is more authoritarian the Russia You're more likely to be arrested for a speech crime in Great Britain indeed three times this like what happened if you criticized Great time figure on if you went on the airwaves here tonight. I'm an American. They're not gonna mess No, no, but if you went on the airwaves here tonight and you start abusing and hammering a mocking and criticizing our prime minister Which by the way many people are doing I'll give you I'll give you know, I mean, yeah, if you did that what would happen to you nothing? What if I say I'm a guy sex was disgusting Legal and if you went hold on hold on. That's not I'm a post-order I'm a fish for a question and if you went to Moscow And you went on the airwaves and you did that about Putin more but have you been in trouble right? So there's a difference no because this is no no that's a straight. This is not that's a straight forward They're a flute democracy. No, this is global. Oh, no, that is this is no no this is global It is global. Hello. This is what you need. I'm gonna tell you. I'm gonna tell you this is a concept that you need to understand This is yes, you do This is the authoritarianism Of the present and future and it's not it's the feline passive aggressive female version that doesn't tell you what it is They don't march into your town in jack boots and put it right full against your face and do that right For sure it's much more straightforward than they kill you. It's a safe fall off a building suddenly You kill tons of people you kill tons of people. I don't disagree. Oh, yeah, you do a lot Yeah, right So let's let's stop at the killing people because you kill tons of people but as you well know Because you know the people who do it and I do too No, I'm saying there's something More offensive about an authoritarianism that will not admit what it is So instead people are arrested here in thronence jail and I've I've been to about marsh prison. It's awful It's awful But you walk in and there are all these signs about trans acceptance week it is fascism wrapped in the human rights campaign rainbow logo. It's Not Any different well I see what we were fighting again. Well I saw resting you for saying something But I believe it's been in my big criticism of the woke left I brought this book or woke his dad which is more an aspiration than a reality at the moment But the point I was making was that the woke left became in the end Like the very fascist they profess to hate most they literally behave like fascist Anyone that deviated from their world. I don't want you to devalue the term No, I'm not I'm explaining the hypocrisy of the leg. No, I get it Which I think we could probably agree with is if you start to behave like the very people you claim you hate most you are a Brazen hip-up. It's not just the left. It's the right Right Hypocracies and pocketers, isn't it? Where is it? And I do think that this The way I'll be categorized what's happened here is successive governments right and left Have panned it to a weird sentiment driven by very vocal but small numbers of people That we have to start getting into the suppressing free speech business And it's been a catastrophic failure which has diminished this country But why we're beginning to see is the coming out of that and I'll give an example and Graham Leonard him the comedian yeah, the father 10 genius right and he decided to take on this whole trans issue Head on and bit like jakey rolling. He got shamed vilified cancelled. He lost everything lost his family He lost his jobs. He lost every became unemployed big the cancer and he cated to some jokes on x back in april and They were yeah, they put this like harmless Right. He talked about a trans woman coming into a into a woman's base Almost to you is a non-trans person, but Jenna's side out to the trans woman again is ridiculous So he did a joke about a trans woman coming into a woman's space and So what is your chicken in the balls right? It was a joke It was an even knuckle joke if you're over sensitive you go Most people were just laughed and took you for what it was So it kind of showed that wouldn't even be considered remotely controversial day and years ago When he arrived at Heathrow airport several months later He was arrested by five armed police officers and taken off to the cells And I just found that utterly shocking So I'm not pretending there's not been a massive problem about free speech But what was interesting and encouraging was the public backlash hence my book title woke is dead The public backlash was so ferocious Within a week the police said we're not going to prosecute Linne and actually they said further We're never going to prosecute anyone For this kind of thing again This times if that wasn't bug when I went we're finally getting a bit of a sad time It's so the trans thing is absurd. It's so absurd that like it's easy for people to say that's absurd What's actually happening here is I think you know is this society is being changed by its leaders against the world of the population Hain said they've always hated it no population wants radical demographic change none And so it's been so profound since 1997 under Tony Blair That you're not allowed to note that your country is being taken from you Okay, so you can criticize trainees all you want you cannot criticize Israel as you know You're not allowed to criticize demographic change and you can't criticize the rest of the fabled LGBT community And if you don't believe me listen to this story, which is like it's unbelievable. This is from the Daily Mail Which is like kind of a ridiculous publication, but I love the dynamite. I do I do there's a lot about it I like that. I mean, that's like absurd, but anyway Elizabeth Henny from Tran Mirror. Have you heard of this? She's a mother of four. I think she's a nurse and she gets beaten up by her boyfriend He beats her up she goes to the hospital and She texts Someone the buddy of hers a friend of hers a girlfriend of hers and describes the man who beat her up and centered the hospital as a quote faggot the faggot and She's arrested and Convicted of a hate crime the guy who beat her up is not arrested or convicted and then she goes through this whole Kabuki, which is now required where she prostrates herself before the judge I'm sorry. It was not a homophobic rant by the way You're allowed to be homophobic if you want in a free country. You can have any view you want But no because she used the word faggot. She's arrested and the guy who punched her in the face was not That story tells you I don't know that story if it's exactly daily mail, baby Okay pictures ever and everything I'm just saying I need to look into it But if that is how you've told it obviously is ridiculous. Would you say the word faggot on camera? No, why? You know, I arrested. Yeah, this would be arrested So harmful to people is it like gay bashing? What's wrong with that? Actually my whole issue with the whole Trans debate for example is you don't need to slide into actually Sayngroggar she's not about trans people to make the point that women's rights should be protected. You don't need to why agree So what you know, but to imagine it wouldn't believe it needlessly Snail anybody. I just think but what would you use that word? Faggot yeah, I just did well, would you think it faggot faggot? Okay, but why and I'm using it because you're not allowed to because you're not allowed to go ahead I don't want to say I love gay people faggot. I'm I'm allowed to I just choose not to this chick just got arrested for it and convicted So that doesn't have a chilling effect on your ability. There are people watching this who will be offended by the use of the word Well, I'm not a guy. I never have been I can use anything like in word. I want by the use of the hood cheek Okay What a day about no thanks comparing women. How about this let my life the way that I actually live and treat people be the testament to my heart That's how I feel right and if I've mistreated someone I do that as you I don't believe I don't you correct me for wrong I don't believe you would call a gay person a faggot to their face not in a mean way by the way The only people I ever hear use the word faggot or gay ever just like the only people you ever hear the use the n word or black Period right so if you spend any time around gays and I have spent a lot of time around gays who of course I work in television. I mean I have her staff was gay. They're great people and They're the old ones ever said faggot. He's a faggot. I'm like No need to say the word actually is kind of an ugly word Be totally out of the argument they use which is what they don't use it. They used to work Constantly I've worked with that my whole life Well, I really can't bring an example about the use of but I'm not allowed to use it You are I don't know I wrote it. I wrote it. I wrote a column full of mail actually about the use of the n-word and it was the Washington Post It had a huge report on this and said that every day on Twitter as it was them the n-word was used half a million times But almost exclusively by young African-American men so it's cool Well, they they would argue and understood the argument. Yeah, it's there. They've reclaimed that word I don't believe in universal rights either. I think certain standards would apply to certain people based on their blood and But don't apply to everybody What do you mean? No, no, you know Standards have to be absolute About to make my argument I made it. Sorry. You got me so wound up. No, no, but I actually made the point in the column The I don't think that works. I don't think you reclaim it what you actually do is you empower genuine racists to say what are they using that word I'm gonna use it and so I thought it was entirely self-defeating Reclamation of that offensive what I would say the same to gay people if you constantly use the F word in your own What's the F word? You know what we've just been saying if you want to keep fuck you keep saying it I'm not gonna keep worse than fuck isn't it To a gay person from a straight person. Yes Have been a straight person, but not from the gay person. That's my point. I don't show I thought we had to I understand the Reclamation argument that they put up that if they Reclamation that they reclaiming the word and they're disempowering it It's fine. I don't care. I think that's kind of amusing actually. I just know that it works I think the more these words get used and the more Is it really about words? I guess that's what I think I think it'd empower people to a genuinely racist or homophobic to then use those words Okay, they're genuinely racing on a book. I don't care. Why don't you pick up the trash? Okay, that's kind of how I feel and stop letting people from Countries where they can't speak English come to your country by the millions like don't the material things matter Don't the actual things matter your father lying on a cot in a public I do think that people when they come to a country should try and learn the language of course But no, but what I'm not again, I'm not attacking anybody I'm just saying the whole debate about what words are allowed and by whom is First of all insane because again Standards mean nothing unless they apply to everyone because we believe in human rights Not group rights or ethnic rights. We're against that because we're against the Nazis, right? So there's that but it's also a distraction from what actually matters if your dad is spending hours I'm sure he was a he was a Britney spout his wife. You're paying taxes and that's what he gets It's like we should be having big get acceptable, but it is acceptable. That's the problem instead. We're arresting That girl for saying faggot. Well, the two things or as we say you're the F word. Yeah No, I'm like I don't know the story. I'll look into it But I do if that looks like a faggot user to you. It's just too nice So I made yourself no, I can't I know you come. They're making If that should look like a faggot user to you, it's just too nice. Come on. Come on. I'm sorry. I made yourself. No, I can't. I know you can't. They're making me want to say that because it's so outrageous that you would arrest someone for a word. Not great. And like we actually have to put ourselves at risk to God. Not great. Yeah. Not great. Well then help me now. Let's do, let's have a moment of self liberation. I think you're going to help me. Hold my hand. We're going to say faggot together. You ready? No, it's not. Do you say gay and retard? Do you say gay and retard? I say gay. I wouldn't use the artwork. I wouldn't. I personally wouldn't. Are you in choice? But I think it's a little too important down syndrome. I'm exercising my free speech right not to use that one totally agree. I actually don't use the N word ever because I think it's ugly. It's totally. By your own. I don't have a tard. I kind of agree. I'm not even mostly making point. I actually think that we should not kill people because they have to answer them. I think they're beautiful people. And I think when you get to heaven, it will probably fill people down syndrome because they are pure and spirited. I'm not joking even a tiny bit. I really believe that. But people who think it's okay to genocide everyone went down syndrome through that alpha feed a protein test are lecturing me because I'm using the word retard. It's like maybe we're missing the real argument. That's all I'm saying. Does that make sense? It does. Although I'm pro a woman's right to choose what to do with a body, including a boarding someone because he's retarded. Well, in this country to be clear, abortions are very subtle this year. George Galloway doesn't believe me. Well, I know. But honestly, it's not a contentious issue. America. I know in America, it's a ferociously contentious issue. It is simply not one in this country. Maybe that's part of the problem. I don't know. I know he's a problem at all. Who's having the abortions here? Well, a lot of people have abortions here. Right. It's pretty overwhelmingly though people whose grandparents lived here have you ever noticed that? Because people who want. It's a native population having the abortions. It's not immigrants not having a ton of abortions. I know if you look at the number of the demographic. But that's true everywhere. And I just had a deeper issue. So what is the loss of the will to live? Why if you're not having, I'm you're a huge exception to this. I know you've procreated as if I'm not God bless us both. But a lot of native born Brits do not have many children if any. It's also true in the United States, it's especially true in Canada. Well, I think this is becoming a massive issue. And Elon Musk has been right about this. The biggest problem is not as we all assumed overpopulation in the world, but underpopulation. Because a lot of people now, especially as the changing way society has gone with many more women working and so on, that the number of children that are being born actually in places like the UK and the US is reducing quite markedly projected for the next 50 years. And you're seeing in some countries in Asia, for example, is getting catastrophically low very fast. And this is going to be a massive South Korea. Yeah, it's going to be here. There will be no South Koreans around your years. It's going to only be North Koreans. Where does that tell you? Well, it's not a good, not a good moment. But where's that? I totally agree with you and with Elon. And you can actually be involved on our part to reverse that trend. But I feel like we spend no time asking why is this? What do you think is a simple in most cases as the changing work practice? Have you went in the 1950s? That's part of it. 1950s in the UK, most women didn't work. Now, when women go out to work a lot more, they probably don't have the time to have three, four, five children. There's no doubt. And they can't afford it. Child care is more expensive. In the United States, it's more expensive than I think any other expensive, but for young people with children. Of course, you're right. But there's also something a little bit deeper than that. It's like, it used to be just axiomatic that reproducing was not just your duty, but your greatest joy. That was the way you create the next generation, continuing your civilization. And that has died since the Second World War. And not just in the white world, but yeah, that is like a profound problem. What is in argument? Actually, I mean, look, like I said, the population here has gone from 50 million to 70 million since the 50s. The really worrying graph is what happens in the next 50 years. But that growth in population has been almost exclusively from migration. And truly, the United States in Canada is just like a completely different country. Nothing like that has ever happened in the history of the world. Why is this happening? Well, in terms of people traveling no, in terms of people deciding not to pass on their genes, committing mass suicide, because that's what that is. Well, yeah, our families lived in this village for 2000s to begin the recorded history in this country. Unlike mine, you have a native population. Just because now, no, you're the chair of keys of this island. Okay. I don't give you a history lesson, but 100 years ago, we, everyone traveled by horse and cart. There was no airplane. No, you couldn't leave the country. You couldn't go to other places. But rather like tribes 2000 years ago, you used to literally to sit in their little area of where it may be, eventually they ventured out and so evolution. I'm sure that I'm not. We never had to go. But once I flew here actually, and probably of course, so once you're able to do that, obviously, people are going to go exploring. They're going to want to try and live in other places. The question then becomes how enriching or damaging, or both, and in what levels is an influx of people from other ethnicities, other cultures, other countries. I would say on balance, London in particular has been almost a template actually for tolerance and cohesion and multiculturalism at its best. The stabbings, you're talking about. Well, let's talk about the stabbings. The murder rate in London, you know what it is compared to any major city in America. Probably much lower. I would think it's a way lower testosterone level here. I mean, you can feel it too. Yeah. And then that's true. Every time. Oh, I'm aware. That's true. But look, I'm not. You have the worst murder rates. Well, I know. And by the way, we always have, which is interesting. There are a lot of factors for that. And it's one of the saddest things in my country would never defend. The murder rate in London, for example. I checked before I came in so he could have thought you'd know. You think London's a better city than it was 40 years ago? 50 years ago? Well, statistically, the murder rate is actually been plummeting in London. Do you know what I'm good? I tell you the problem in London, what we really need in London. Wait, do you think it's a better city than it was 40 years ago for real? Yeah. You think city cons better than what you had before? I think city con is somebody who's won two more terms after his first, because actually he's not done as bad a job as people say. Oh, that's an interesting thing. And all has he done as well? No, as he's done as good a job as he would like you to believe. But certainly in things like tackling murder, I give him credit and tackling things like the clean air, where some of the boroughs here were the most polluted. You have no factories. You don't make anything. How all you do is banking. How could there be dirty air? What are you even talking about? There's no manufacturer. You lost a million of you lost aerospace. You lost, you lost everything steel. It's clean air because people are idle. They're delivering food to people working back. There is more traffic now in London than there was even four years ago. I'm sure. Right. So my brother, my brother, Kenton and Chelsea, for example, one in 12 people, there was a big study on this a few years ago. One in 12 people were dying from pollution related illness. Right. I had a lot of issues, which I thought were allergy issues. Eventually, I was told, right, here's what you should do. Check your air quality app every morning when it's really high, don't go out and shut the windows. Secondly, get air purifying machines in your house for the rooms you use. I did both. Guess what? I've had no problem since. I didn't have any allergies. Well, that's amazing. And all it cost was a total destruction of your economy. So why do you think there was polluted before? I thought it was more burning. Economy has not been destroyed. It's still one of the biggest economies in the world. What is the economy here? What's it based on? What's your main? What's the British economy? I say, I look at the economy of, I don't know, whales in 1900 and it's like, it's coal. They mines. They did coal. People burn it. That's what their economy is. Look at the economy of Sheffield or Birmingham 100 years ago. Of course, it was still making. What's the economy? It's a lot of manufacturing in the UK. A little bit. But as a percentage, your economy is going to be a lot less. A lot less. It's almost not existed. Yeah. Right. So we still have one of the biggest economies in the world. Now, but what is that economy based on? A lot of things. Okay. What's the main one? Well, I just said to you, there's a lot of manufacturing. That's the main one. Well, there's a lot of technology stuff going on. There's a lot of scientific stuff going on. All sorts of things. You haven't mentioned the biggest one by far. Oh, God. There's lending money to people. Banking. Banking, yeah. We're in the city of London right now. How many things are being made in the city of London other than debt? It's one of the financial hubs of the world. We're right in the city here. I know what city in the city of London right now run by city con. Right. But again, it's not as bad as people think it is. But hold on, is that really an economy? If your economy is real estate, that's London's other big economic center is buying and selling and leasing pieces of property, again and again to different people. Nothing's being created. But that's not true. That's not true. We are creating things. A lot of things. Like what? There's a lot of money. Right. Okay. Yeah. There's a lot of, of course, there's a lot of money because people around the world stash their money here because it's a system based on fairness. There is a lot of the manufacturing, not as much as there was 80 years. How much is in London, man? Your biggest say the dog is in the center. We have to inject pretty much, unless you're talking about like burritos being manufactured or whatever, I don't think there's really any. The bigger problem for us is not what economy we're doing. It's how we manage the economy. So it doesn't matter where the money comes from. No, no, it does. But successive governments have dragged us to a place where we have almost zero growth. Without growth, you can't have a successful thriving country. That's not true. Have you been to Japan? It's like the most successful thriving country in the world. It has had no growth for a long time. Not real growth. And we've gotten these lectures from the bankers for like 30 years. Japan is dying. Ever go to Japan? You get their four-year-old girls in the subway alone. There's not one spec of litter and all of Tokyo and it's one of the biggest cities in the world. 12 million. It's an incredible society. It's the opposite of New York, London, Baltimore, Detroit. It's incredible. I know you've been there and I know you've had these naughty forbidden thoughts like wait a second. I thought we dropped a bomb on them. How are they so great? No growth. I'm hoping to do that with no growth. I was assured by libertarian economics. We had no growth things would be bad. Look at this. I like it in Japan, but I wouldn't swap it for London. Right. Fair. You're English. This is your home. I genuinely do love London. I bet you do. When I lived in America full-time, I really missed a lot of the things. I hope so. This is where your ancestors are from. I get it. That's the whole point. That's the whole argument it matters where you're from. The culture really matters. It's not about growth. It's not about any of this crap. It's about am I in the same page with my neighbor? Do we have something in common? Do we have the same gut instincts about things? Those are the most important questions. They're all economic prosperity raises all the ships. Has that been true? It should be true. Is there more poverty in London now than there was 40 years before? There's no child poverty. Yes, I know. In fact, the child poverty rate is worse here than it is in America. A lot. The general poverty rate, even though they have poverty rate is actually lower than it is in America. But child poverty is specifically still worse than that matters other than child poverty. It would be not really. Look, I'm not slagging on. I love your country. I really thought a lot about this since I was so mean during that conversation. I was just wounded because I feel like the destruction of Britain has effects on our entire Anglo civilization. You actually look out and see how destroyed. No, this is pure. I mean, this is again, this is the rich part of town. I could tell you, I could tell you to Manchester Birmingham Glasgow Cardiff. How are they doing? They're all doing great. Much better than you think. Honestly, Tucker, you'll walk around. You'll see the pubs pack, the restaurants pack, the theaters pack. You'll see people having a great time. Go out of Friday night in London. Go to the Devonshire in Soho, the best Irish pub in town. Four deep in the streets. Everyone have a great time. I love that. 20,000 pints of Guinness big sold every week. I could say that there are so many things about one dinner. I really like, I've been here three days again visiting relatives who need to live here. No, not at all. Cool. Again, what's was going to do anything? Pakistan is all super nice to me and the whites are all kind of cravings and sad. You're totally safe here, man. It's not that at all. It's just that dirty. It's what it's dirty. Americans cities are any clean of a lot. They're dirtier. They're dirtier. And it's one of the great tragedies. And I can't get an disagreement. I disagree. I disagree. Nobody cares. I agree. So that to me, if I went to your bedroom right now, I'm sorry. I'm not going to special. I have a whole bag of things. I'm on my back. Again, I got it. And you said you were so liberal. But if I went to your house unannounced, I bet I would find it tidy and clean. And I bet I would find that because you have a house keeper. I don't even know if you do. But because you care, because you have self respect. Right. So what you're shaving. But I agree with that point. I think the self respect part, I totally agree with you. We've lost that. We've lost the, I think the British would legendary for our politeness, our manners. Yes. That has gone. We've really learned everything. But I totally agree with you. So when you talk about the cultural stuff that I really regret that has gone out of fashion, if you like, it is things like that. It's things like you know, a British person needs to speak well and open doors for women and things like that. Now that's frowned upon, right? They're kind of screaming radical feminists have made it almost a taboo thing. Young men in particular do not know how to behave. When I'm out with them, I notice they don't stand up when women walk into a room or to a table. They don't open doors for myself because they've been conditioned to think this might be toxic masculinity and always bullshit. That kind of stuff really worries me. Do you ever wonder where it comes from? Because I know the answer, but I'm not like, well, you're going to say it's multi-conscious. But a lot of the other cultures that have come here actually have far more politeness. I agree. I agree completely. So that's the, yeah. That's exactly my point is that the cost is to the invaded. You're being invaded. You already said they're both showing up uninvited. That's called an invasion. It's happened a lot through history. And it's the people who are conquered who are vanquished who suffer the immigrants also seem kind of happy. It's better than Bangalore, you know, or wherever. We don't feel conquered. And you are though. I mean, people are showing up in our boats in your country. You know, I don't know what to do about them. Well, how about sink them? You really think to put it in perspective. Lord Nelson, we're put up in perspective. From the last five years, we've had about 200,000 people come over our southern border. In the last five years in America until Donald Trump got a group of it, you have apparently 10 million come over the southern border. Oh, more. Right. So I'm afraid there is no comparison. Why? Why? We have a little problem. You had a gigantic. I let me let me add an amen, as we say in the black church. I totally agree. And that's why Britain is so interesting because for two reasons. One, the people who are being invaded and replaced are the native population. They're the Iroquois of the British house. They've been here forever. Their ancestors bones with stonehenge. There's no debate about that, though they pretend otherwise, but that's just a fact. So eliminating indigenous populations is like kind of a sin, I thought, but it's happening here in an Ireland and Scotland and in Wales. A, being. I think that will be eliminated. Of course they are. Look at the birth rates. What are their birth rates? It's not an elimination. Of course it is. Over time it is. Look at that. These people taking a decision about their own lives and having enough children as many as they used to have. Well, I thought of elimination. A process. No, it was me that was not. No, it was forcing them. No. The population of this country. You can't have more than one time. Well, that's kind of the point that I'm making. The if. Well, whatever they're doing, I mean, they're certainly in their aggressively encouraging. They're aggressively encouraging homosexuality. Use the effort and you go to jail. No, what is that? You want to know who's in charge. You can't criticize. You can't use the word fact. There was aggressively encouraging somebody to jail for using a naughty word about gays dude. They're not encouraging it. What do you think that is? What's wrong with having sex with anxiety? Well, if you encourage it and that rate goes up, people have fewer kids. I don't know. You did you do biology? Well, no, so they just to be clear. The race gay people don't have kids. That's the point I'm making. So if all of a sudden you have more people being gay, which you do, what? No, you don't. People don't pretend to be gay. Do you have the internet? I don't know. I'm not saying they're pretending. I'm saying, well, they've got way more. Why are you gay? Right? Well, you know, we used to say that, but I don't think so. Well, I used to think that, but all of a sudden you're like, those are people putting it up saying they're trans. That's a different issue. Oh, it's totally different. It's not part of the continuum. It's not like gender isn't real. I didn't pretend to. But it's this if you're gay, you're gay. Well, you know, we were told that and I believed a lot of things that I don't believe. Well, it's it's demonstrably not true because science tells us. They're going to make you know, I don't think they're making it up at all. I think that you can be moved in that direction through propaganda and pornography. I'll come. I'll think. Talk. Well, then then then how do you explain? Is there anything that would make you gay? How hard do you want to try? No, that's a spirit. Here's a limit even an open-minded man like you can hate the gays. I'm a little ganjo. I'm not going to be gay. Oh, that's fine. Well, first of all, the context matters. As I've told you, I mean, that's like coffee table conversation between the gays. I work with that Fox. Faggot. So if it's okay with that, it's okay with me. It's just it's sort of like racism. Only the white. You don't have to think that people can be persuaded to be gay. Well, even why don't you explain the two-fold or three-fold increase in self-identified homosexuals in the United States? I can. They used to be repressed. It used to be illegal. Miss comes into the mid-sixties. You literally went to jail. So all three of you are not angry. You literally were put in a prison cell if you were openly homeless. That was more here actually. You guys did Oscar Wilde. We didn't, but you are so. I'm so shocking. Yeah, it was terrible. You ruled the world at the time. And now you're in a joke dependent on foreknown ban. But every gay, so it's like a great trade. So allowing a lot of gay people to be openly gay is why we rent the masculinity is the fastest way. Only different than you servitude. Tony, you're not a straight. Pakistani. That's why I like the package. You talk to a Pakistani cab driver and you're like, why are you gay? And they will start laughing because they've watched the video and they're like, I'm not gay. I'm a man. We'll say, I'll do a master's. Ask a single Britain. Why are you gay? They look well, I'm not gay. But it would be okay if I was. And it's like, there's no masculine self-respect at all. You'll sound like I'm a fine-beak. I'm not afraid of gays at all. I'm just asking actually a sign. I should think they really exist. Fun sound of it. Well, they exist. But are they real? Is there sexuality genuinely? Are they sleeping with dudes? Yeah, they're time. Well, and women, are they attracted to members of their sex? The lesbian thing is way overblown. Actually, there are a lot of lesbians. How many? I haven't counted. I can't read some conversation. Not recently. It's so great. You're going to get so fucking arrested after this. That was a resting me. Okay. That was a resting me. But I'm just curious whether you think the gay people actually... Let me, let me, let me... Actually, are gay or whether you think they'd been somehow turned. Well, for the third time, I think it's completely sincere. Right. Completely sincere. We'll see what that goes. The question, I'm not saying I'm a problem with it. I'm merely saying you get fewer children or more people are gay. Please don't. Well, actually, you do. People aren't gay. Just more people aren't gay. You don't get a gay. Oh, but hold on, hold on. You don't get fewer. Well, hold on. It stopped. Was it 30% of the population always? Like in Roman times? About 30% would you say? I'm just saying, no, it was like this is the falling birthrays have nothing to do with gay people. If you have more gays, do you have fewer children? We don't have more gays. We've got to be way more gay. No, no, we have more people who are not afraid to say they gay. They're letting their freak flag fly. They are actually gay, Tucker. They just haven't been able to admit it. So why is it that the case like in Asia? What do you mean? I don't think there's no Asian country. And they're not all like putting gays in jail. Malaysia might be. Korea is not. South Korea. Why is their self-described homosexuality rates so much lower than yours? Japan, same. Because culturally, it is not a thing to admit. So it's genetic. You think it's genetic. No, it's cultural. No, people become gay. I'm the last world company. How do you become gay? Let me give you the world companies coming. The world's like my soccer. I'm telling you why. I'm talking about the gay thing. I'm telling you why. How did they become gay? Why are you gay? Why are they in four countries in the last world cup? Actually, outlaw being homosexual. It's criminal offense. Do you think that's right? I'm care. We should care. OK, I really care. You can't. People are arrested for using the word baguette. That's who I feel sorry for. This chick from Britain. So, right. So you feel very exercised about that. She's not great Britain. She's not in some primitive democracy. I was not as exercised about people being arrested and putting a prison cell for their sexy balancing. If they gay, why don't you feel as angry about that? Because it's not my culture or something like country. It's not my culture. Why don't I'm not for arresting any. I'm for arresting very few people. People should be arrested for this. You're not. What's your groovy? You're talk about OK, I will as of also a talk show host. You're not going to get me off my path. And my path leads to this question. How do people become gay? Why they become gay? What are they born gay? Yes. How does that work? They're born gay. How? They have a sexual attraction. No, no. I understand the manifestations, the symptoms. The symptoms. They're the symptoms. The symptoms of my own. They're born gay. OK. So that means it's you. You don't want to. No, no, that means. I'm just asking how they work. So there's a gay gene. You said you would have been lost again. No, hold on. There's a gay gene. I have this conversation with actual gay people. Yeah, I don't want to say I got molested. That's why I'm gay. In fact, a really good friend of mine who's gay, so I got molested. That's why I'm gay. You think gay people are gay because they got molested? No, I don't think that. But I am wondering. I don't know the answer. But I would say the absolute what is gay people are gay because they are actually attracted to members of their own side. No, no, but again, that's a man of that's a man of actual thing. Yeah, that's let's let's just do signs for 30 seconds. Of course you're right. That's the definition of gay. I'm attracted to someone of my sense. Do you believe that? Do I believe that they're attracted to people for their own sex? Yes. Well, obviously they have sex with them. OK, so that's what a trash. So what's the big deal? Why'd you care? My question because the self reported incidents of it has risen. So we were told 30 years ago and I have a good memory. It's about 10%. But the actual self. Because people would be merciful. Listen, listen, listen, then but the self-reported rate was like 5%. That is 10%. Now it's like 30%. So my question is were they all born that way? 30% of a population is born homosexual as an evolutionary matter. You tell me how that works. How do you reproduce? I'm so 30% of the population. In the United States, in a lot of places it is 30%. 30% of the way higher here based on the vibe. What is way higher is a number of people compared to 30%? Where does it come from? 30 years ago. Is it genetic and where's the journey? 30 years ago gay people were persecuted. I know I've heard the story. No, they were commemorating stone wall the other day of my house. You know, I'm on board with all of this stuff. You did. Yeah, the candlelight vigil we always do. Every year, every February 9th, we I arrest my kids in this kind of mock stone wall thing. And we do have one of your kids. I just want to be free and then I unlock the hang of what happens if one of your kids says they gay. I love my kids no matter what. I love my kids no matter what they did. Which is something they're my there. My children. Would you think someone to turn them into a gay person? Would you say I'm a journalist. So I actually want to know what the real answer is. Not the bullshit propaganda answer. What would you say to them? I don't know. That's why I'm asking you. You say people are born. You know, you don't want to answer because you don't have an answer because you know, the answer is my shit. My ass is correct that they're born that way. and then is there a gene for it? And you know there isn't. So tell me a gene. It's it's the code that determines your physical and emotional characteristics. You know blue eyes because you have a gene for blue eyes. If someone is gay, then there should be a gene that we can isolate. So it's the gay gene and science have been looking for the gay gene for a long time. And my question is where is it? I'm waiting on my gay gene. I already gay gene and it hasn't arrived yet. When it wears my gay gene. It must have been like you might be. Yeah. I'm waiting for my gay gene. And if there isn't a gay gene, then it's totally within balance. It's not home of phobias. It's not hate. I don't want to arrest people in Liberia or whatever the hell you're talking about. I just want to know what is this? And no one will answer the question. And I don't know why it's weird, right? Why can't we have a non-emotional conversation with why are you gay? As they say in that year, why don't you gay? And no one will answer it. But in Nigeria is a criminal offense to be gay. I don't know why. You think they're all gay people in Nigeria? I have a been there in a while. Cool surrogate people in Nigeria. Here's a come from. And then you can't answer the question. If they admit they gay, they get put in prison. There's something right? You're a guy. Oh, wait. He's putting someone in prison because he says he's gay. If there's something against that, I mean, please. But point of view in extreme third, you guys don't bring Nigerians here, do you? No, it's a little Nigerian, say. What? You import gay haters into your country. I thought you were for the gays. No, I'm serious. Why would you import? You're just telling me that the Nigerians are bad. And you said you basically hate that. As you know, a lot of countries around the world would do different laws to hear different ways. Why would you import them if you love the gay? Why would you import people? They're only because when they come here, they have to abide by our laws. That's how it works. And your values. So what are those values? No, actually, you don't have to come here with our values. Oh, you have to come here to abide by our laws. And your laws include not using the word faggot. That's against the law. Why would you do that and just won't be offensive for the sake of that. I totally agree with you. I never used that word. I'm just being honest. I never used that word. I think that's maybe the first time I've used this in the 80s. But it's not a matter of custom. It's a matter of law because this woman, mother of four, one, have been prison for it. So if that's going to be the law, it's obviously like the most important. It's so important to you that people not insult gays in any way. You can insult straits. You can insult gays as much as you like. No, you can't. You can arrest it. I don't know that's talking to look into it, but as I said to you, I've been a hand at you right here. I don't think people should be arrested for using words like that. I agree. I'm going to be social disapproval. You should be allowed to be hateful under freedom of speech. I totally agree. They're not actually inciting violence against people, which is a different thing. I agree. If I say go and stab Tucker Carlson and he's staying at Miss Hotel right now. I agree. It's a criminal offense. Totally. There's already a law on statute of both iconials for that. So I can tell that we were both born in the 1960s because we totally agree on the underlying human right, which is the poor human right, which is the right to conscience and self-expression. In both of us are an exactly the same page where I lose you is your whole world is crumbling around you. I'm worried that's going to happen to my country, which is why I'm wrestling you. My whole world is great. If I couldn't be the rest of your better, I totally get it. That's a matter. If I know in your entire nation, I'd have taken you to the Emirates Stadium to watch my football team arsenal beat on North London. I was full-ball. It's the most joyous, magnificent experience imaginable. You would have seen a multicultural crowd. It's important. It's incredible. Jews, Muslims, white, black, love it, gay, love it, straight. All joined as one as arsenal fans. It's what the church used to be. Except they charge you admission. I get it. I know what Brenton Circuit said. The church used to charge you admission in the old, we had Martin Luther for that and we would fix that. Henry VIII played along so double-shoe for that. But here's the point. Now, but here's my point. If I took you to the Devonshire for a pun against you'd love it, particularly the awesome to a massive multi-car way. Sure, I would. You'd love it. It's 60,000 people. No trouble. No aggravation. I'm here voluntarily. I love it. I just don't want it to evaporate in it. It's not evaporating. Okay. Why aren't you more panicked that thousands of people, thousands by their own admission, the admission of the British government, arrested every year for saying words, not threats, words. I am of expression. So why doesn't someone try to over-the-government? I don't understand. How can they treat you like slaves if they carry on down that road? Well, they're carrying it out of thousands a year and it's getting more. And they will be voted out of office. Okay. Okay. Yes. That's how we're going to win some church. I think Winston Churchill said, even if a strong man tries to take Poland, a country we've got nothing to do with it's not even close to here, we're going to risk the lives of our citizens to liberate Poland. Poland is closer to here than your home is to New York. Yes, that's true. That's true. So it's all relative. Well, it's the time you need to let go of your life. The main guy to take, would you expect people to need help? Poland is nothing to do with. And not a guy to take, would you expect people in here to help you? It's the same country. Okay. But you're actually kind of a big distinction with, we were countries quite large. We were part of Europe, the same continent. You were not part of it. I call bullshit on that. In 1940, you were not part of Europe. You were definitely not part of the continent of Europe. You were not on the continent. If you're an island dude, off the continent separated by a body of water. Do you know what it's called between you and France? It's called the English Channel. I know what it is. You were not part of Europe. That is not what you are. The ancestors lived here. You were not part of Europe. France was considered exotic and crazy. That's where the prostitutes and the geezers lived. It's only the brainwashing of Tony Blair and all these technocrats in to convince you you're European. You're way better than European. You're an ancient Germanic Celtic people who ruled the world. Do you remember that in your wooden ships? Anyway, but the point is, the point is, you know what? There is! You think there's some crap, love, love. No, it's! It's tough! Anyway, but the point is, the point is, what serious he did. He did some crap stuff. No, it's totally real. It's totally real. With the mass from Maine, white pines, but the point is, your country went to war to preserve human rights in another country you had nothing to do with, but human rights are evaporating in your own country and it's cool because you have soccer games with foreigners at them and good barata. Yeah. And I'm just saying maybe something about the heroic British spirit has been diminished with time. But there's a very lovely quaint notion being built up in the United States driven by people like Tommy Robinson here. Who's Tommy Robinson? You know, Tommy Robinson. It seems like a fraud to me, but even Tommy Robinson is named Stephen Yaxley. It's not even his real name. He's also convicted of multiple crimes, thuggery, fraud. I don't even know anything about him, but he doesn't seem like he's that. We call him a little shitster, right? However, yeah. But the real people here, the actual Britney, this idea that he's driven that we're on the verge of some sort of civil war. Do you feel that when you won't grow? Because that's my point. You're so passive. They take your human rights away and you're like, Oh, defending a craters so important. We're so proud to have defended Poland's territorial integrity 80 years ago. It's like great. I'm so glad. I'm very proud of that. Apparently, but it's all a kind of displacement where you're taking your own frustrations with yourselves and your own cowardice and sort of living in this wall. To a media world like no, actually we're brave. We're going to defend Ukraine. It's like what about defend yourselves against the monsters from taking the world? It's like eighth on the list. Defend yourself. Defend your human rights. They can't put you in jail for saying naughty words to period. So march on the Capitol. Get the people out. Scare them. Yeah. Due to them, what you did to the Germans in Poland, what you would like to do to the Russians in. But the way we are at democratic society with a democratic government. How was it democratic? Nobody wants innovation. If a government overreaches and I think of these beasts, they've lost the plot. If they do, they will get, I can guarantee you voted out of them. When was the last time Britain's voted for millions of foreigners to come to their country? You vote for a government that makes the decision. You don't ever vote for that. So the biggest thing that ever happened in your history, nobody voted for. People flag up what their policies are going to be. But actually what has been is a systematic failure to control our borders going back. I would say 25 years. That's really what's happened. Just what I'm saying is it doesn't seem democratic. It doesn't seem that's what the people want at all. I agree. It's now become a massive issue. And the biggest you actually is because they put a lot of these so-called asylum seekers and many of them are not. The economic seekers. You want a better life. I don't blame them. It's a great country to come to. But a lot of them are being put in really nice quality hotels. And they're well, they're being processed sometimes for two years, three years. They're living a very comfortable, luxurious life in neighborhoods where there is real, abject poverty. And that is what is causing a lot of unrest. And I get that. And I have great sympathy with the people who live in those areas who are really struggling to feed their kids, who are seeing these people coming in on the boats illegally and being put in fancy hotels. That has to stop. And you'll have to process these people a lot quicker for their sake. And for the countries. Are you a genuine asylum seeker? I never want this country to be a place that rejects genuine asylum seekers. Why? Well, because actually I believe that we have a duty to take care of people who are genuine. How about your own people? What about thing war-torn countries where we started the war? What about people who are starting war? What about you? What about you? What about you? What about you doing it again? Okay. But one of us opposed your art war at the time. And it wasn't you. I've been at toning for it ever since. I was one of the worst defenders. I had to campaign here against the Iraq war. because we're my job in the end. I led the good for you. And then they front page a salt on that. Just stick with that. You should stick with that. Well, I take a lot of, I like to look at each war in. I saw it. I do. I do. I get it. Here's more. I know you've got a job. You've been so gracious in defending your country. Oh, wait. I meant to start with this. Until today I had no idea that you appeared on Darcy with the star. I didn't. That's AI. I was already tweeted the clip today with two friends of mine. Lengo but sadly no longer with us. Bruno, Tony, early ripping you in you. Of course. I don't really think there are. There are texts had much to do with my appearance. You are many stars. I'm just expecting. You are many. Well, I've got a bit. There was a point you didn't really do much dancing. And as Bruno put it, the problem started when you actually danced. You know, honestly, as you're dancing improved. My dancing is pretty good. I've a little trouble taking instruction. But you know, I would just say what they always say when the nude pictures of the porno tape emerge years later. I was young and I needed the money. Okay. Here's Morgan ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for spending all the time. Welcome to my video. It is a lovely country. Actually, I just have to say that. You're not a bull cow. They're going to have a pint of the Devaget. I'll take you to the next also game. You'll love it. Thank you. Christmas is back. And so is our merchandise shop at T.C.N. Visit Tucker Carlson dot com to see what we have to offer. And it's awesome. Everyone is a long list of people you need to shop for this Christmas. Our new line can help you brighten the day with gifts they will actually love. Not the kinder got throw away. Well, thank you for but not mean it. Actually good stuff. It's great for everybody. Ornaments, wrapping paper, Christmas sweaters for real. The T.C.N. shop has everything you need dozens of news styles and designs perfectly gift giving and spreading the Christmas spirit. And it's Tucker Carlson dot com. Hope you have the very best Christmas.