Go, Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. All right, brother. Please, what's happening? Let's go on out. Same shit. Great to be here. Great to see you. How you feeling? Like a tip-top fucking macbook. I can't believe you could walk so quickly after getting the knee fixed again. It was like three days, man. That's nuts. But yes, I fucked it up in Newark Airport because I wanted to walk, you know? But it was like, like, I walk every day at the gym and then I walked my neighborhood for breakfast and after dinner. But that's a loop, you know? This was ten loops yesterday. So thank God I had a baggie with edibles for me on the plane. I ate the edibles and I put, I asked the fuck and I'd like to tell them she'd give me some ice and that's how I got it down. Then I, you rub it with that wartime shit, that liquor cocaine juice that's a cream that became illegal. You buy it over the counter. What is that? It's something, don't quote me, man. But it's a good cream, nums dry. You have to rub it though twice a day. Oh yeah. Yeah, but it's a fucking feels fantastic. I've never heard of it. Yeah, Voltron, Voltra. Oh, what? Don't listen to me though, this Google. Is that it? That it, Voltra. See, Voltra, Art's Right is pain. And you just rub it on your knee. Yeah, a couple times a day. Anything that hurts. What is it? It's like a fucking jowl with cocaine that they take care of the fucking situation for you. Oh. Prescription strength over the counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory that penetrates the skin to relieve joint pain, inflammation, and stiffness. Interesting, I never heard of it before. Widely used for osteoarthritis, a muscle ache should not be used for acute injuries like simple strains or bruises. Wonder why? Why can't you use it for strains or bruises? Does it say why? That seems weird, because like that's what people use, like ibuprofen and shit. Yeah. Wonder why I can't use it. Like I couldn't use any of that shit. I could only use kind of one other fuck that is. I couldn't take ibuprofen after the surgery. No. Have you ever used DMSO? I don't know what that is, Joe. Is this shit right here? You rub it on? Yeah. They, that's another horse tranquilizer, another horse medication. Yeah, they use it in veterinary applications, but it's a, it's really good for pain for pain and injury or a tic-tic. Keep it. No, I have a bunch of them. I buy, I buy shit. Yeah. We were talking about wild eyes, they don't. Yeah. That was the early steroids, which were the seventies. Yeah. I don't know what the fuck we were getting the seventies. Everything came from Germany, I think. I think they were getting. I got the roblin' all that shit. I think they were getting human growth hormone from c-c-c-cadavers. See if that's true. Jamie, put that into our AI sponsor perplexity. Did they used to get human growth hormone from c-cadavers? I think they did. I think that's how they used to get it. What do you get, who you m-what growth hormone from now? That's a good question. Um, I don't know. I don't know how they do it. It's synthetic. I know it's synthetic. So it must be, they isolate the molecule, they figure out how to reproduce it and then they make it somehow, I have no idea. But the way they used to do it back then. Could Daver-derived human growth hormone was really used mid-1900s to 1985 and turned out to be dangerous because it sometimes transmitted pre-on diseases like Crocsfeld-Jekob, Yuckob, and is no longer used as been fully replaced by synthetic recombinant HGH. So, Crocsfeld-Yuckob disease, that's mad cow disease. It's the same kind of disease. And what it comes from is, it's the same thing that cannibals get when people eat human brain tissue. They get in neurons and that kind of shit. You get this same disease. Alsada was one of the first U.S. Sports figures to admit using anabolic steroids in the last year of his life as he battled against the brain tumor, which eventually caused his death. Alsada asserted that his steroid abuse, abuse, his steroid abuse directly led to his fatal illness. He recounted his steroid abuse and article sports illustrated. Our target started taking an anabolic steroids in 69 and never stopped. Now, I'm sick and I'm scared. I was addicting mentally, it was addicting mentally, and mentally addicting. 90% of athletes I know were on the stuff. We're not born to be 300 pounds or jump 30 feet. I became very violent on the field. Off it too. I did things only crazy people do. Once in 1979, I'd Denver, a guy, saw it swipe my car. I chased him up and down the hills through the neighborhoods. I did that a lot. I chased a guy, pulled out of his car, beat the hell out of him, but look at me now. I wobble when I walk and sometimes I have to hold on to somebody. He have to give me time to answer questions because I have trouble remembering things. He died at 43. 43 for a pretty great answer. Wow. He didn't look good at the end, like he wore the bandana. Alsada was Jewish. That's his. He was inducted into the Jewish Hall of Fame. Would it say, go back to that? Or what I was just reading? International Jewish Hall of Fame. Jewish sports Hall of Fame. I don't even know that existed. Okay. So I don't know if that was that stuff that growth hormone did that. But listen, he's saying he can't walk at the end. He can't remember. That's the. It's also good enough to that. Yeah. And mixed with whatever was going on. Yeah. I mean, there's everything else. It becomes something else. I lied. It meets the massive stuff. That's one of those lies that like everybody, you know, it's like when bodybuilders say they're natural, like shut the fuck up, bitch. Nobody's that big. Nobody's that big without help. There's a bunch of goofy guys out there that still try to claim natural. But like, come on, son. How many fucking states do you eat a day? Like the barbarian brothers, 36 eggs. There's some guys that have free genetics. They have very unusual genetics and they get real big naturally. But that's rare. That's super, super rare. As a matter of fact, I got picked up by an OBS thing. Guess who was the driver? You are Romero's nephew. No way. He's a judo champion. No way. We talked to Spanish for about 15, 20 minutes. 20 minutes. Right here. All these Uber drivers are Cuban. Really? All of them in Austin. I'll get him replaced by robots. Fuck that. The Cuban Brian saw Cuban yellow to robot couple. Last time I was here, he got out of the car. He don't let the car. He realized for you. And what do you got back in the car? My bad. That's hilarious. You got to cut him off. He got you off all the time. He's fucking way. No, I stay away from the door. They get right in front of you. They're ridiculous. I don't trust those cars in the car. And I don't see how people sit. I don't. It's not for me, bro. Did you hear about the lady she got into one and a homeless guy was in the back? No. Yeah, some guy used the waymo. He got his luggage out, left the hatch open, probably figured the thing closed itself. It didn't. Homeless guy hopped in, shut the door. Lady gets the waymo. There's a homeless guy in the back. He starts yelling at her for paying robots. Why you paid robots? I'm going to tell you about my homeless situation this week, Joe. Oh, no. So my go to play the day car by this weekend. It's like 25 minutes outside of Atlantic City, which is an hour and a half from now. So we went down for Saturdays to ornament. They won. Now we got two more games on Sunday. So we got a hotel. I didn't want to get a hotel at Oceans. I'm going to be at Oceans in August, but I didn't want to go there because all the other parents were in fucking Harris. So I said, fuck it. I don't want to be that guy. I'll stay at Harris with you. So the game ended. And my wife had to drive the kid somewhere. And I go, you know what? Because every weekend, when I go on those little trips, I go to a weed store. Like last week, I went into one in Trenton. Doc, this was a block from the fake capital. You could see the dog. The black guy called me back and he was, no, no, no, I got a secret place in the back. He had mushrooms, mushroom chalk. Don't say this. You can have this kind of enthralled. There's 18 stores in fucking, you know, you got a figure out about rat. Nobody out there knows what's going on in the cops. They got a bag. They had packaged mushrooms, all different flavors. Grilled wide, old thing. This week, I got a Atlantic city. I go to this one to have real, whatever. It's supposed to be the big one. The big one, the big wheat store in Atlantic City. And it's right by the casino. So as I pull up, I park my car in front. As I walk out, there's four yoke brothers. Yoke with cold chains on him, one of those fucking suburban millionaire cars. What do you call the big truck? Escalades? No, the other one. The one that looks like they're attacking your town. Not the... Oh, AMG, G-Wargens? I don't fucking know anywhere there. They were saying they're in their bumping shit. And they see me and they go, yo, we know you. And they go, yeah, what up brother? Hold on. I'll catch you on the way out. I thought by the time I got out, they would leave. So I went in, I come out and they're all outside of their cars. All four brothers, yoke, big, cold chains like yo, you're the motherfucking, it goes on, broken. No, that's the motherfucker from the longest yard. We looked you up. So they're talking to me, talking to me, talking to me, talking. I'm rockin' and rollin'. Rogan, the UFC, yo, what do you think about that? And I'm lovin' it. But in the middle of all this, this black little homeless crackhead walks his way over and I can hear him ask the other guy, who's this white motherfucker? And the black guy goes, that's the dude from the longest yard. You know, the football movie, the black guy comes over and makes him walk right on me, goes, hey, Mr. football man, watch your break out of doubt for me. He just bummed me out of doubt, out of him 10. I was so fucking embarrassed before you... You break out of doubt for me. Once your break out of doubt for me, Mr. football star. I gave him a 10, this motherfucker, ran. He walked up with a limp, but he ran away. He was gonna write for crack, I'm like these motherfuckers, they got a game for everything. I love it, I love all that shit, Joe. It's fun to be around wacky people every now on the beach. Just people live it on the edge. But that Atlantic City outside those casinos, bro, that shit's real. Oh, that's real. Drug transaction right on the street, when we're down there last. Bro, I'm surprised you didn't see a hooker get mugged or something like that. They are not fucking around. I took a ride Saturday night about 10, just get those right. Bro, you make it right and some of those corners, you ain't coming back. And I thought by now that at least build up the outside of Bay Sea. No, no, no, no, no. No, it's barely making money. You know, AC doesn't do well, not like Vegas does. You know what I mean? Like, AC's got some nice spots. You can go there and have a good time, but it's not like it's gonna grow. You're gonna go down to the Italian. Yeah, outside's two sketch. We got all the Italians go down with their white shoes on the weekend. It's got all with up, you know, but not. I don't like the book. I like the couple hotels down there. There's some nice places. Yeah, we stayed with the boys. Got them on the first open. You and I. Yeah, had a gig desk right? Had a gig desk right? The thing is it's not going to grow like Vegas is, you know, Vegas is crazy. See, Vegas had a head start. The thing is like if they tried to make Vegas now, whoa, tough sell tough sell too many places to go, you can gamble everywhere. You can gamble on your phone now. But when Vegas was first, there was no casinos in the country, dog, it was just Vegas. And I wonder if they made some sort of a deal. Well, let them blow off atomic bombs. They blow off these atomic bombs and then, you know, we'll put the casinos in. What's the difference? I thought that. But then we looked it up and it turned out they made Vegas before the atomic bomb. So I'm like, well, what I guess it was just gangsters. They just bribe people or convinced people. There was nothing going on there. There was a pick stop. They opened up Vegas for a pit stop for American soldiers to stop on the way. It was something like that. Well, was it in the 30s, right? Was it the 30s, Jamie? Didn't the guy that home the counter. When Vegas was created. Yeah, and got it on the end. But he wasn't charged with Vegas. And he brought the same guy as the comedy store. Same guy as telling me store. He was in charge. He's fucking genius. That fucking, I'm not the fuck with it. Genie. He got shot because he stole at the end the expenses. Oh, is that what it was? The casinos, you know, he gave in those days they borrowed money from the unions in Chicago. And then you borrowed that and you worked off those team store loans. Those Jimmy half alone. So you had to build on those while the expenses never stopped. And they're like, what the fuck is going on? And he was hanging out with James Seymour or something going back and forth like a million dollars. Yeah, like a movie store and they're in a leg and they shot him. That's why they shot him. I think so. They shot him in his house and there's eyeballs. Yeah, and his eyeballs. Something like that. I remember that. Yeah, as a picture of his dead body allegedly on my own. In LA. Right. Yeah, I am. So that was all because of the casinos, huh? But then they made it, you know, it's like when we first went to Denver, the money was too good. I don't give a fuck if it's Jesus and his three disciples, they're going to take that envelope. It's too good. Well, you know what it was going on in the beginning. They weren't allowed to use credit cards. Everything had to be cash. Yeah. And it was crazy. So these guys were leaving the fucking and they bring like six special forces guys with them. They'd have fucking green borays and Navy seals and shit like arm to the tits because they're transferring millions of dollars in cash. So there's no fucking no nuts, man. No, no, no. It was nuts. I read this story about the dilemma like these people are making all this money. And the crazy thing is the state was making all that money too because the taxes on the legal weed looked this up, please. It's amazing. I think it was like 39%. It's fucking crazy. And everybody was like sure. Like you would never accept 39% on alcohol. No. Never accept 39% on relief. No, but 39% on weed. You're like, I'll take it during the pandemic. And I'll let you buy an extra tax to go open. That's why they called them. What do they call those businesses that had to be open? Dispenceries? No, no, the businesses that they had a purpose to be open during the pandemic. Oh, right. Yeah. They made that essential, but they tried to tax 10% tax. We're making so much money off weed in California. But now look at all the wheat stores that start in the close. Are they? And in Jersey, they created the dilemma because the state convinced them that they had a build and all these places started. You know, you're opening up a shop minus stream mill. Listen, it's a lot of $20 bags to get the twee-wee-mill. A lot. Not only that, there's a lot of competition. Oh, and how many wheat stores are in LA? It's bananas. Well, in English, Tom New Jersey, there's four of them, and here's where it gets better. They're all on the same block. Wow. Did you ever go to that place in Inglewood with me? Back when it was only medical, the Inglewood would be in the lollipop. Well, you should get the lollipop. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. I went there one time with you. You know, the guy that ran that got shot, that do that we used to deal with, got shot in that store. Take you? No. I think he lived. I'm not sure though. Look that up. He might have died. Yeah, that's the first place you had the lollipop from. I'm feel-facto. Yes. To which one? That guy. Yeah, yeah. In Inglewood Wellness Center, that was in the 90s. That was in the days where it was legal, if you had a medical reason, and any medical reason would do, oh, my feet hurt. Get in there. Side of the mouth. But anybody who does martial arts has the pain excuse, because everybody's in pain, and it does help you with pain. Is this like, if you could take aspirin, THC, like gummies with CBD are phenomenal for aches and pains. You remember Dave Foley? Yeah. Dave Foley's hand, of course you do. Dave Foley's hand was all fucked up from arthritis. He started taking CBD, and now his hand has full function. Absolutely. CBD is amazing. They just blew it up by the content a couple of years ago. Well, who knows who's making it and what the quality is? Yeah, that's the things when things are gray, you get a bunch of douche bags, making stuff. You know, you still have a bit about that, about the gummy bears? They're not making these gummy bears in the same labs or they're making tylenol. They're very inconsistent. You get one of them, you swear it's a thousand milligrams, and the other one feels like it's like a hundred. They barely make sense back in the day, back in the, you know, when it was the Wild West. I got some 500 milligrams in my pocket. They feel like 500 milligrams, whether you take that. Now I don't think you can do that anymore. I'm talking about like way back in the day, it was different, because way back in the day, it was like, it was the Wild West. First of all, way back in the day, they didn't put warnings on this shit. No, no one lost many milligrams when this thought. And I'm gonna be the brownie one time and flying up to Pittsburgh and we're red eye, and my leg won't stop tapping. I'm gonna win a stop fucking time. I remember one time we were out of play, we had a panic attack, and then you waited like an hour later and then popped two more. I was like, how are you doing that? You're like, Joe Rogan, I almost got off the plane. I couldn't take it. I couldn't breathe. My fucking heart was closing because my chest was closing in on me. The walls were closing in. I thought the plane was gonna crash. I was freaking out. I almost had to turn the fucking plane around. Oh, you're not going back, baby. You have popped two more. You have no idea what I put myself through over the years. You do that. Because I just want to take a chance. Columbus did. I'm sitting at home. It's two or the afternoon. Your boy is shit. You're like, let's see what happens. And the only thing that would hold me back is if I had to spot that night. Oh, yeah. Then I would tame it and be like a couple hundred milligrams. But you don't want to go up on stage with too much edible. Yes, you do. Sometimes, yes, you do. Sometimes you need to. It's important. Sometimes. Sometimes it's important to go off into the woods. Right? Yeah. Sometimes you stay on the trail. But listen, Pat, you still have a special stay on the trail. Last week, I went to do a spot. I figured, let me wait five weeks. I haven't been on stage since April 18th. Let me go do a spot. I'm nervous. I get down there and there's 50 people perfect. Break my cherry. Do it. I got to such a groove. I ended up doing that. That was because the edible I took before I went on stage. No, I'm a cherry. I told you that. I got nothing. Right. I said, I'm starting over from scratch. I got nothing. I talked about going to hospital and then it just became something else. And I was up there and out. Wow. I was starting to fucking throw up. Did you film it or record it or anything? No. I didn't know it was going to be gold. Right. Right. But that's why THC, somebody said THC is like a band substance for comics because it may. If they really let it absorb you, then I'm not telling you to smoke pop. But then I have no addition. Whenever I have no addition, I read it. I put it away. I just get stoned and then I go back and I look at it again. Complete. Complete. Different sheet. Not like pick out things. All right. Good point. Then I leave it again. I get high and I come back like an hour later. And that's what I think THC makes me just rely. Look, I live in anxiety naturally. Naturally. I beat myself up. This morning, it's 8th. I'm drinking coffee outside the 4th season. I'm like, why am I heartbeat? Because I don't have somewhere to go to. I can't know where to go. You just gave yourself anxiety for no reason. Yeah, because I always tell you, I got somewhere to fucking go 10 in the morning. That's why when my daughter gets on that bus to school, that's something that's not blasting. Because then I know I ain't got nowhere to go. Like, you know, you make a list every day and you go, this is what I'm going to do today. And then you fucking wake up and you look at that list after you smoke them. like, that's a long drive up to New York City today. I ain't doing that podcast. You know, that's a fucking long drive up to that motherfucker. Yeah, the driving in New York is not a joke. That's an endeavor. Yeah. You got to take a day. Like that's your day. Your day is driving and driving out. You're not going to the gym. You're not doing all of those stuff. Me? No, I'm saying if you've got a driving to New Jersey, that's your day. It's not like, oh, I'll go there. That's at noon. I'll hit the gym at 2.30. No, you'll be in traffic for three hours. Three hours. I always go to Friday. I should early and get it all in. Like on days that have to go to the city up north, I'll just take that as a day off. Like I'll work that day before so I could go up there comfortably and that's what it. Yeah. But it's got some days I got up. I'm not going up there. I got to work out today. Listen, this is one of the big things that Texas has or Austin has in particular over the East Coast is the fucking traffic. The traffic here's a joke. They talk about traffic. It's adorable. You might be 10 extra minutes. Whoop, they do. It's adorable. But last time we're watching. Usually a car accident happens and there's a bunch of people stopped. That should happens everywhere in the world. But for the most part, the East Coast is so thick with people. You don't realize it until you have to make that trip to New Jersey and back and forth. When we do the UFC's, if we go into New Jersey to the UFC and then with the way in then we have to go back to New York to play the pool. I'd six o'clock that day. Oh my God. It's crazy. Go to New York to eat and to play pool and it's fucking, it's a mad house. Think about it. What it was like the last two weeks. Jim Florentine said he wanted to the city's side. It was three hours because of the Nick bullshit. They weren't even playing. They weren't even playing. People were so upset that Trump was going to go to the NBA. Because if he's there, then they have all these crazy security protocols and makes the traffic even worse. There was no parties. There was no nothing. And that's what's up. And that's why I'm going to boo him everywhere. Oh, they booed him to that. I didn't watch the whole game. I heard some people cheered. I heard it was like cheers and booze. But the problem is if there's cheers in any booze, if there's like 50, 50, like that's don't go to that spot. Go to the UFC. People say he got booed at the UFC. I've seen him at the UFC six times or something like that. I don't know how many times. Never get booed. They never got booed. They fucking cheer. The people that say they booed him, you're distorting reality. It's not true. They cheer him like he walks in there to the American badass song, especially if kid rock is with him and Dana White's behind him. And then sometimes Tucker Carlson was there too, back when they were close. It was like the conservative Avengers. It was like this is ridiculous. They were cheering. He was the kisser of death last night. I'd better guess the next last night. Me and Jamie, we were like, fuck that, getting two and a half. Why they only giving two and a half? They're up two scames. What do you mean, time? Two and a half? They were giving last night. Everybody named Mother, even fucking your daughter, bet the next last night, giving two and a half. Do you bet sports all the time? How often do you bet? This type of the year, I bet basketball because it's real. Do you use an app? Like what are you doing? Draft games. Draft games. You don't have a bookie. No. Yeah. No. I enjoyed it because Draft games has so many fun. Like there's bookies out there. Like they keep busting these mafia rings in Jersey and New York. 39 people had the big bust last year with the basketball coaches that they put the cards up and you could see through the fucking cards on the table. It's gambling has grown to a fucking nightmare. We're going to pay for this in five years. But when I went to college after orientation, you walked out. and there was credit card companies, discover, master card, visa, and they give you a credit card for being a student for 250 automatic right there. And now when you go to all orientation days, Draft games is that. You know, the other ones, fans, who's there. And I'm not putting them down. I love Draft Kings. But you're copying these kids. These kids don't have enough problems with fucking student loans. Right. Now I'm going to put a fucking thing. More people are gambling more than ever than ever. It's Australia too. Yeah, my buddy, you know, James, you can't. Yeah, I was talking about how crazy it is in Australia. Yeah, it's, what's the odds on the Iliad Taporia just engage you fight at the White House? To pick them. No. No. Taporia has to be a huge favorite. I guarantee to pour his two to one. Four to one. Yeah. Oh my God. Four to one is crazy. Two to one. If you just think about what he's done in his last three fights, he's had the most legendary run in MMA championship history in his last three fights. He knocked out three all time greats. Knocks out Alexander Volkenowski, Knocks out Max Holloway, Knocks out Charles Oliver, three in a row. Like anybody who could do that, you go, I'm not fucking betting anything against that guy. But just engage. He's a tough character son. So if I bet 25 bucks on Gage, I win. 100. 400. Yeah. Yeah. Um, which is, uh, look, it's minus 426 for toporia. They're like four to ones. I don't know. Caesar says 600. Caesar's is smart. But the thing is, man, don't think that just engage you can't win. Like anybody can lose in an MMA fight. People get hit. Like in Iliad, it's a poor area. One of his early fights, one of it, I think his first fight in UFC at lightweight. He took it on short notice and he fought this dude, um, Jai Herbert, who's a really tall, really good striker. And Jai Herbert caught him with a head kick in the first round, a switch kick to the dome that dropped him. It was perfect, but he recovered brilliant. He got a hold of them, took him to the ground, recovered and then came back and devastating knock out in the second round. Like he fucking puts people into orbit, man. His power is crazy. He's not a big guy either, man. Justin's a much bigger guy than him, but the way he knocks guys out, it's just dead. He knocks them out dead. But so does Gai Chi. People forget it. Gai Chi's a fucking war hammer, dude. That guy loves battles. He loves it. I don't think. It's a tough fight man. There's a tough fucking fight. I think both this guy, and this is this Sunday, right? Gai Chi's bigger. So, fuck yeah, I'm going. So Gai Chi's bigger, Gai Chi used to fight at what was it called? The IFL, whatever the organization was before he came to the UFC. I think it was before the PFL was like another one. But what was it? What was the organization? You know, there's these feet are organizations like the PFL. A lot of really good fighters that wound up becoming champions. And started with that. Was that it? World Series of fighting. That's right. That's what it was. And he was fucking people up with leg kicks. But it was the way he was fighting. It was just to throw himself into chaos. Like he didn't fight tactically at all back then. You ever see the Michael Johnson fight with him in the UFC? A long time, yeah. This is his first fight in the UFC. It's one of the craziest fucking fights ever. Because he just fucking throws himself at Michael Johnson. And Michael Johnson throws himself right back. And moves up. They got hurt. Both guys got cracked. It was a crazy fight. But eventually Justin got him. But it was the way he fought. You're like, good Lord. Yeah, he fights every. Like a pit bull. Like a pit bull. Like no concern for his safety. Just dive in. It was a fucking crazy fight. And look how Dustin is always just trying to kill you. He's always moving. Look at every shot he's trying to fucking kill you. He's always moving forward trying to smash you. And the thing is he relishes this kind of combat so much that in the beginning he lost some fights that he could have won if he tempered it. And then he did. So and then when he went on this like legendary run started beating everybody. It's really because he controlled the violence a little bit more. He controlled the chaos. But it was still like very technical violence. It wasn't like he was brawling dumb. He was just forcing himself into chaos so much. he was throwing himself running to the fire over and over and over again. This is a dangerous fucking guy. He's a dangerous fucking guy for anybody. I mean, he hit Kabib. He heard him with some calf kicks. He could do that too. He leg kicks you from inside the clinch. One of the things that he does really well is from like he could get you with like a collar tie and he's leg kicking you. Well, he gives him the finger and tells him to get up. I mean, Michael Johnson is getting battered. This is a tough fight for him. At this point, we're in round two. Look at that. Need the body. Just everything's trying to kill you. It's not like this tactical take a chance here. Take a chance there. No, everything's take a chance. It's like from the very beginning of the fight and this is how he fight. He eventually took him out. But it was crazy fight. He fights like I told you, I was used to fight. They weren't thinking about brain damage. Right. Haggle all those dudes were not thinking about that. We were talking about that. We were football before. You know what I just watched the other day? Must stop for ham show. Haggle versus Must stop for ham show. Woo. They battle. Haggle took him out. But it was just haggler and his prime. He would beautiful that pro. He was so fucking so good. He was so good. And he was so good at switching stances, man. What no one was doing that back then. Haggle would fight. South Paul, he would fight. Oratara actually would fuck you up. He didn't know where it was coming from. And he could fight just as good South Paul as he could. Oratara. It was an amazing fight to watch. Look, God, that guy was great. So disciplined. Yeah, so good fights this week. I'm excited for the car. I thought it was Saturday. Yeah, Jamie posted up that the serial gun out-spererifies the closest fight in the car is in terms of odds. It's like even odds. And that's a serial gun. It's a tall order. That's a tall order for your first heavyweight fight in the UFC. These are sad. It's in terms of odds. It's like even odds. That's a that's a Zero guns a tall order. That's a tall order for your first heavyweight fight in the UFC Pick them. Yeah. I would say it's a pick them. I would say it's a pick them cereal gone is really good and to think about cereal gone is The problems that he's had in fights or when guys take him down When guys stand with him, he is very tricky. He's very slick He's very tactical and he's he's very light on his feet for a big guy Like he moves really well like one of the best movers in the heavyweight division for sure He's he's like dancing. I mean he also does a weird thing off his front leg He throws a front kick when he's standing sideways like in a belated stance like this and he picks it up and twist it into your stomach Bang like that. It's weird like I work. It's a kick. I mean it's called a twig Wisting kick with your kick. It's just you don't ever see people throwing that kick from the front leg like he does like he does a lot He does a lot of weird shit, but you have to get used to like that Tom Aspen all fight man He was he was scoring very well on the theme I know it got stopped because of the eye pokes But before the eye pokes here will go almost doing very well on the feet against Aspen all nationals a big fast heavyweight It's gonna be interesting because I don't I don't you know know of Pereira Is gonna have an issue with the movement, you know if he's gonna be able shut that movement down And I don't know if cereal gone is gonna be able to like if he's gonna want exchange with them He might feel that power and say I'm just gonna fight on the outside because Pereira's got that you make one mistake power That was good. I have anyway He looks like he gained the way he was yo he's huge. He looks like you know that no dieting So no depleting of his body at all You're gonna have a guy competing for the first time where he's never had to cut weight That's huge. That's a giant advantage not having to cut weight is like they let you take steroids You can't you don't have to cut weight no cutting weight at all if they change weight cutting if they cut all weight cutting out of MMA You'd have like 20% better performances People be fighting so much better Because they would they would feel so much healthier They would be so much more durable. They wouldn't be as many like one shot knockouts where you're like whoa That got him because a lot of these guys like their brain is still dehydrated when they're in their fighting It's only 24 hours after they rehydrate. That's not enough time to get to the brain We go to weigh on you with you and these guys will come in like they look like that cancer They look dead. Yeah, I would see him and then they would drive me in the back. They like to take cut out IVs Yeah, I'm gonna be in there with you and look at these guys coming in There we go. They look like they were on that fucking GLP But I see it's like fucking Sharon. I was once gone. I mean they were looking fun. Thubjack Yeah, they look dead some guys looked real You remember when Anderson Silva fought Travis looter. Do you remember that fight? Yeah, did you do you took that from Texas? Exactly. Yes, he that was the worst ever saw anybody at a weigh in he looked really fucking And again, this was not the ceremonial weigh-in like we have now This was like the actual weigh-in see if you can make the weight and Travis couldn't walk He was shuffling he could pick his legs up his lips were cracked like he his body was dry How can't be good for you like you pick it back up and then go through rounds Exactly a couple inches eight o'clock the next night Meanwhile, I mean he was so depleted But he got a hold to Anderson the first round it took him down and that's what he wanted to do and it's Texas yeah, yeah Kevin Holmes coach. Oh shit. Yeah, yeah, Travis is a bad mother. Oh bad mother fun He was a when guys rolled with him on the ultimate fighter, you know one of One of the best compliments one of the guys said he goes dude He goes I've rolled with only a couple guys like that is like him and Ricardo Laborio I go really I go that guy feels like Ricardo Laborio. He's that level. He goes He's like dude. He was running through people just running through people on the ground Travis was a beast he was one of the first like truly elite Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belts and like the modern era Like the Anderson silver era whereas when he got guys to the ground you were in trouble You're in real trouble. There's a few guys. I Charles Oliver is the big one Charles Oliver puts people in positions. They're like oh no, what have I done? Like you think you're gonna be comfortable like in his guard like bitch You're never gonna be comfortable on the ground with all of air all of ours just so dangerous everywhere Oh, yeah, yeah, I've been doing so good. We're a kid. Yep. Also. I got to withstand great camp He's from that shoot the box camp. I mean that can't produce Anderson silver Marie Ninja Shogun like cool else Okay, pay lay pay lay the one of the original MMA fighters back in the bare knuckle days He was the the top dude in the original in the original days. No no Garrett's not from shoe box. No Garrett is a cross and grace He got those Is crossing grace right no Call for the Chicago. No. No. Gary wasn't crossing. Gracie. No. Gary was um I don't want to get that wrong. Who was no Garrett's trainer? Minitaro no Garrett his original Jiu Jitsu coach fucking brother probably No, both of them were ill just easy. They were twins. They were twins. Yeah, there were twins. They were both elite They were both like world class fighters and pride Does it say is Jiu Jitsu coach? Minitaro was the first like he was the first guy that was like finishing and elite guys off of his back in pride Like he was tap into like when he was the champion in pride. I think you remember when he beat Bob's sap No Bob sap was 350 pounds with abs and The fight was crazy. He picks Minitaro up and spikes him on his head in the beginning of the fight fucked his neck up for years I guess neck was fucked up after that fight and still survived and eventually caught Bob's app in an arm bar But it was bananas On my bettech. Okay. Yeah, there you go on my bettech is another guy. I fought early in the UFC So that's his coach for one. Where did he get his black belt? Just see where he got his black belt from Just ask the question who gave Minitaro his black belt. Oh, we just uh Okay, Ricardo Diller Dilla heba That's his primer instructor There you go. Okay. Yeah, he was He was he was he invented the dollar he broke Probably There's a bunch of moves that are attributed to guys that it's not quite sure whether or not they invented But they were really good at it, you know How much money is that guy somebody though? I even take him down. That's fun. I can't finish the leg lock I never could I'm fucking terrible. I can't get my arms around it. I'm fucking Shoulders of fucked up. They lack to scary. Yeah, I don't like holding that shit. He fuck them up You know, you twist the wrong way turn the wrong way. He hit things pop E Scary you still training no no I haven't over a year I'm gonna roll with you that was for a while. I've got a knee problem It's much better now. I've been really working on it over the last six months But it kept swelling after a while the thing is it would get better and I'd feel pretty good and then I'd heard it Again and usually I heard it like a year ago hunting I twisted it hunting and then I've also heard it like hitting the back too Like sometimes I just start whaling on the back. You forget. Yeah, you forget. It's just the next day It's sore as fuck. It's like I don't have meniscus on one part of my knee So I have to make sure that it doesn't get arthritic. You know what I mean because Like I don't tell you like once your knee gets bad. It's a real problem problem And so you got to like Walk that edge between when you don't have cartilage or you don't have um meniscus and your cartilage is getting bone on bone like that like you got to be careful You got to be careful they're getting real close to fix and shit real close They're injecting like different kinds of gels and people's knees now that replace the meniscus And they're also doing some new stem cell therapy where they go into the bone itself and it regenerates hard But that gel they always work you with that gel. I think it's a new one Joey. It's it's like a it's they call it a Biological matrix you need to fucking get like a you need to get like an insurance approval all that yeah, I did it That's just all those things. It's like when you see an ad for somebody You have problems sweeping by this mouthpiece But why am I me mine? I don't think you got what they have now because this is just released in Germany This is this is brand new but this gel like I'm just saying to you the gel the quarters Well, I have friends with knee problems and they tell me what they go through and they go to different doctors And it's the same fucking We got quarters off here. We got the gel We're not gonna do the PRP and we don't do stem cell so you Show regular you don't do no reading. This is what happened to me with the fucking wired the dissurgery in the first place You hadn't moved here and I didn't know about ways to well, I'm not I wouldn't have never thought this made the first time never Never I didn't read up on it because When my wife was pregnant I read up on all that shit and I was I didn't want to have the baby no more Because it said one show for 43 you'll buy if you're giving birth like so if you're not ready when you get older as a woman You know now women are having kids of 50s and fucking 55s But a woman has to be this she has like a short window Right, they have a lot of things that could go wrong with the pregnancy when I read that I got nervous from my wife I'm like she's gonna die on a fucking table and I'm stuck raising a girl. I don't know how to fathom raise a girl You know what I'm gonna do here so I didn't really I research it a little bit After I got the need after I went and I saw the fucking the chisel and the fucking mouth on the table I go we got to look into this I'm not gonna Like this is fucking insane. I would have never done The redo knee. I would have waited shot it with stem cell BPC it at that time. I'm still a little fearful of needles So I was like uh BPC them everything as you got to shoot it you're feel fearful of needles, but not of a knee replacement That's hilarious. No, no, I'm fine now. It took it took four stays in hospital last year to fucking like go One day they had to come in and take blood out of me every 20 minutes for three hours. Why? That type of test they shoot you with something to see how you react to it all And don't gonna faint. I don't faint no more unless like last time I waste a while I want to know I'm gonna load run those tequila's from the mothership drinking that run away Juice and shit. I want to know what no breakfast like we need to take blood out within minutes. I'm pale I'm sweat profuseously. They'll put ice on my back on my neck and shit And when I did uh when they turned to switch off on your leg. What's that? When you do that little four surgery when I first hurt the knee They said we're not gonna give you pain medication But if you're really hurting that bad come on down here. We'll give you a nerve block. Oh, they give you a nerve block. Oh Holy shit. Who did that? Where'd they do that? Because the place where I went for surgery the first time they shit uh-huh This place is specialized and all that stuff so they have their own therapy They have their own like the surgeons and then they have a pain department that they talk to you Hmm, listen you could take this you want to go give it to you. Well, let's do this. Let's try it with this They don't want you. You know, and I understand that people lose their minds on those fucking things So I did the nerve block first Joe Holy fuck Holy fuck I'm the well into the doctor about a month ago the girl was like I was there that day when I paint it She was you didn't faint but your show came close. She was you lost all the color in your face. It's crazy Joey Hadrick water and then the epidural block you ever do one of those no Well, no, I did what I have my knee surgery. Yeah, they always me served you I thought they put you out for those they did most of the time but my first ACL I asked if I could watch and He said you don't want to watch it. I go no, I do. I don't want to I don't want to get this done once I want to see it can I watch it see it and they shot it in the head on your spine Well, they shot it in my spine right and so it you don't feel anything in your legs and I watched them open my knee Up and put it together again. Fuck you Joe The epidural block I wanted to see I'm like I don't want to do this once I didn't know that I was gonna have another ACL Resurgery you're gonna get put out for your surgery. No, not the first one the second one. I did I can say Joe I love you. I use on bone shit, but I wanted to watch not I want to watch a lot of what it looks like because it's kind of crazy They're gonna take your knee take a slice out of your patella tendon along with a chunk of Bone and a chunk of bone for your kneecap and then screw it back in place like this is crazy. I want to watch Held up Still good the the real problem was the meniscus so they didn't even take the meniscus out then they just Stitched it up. There was a tear in the meniscus, but it wasn't too bad and he thought it could heal You know cuz I was in my 20s. I was like 23 I think 22 and then over time it just got wore out that Tear became a bucket handle tear and then it would lock so it would pull the meniscus would pull up and like lock in place It was fucking Insanely painful and I was like this keeps happening. It happened a couple of times It was like it happened in Jiu Jitsu class and Eddie Bravo had to take me to the doctor So Eddie Bravo had to drive my NSX. We drove straight to the doctor and you know They tell me I need to get my meniscus removed Okay, and then he told me I need to stop doing martial arts. I was like, okay, that's cute That's the person they'll tell you. Yeah, you got to stop doing martial arts. Why do I wear everything? No, much a lot. You know, there's 30 years later fuck you. I'll get one of those things. Yeah, sure We've used one of these is alps. Those are that's Tucker Carlson's one. So those are good It's six six milligrams. These are threes. This is the athletic nicotine. That's threes Like those they don't make you jittery Those those take a hell of a hit Tucker likes mr. I like them, but they fucking always wow Next you know shit and pouches and shit. I have to have focus ones Yeah, that's these altruists. Yeah, I do the altruists I was doing those after I had the surgery. Those are great. Yeah, there's a bunch of really good things for your focus People think it's all bullshit. You know like that neutral person bullshit And you're allowed to think whatever you want But trust me from somebody uses use this as brain for a living There's a difference between taking neutral picks and not take him. It's not going to make you smarter But it'll make your brain function at a better level. There's a bunch of shit that works like that Like you know those those ketone drinks like ketone IQ that helps a lot really. Yeah Your brain uses ketones your brain uses ketones for focus That's why people that take ketogenic diets and go on carnivore diet They say it gives them like more mental clarity. You have more more focus It's fact you like I feel different when I'm eating like clean if I'm eating like carnivore just eggs and steak My brain works better 100% It's just not processing the carbs and all the fog that comes with that not the carbs a bad point But when you um take this stuff this stuff is the shit This is my friend Derek's gorilla mind. This is a neutral big drink Not coffee drink no, no, it's got some caffeine in it's got a good amount of caffeine But it's got a bunch of neutral picks so there's a bunch of like brain vitamins in there. You know anything I'm not selling this. This is my friends You know, I'm not a you know that I have a great memory of dates and I can take it a different situation stories I don't know what happened last three years. How come if I talked you on a Monday, which I usually do You call me Mondays on the way home at six Whatever we talked about by Thursday I don't remember I you'll say call me back when you find out I fucking forget now Like just little face him this last few years last few years like it's a you know I have you know your 60. Oh, how does shit changes you yeah? You know, it's really weird Joe. I need eight now. I need eight. Sorry. I need eight eight. What I was asleep Solid I got the wool. I need it makes a difference six and a half don't cut it Yeah, yeah, I need eight now and don't get me start on an hour nap Well now 15 nap and two or three o'clock me out. Yeah, if I get up in the morning make it up at six So I put it on the bus. I start smoking weed and nine. I'm out of gym. I'm doing something boxing PT. You know, so By fucking two o'clock those days. I walk in there ain't no stopping there ain't no pissing I go right to the bed put the mask on and go right to sleep Just like that. I mean there's no thought there's no Stop it. What is that Monopoly stop it go and get 200? They know that I've come in I drop my bag. I pee and I walk around upstairs right to the bed I move the cat over get the fuck over And I fucking put that mask on It's a cat cuddle with you. I'm police and he goes under the blank. She goes under the blank or me too, so it's perfect But dog it's not no moon My mother flat early no more For you. Yeah, you need you need a solid amount you need as you get older. It's even more important You know else is really important creatine. I take 10 milligrams twice a day beautiful beautiful beautiful That's phenomenal for your memory and that's a really good new trope as well. I don't like the companies And then you had some gummies on yeah, I like my neighbor gave him to me that you had him I prefer to just open it up and pour it in my mouth and then drink water Yeah, let me do it. I like about it. Yeah, I put like the 10 milligrams in my mouth and I just drink You don't put it on your food. Do you? No, no, I just put it. I put it in a smoothie from time to time I like to raspberries with Make the best way to make sure that I'm getting all 10 milligrams is to just pour it in my mouth and then drink water with it Because otherwise it's in the glass you got to rinse the glass and get more of it in You know you you're giving yourself an exact dose just put it in your mouth dry scoop it So I just dry scoop it in my mouth and pour the water in there That's how I do most of the time what the gummies are really good for is if you forget and they just land around You just eat a couple of gummies You know, I don't know how many milligrams right now. It's a little bit of a buzz at all You know, I think two gummies is five milligrams. I think that's what it is I also got turned down to a free of 10 inch company that has a pre-a-teen pre-cursor. Is that a pre-cursor? Pre-teen pre-cursor. I don't know what that is your own body creates creatine Right, I think someone this helps Oh, it's just a body. I think it's called a pre-cursor. I don't know. Hey, don't you say Just right off with a fucking you saying I know it because I'm saying it wrong like Voltron. I don't fucking know guys I'm sure there's something I mean there's always a bunch of mean there's If you think about how many supplements are out there, I could lord there's so many supplements and not all of them are good But a lot of them are really good. Here's another one's really good for working out beta alanine You ever take that? No phenomenal phenomenal Don't take everything else makes you tingle though makes your skin like I had died itch you would take I died Yeah, like you there's a pill or something you take I had died to help you supposed to do that if you get radiation poisoning Listen when the first piss test came up they said you would take I had died So get you put chlorox in your dick that put chlorox in my dick after when because I had died obviously didn't fuck a work, okay? You imagine when I read your piss through the fucking test machine they were like what what is what is this? Do you want to stand piss? Do you want to stand like this times like I remember I take my cup of coffee and I stood outside. I think you know the whole fucking bullshit story And then it takes me somewhere like after the second cup of coffee and one of these zins in the bonget You might go something I think a chunks of my life and I go What the fuck was that? Mm-hmm like that was Joe that wasn't sanity What about every time he used to come to my house to do the check-up? I never let him in he came like 11 times in two years. I never let him in my house He didn't know I was in the house He would put the sheriff's come and sit outside my house for two hours Then they would leave like one another he's not home I never let him in my house. I tortured that guy. That's a lot of sad me to prison. I still would have been in prison But it was such a like first was the eye I died And then you fucking you know you're supposed to take 20 milligrams. Yeah, I mean 200 whatever. I don't know Am I skin his burning? I'm fucking bread in the face. I got it. Geez. So I stopped with the eye then I still came back positive Then I went on the fucking White vinegar white vinegar with a fucking bottle of Gatorade on a Monday morning not a little vinegar not red wine vinegar the real vinegar that you clean your ass whole And douche bags and all that shit feeling a clean job. That's what when we watched that monkey We've been a good because it takes all the fucking cap place out of all the shit they got in there So they said drink vinegar every Monday morning bro, and it's like a process like you would get high Friday And you would hope to beat it by Sunday, but you knew you weren't gonna beat it and they're gonna call you Monday And it's like your color is yellow right like if they say yellow you got to come in So you wait till one o'clock and you're like all right you got to call in and all something today Monday Tuesday the 9th of June the colors are purple and you're like yellow god damn now I got to figure out I got five hours The place closes at six I got to figure out how to stop This cocaine from coming up. So then we started taking a sero What's sir? Sero is what you put in like Jello that said ding that makes the jello jiggle with some shit like what? Fucking sero now there was there was some winter that these days These are just pieces. See what is that a brand of liquid fruit pectin most commonly used in the kitchen as a thick and engaging From homemade jams and jealous However, it's also widely known as an internet folk remedy people using attempt to mask drug but drug metabolite I don't have full Fucking bullshit. Is it work? No, that's why let's find out if it works The myth many online forums suggest mixing sero with a large sports drink like Gatorade and drinking a few hours for a drug urine test The theory claims the fiber traps toxins in your digestive tract Reality health professionals and medical studies show no scientific evidence that fruit pectin can rely to clear drugs or toxins from your urine While fiber works in the gut as no effect on what your kidneys filter into your urine This episode is brought to you by armra every week. There's some new wellness hack that people swear by and after a while you start thinking Why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why armra colostrum caught my attention It's something the body already recognizes and it has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff immunity metabolism etc I first noticed it working around training especially workout recovery Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this if you want to try armra is offering my listeners 30% off plus two free gifts Go to armra.com Slash Rogan But again, you get your advice my god. We've done 30 fucking years. Then you forget he's been doing 30 years because we made mistakes Not because he's a fucking genius about sero Exactly, you know, and then we went from sero and then one day I was saying they work. Huh? Is anything work? No cranberry juice. What about that stuff that they used to sell remember these to sell stuff? This is 90 fucking This is 89 minutes. I'm knocking no, but you remember there was some stuff that you could buy and shake it in Yeah, no, no you're saying the use of my piss now now. It's completely different you could buy this Yeah, you could buy piss online just get that Dirty that dirty fucking XPT whatever you go on and you could search hidden. She's gonna get a rubber dick and take that piss and go I had a guy who made a rubber dick Normal let could not start snoring coke. So he made a Contraction where he filled up his sons piss in the hot water bottle and did the same thing with the douche They took the douche on the bottom. He Scott's taped it to his dick and he would piss and squeeze the his chest Oh my god And he was a bank royale. It's a jail for 30 fucking years one here the craziest steroid evasion story that ever heard There was a guy who was fighting and he knew he was gonna get pissed test and he was just juiced the tits So the legend is that they inserted clean urine into his bladder through injection So he injected clean urine into his bladder with a needle Whether or not that's true. I have no idea But this is what everybody this is like early days the USA When they first started drug testing people would you think I don't even think it was in the UFC that he did this? I think it was in another organization, but I don't know if it's true. But what was going on the other side of this Your addiction is that high Well these guys when they're not you stop when they're that you stuff. They're not getting off of it Because I know I know muscle. I understand so you understand these streams that people do. Yeah, could you ever shoot fucking fake piss Like Joey go piss. I'm gonna shoot Joey's piss A guy willing to do that and trusting that guy was finding your bladder. He could shoot pissing your liver Like who knows what this guy you can understand There's no levels that you do so here I am sure it won't work fucking nothing works and one damn on a pool Oh shit when you pissing the pool The pool cleaner Cleaning all this and not the pool would be green to the next day. So this is your logic When I took the kids I took one of those cubes first. I think problems smash it up Then I put it on my outside of a dick because I'm on circumstance So I'll pull the skin back and that would fall into the fucking piss and then so he told me once he'll some happen last time You fucked up the machine. That's not like that. Right? We have a certain condoms filled with someone else's urine inside themselves He said some athletes would inject urine into their bladder using a catheter. Oh, God. They did do that. So that's real. Oh So maybe that's how he did it maybe they used a catheter That's how they put the fake that there's the whizzin'ator. Yeah, that was the rubber dick Wasn't there some stuff that you could buy that would you get it like a head chop Supposedly toxic to 89 but does that stuff work? That's real yeah, I was assumed that it wasn't real I was just sitting on this at a head chop stuff than from the 90s or some of the product the killer was when I used drain Oh, okay, so this all bullshit. Yeah, they just robbed me. They just robbed me fetish urine Look at that it says look at that's labels fetish urine with the fuck does that mean? It's probably a way to sell it because you have to say what You know for human consumption. Oh, so that's your buying piss. Oh, that's an actual bag of piss. Yeah, right? Oh good Lord It's fun called a tinkle. It's fetish urine. So if you just like want someone to piss on you, but no one's willing Very total story The guy went the gay club the guy at the bathtub Pissed on the top. Yeah, and then that party Shema took me to in that whole town next to the comedy store They were getting pissed on in there the women and then I wake up sadly. I'm feeling good about myself On Twitter. I see Bonnie blue. She had a that chick is fucking she got pissed on Baby show problems in her ass people were pissing her pussy in her ass. Not like Something's got to stop that woman. She's your least of her problems. Oh my god. I'm a baby shower Now I used to drain all though. That was the best because that destroyed the machine But the truth of him matter is When he said something happened last time well, this is what happened I put the drain on my dick and I walked up to the counter and I put on the desk and he asked you questions How's it been? And I'm looking at this thing and they start the phone And it's coming out of the bag And I'm looking at this thing going this motherfucker by the end what he did was just picked it up and threw it In the bag like when they pick it up and tuck Sometimes you leave the cop top off. That was a whole trick You leave the top off and there's spill off So that buys you one extra week, but the time with the drain. Oh, it started like whoa It was like shaking at the thing like phone was coming out of fucking sides. I lost them good That's what happened. There's no oxygen. That motherfucker is like, you know, boom It was like shaking at the thing like foam was coming out of fucking sides. And I lost them. Good. That's what happened. There was no oxygen. That motherfucker was like, you know, boom. So I put in the fucking thing. And he called me a few days later. And he's like, listen, I wrote up a thing. I'm taking you to court because you broke the machine. This cannot continue. This can continue. This can continue. This is like a fucking cat mouth game. What did you put in your body? What happened? What the fuck is going on? Jose. So there you go. Hey, your machine sucks. Your machine broke. And then I was going to do with me. No. And then they put me on like this hold. They were like, when I even got a piss, you know, what the? With the, we're done. We can't take this mental fucking. So this is when you're in the probation department. Now that we're going to throw me back in community corrections. Because they'll put you in for 90 days and all that. I mess this fucking guy. For three months we spoke like nothing like gentlemen. I would talk to him. So I'm one so weak. And one day I said, what do you do? And he goes, I'm a district attorney in Boulder, Bill Wise. I need a beef. I need a problem. I'm on this probation. They won't leave me alone. What do I do to get off? He goes, just have your attorney drop a statement and I'll sign and get your probation. And that was it. Just a guy met on the street, Bill Wise. And then he got fired after the job. But they ramsy thing. He was dead during the whole job. And they ramsy thing. And everybody I fucking fired. I guess. I know Bill Wise was a great dude. Man, he was good to me. And I told him, he asked him what I did. I told him the truth. And he goes, did you learn from the state? Yeah. I'm here working, aren't I? Because I'm passing over the sign of my, oh my God. I'm fucking lucky in my, that's how I'm done. I'm done. I was done. Started in 87. It was all the way to 91 for a year. I was fucking him up with the Pete thing. Then they put me back on the ass butt and the halfway house. And that was even worse. I was out of control. And there was freaks in there. There's fucking everything in there. Freaky girls. I was feeling the air conditioner. I had the conference room. I put in my room. They could handle me there either. They're like, you're just calling. I'm not gonna fucking get me. Oh. And that's what you need. Just wear somebody ragging. Don't let you go eventually. I'll just say, you know what, man, it ain't worth it. You never gonna stop. You never gonna stop. And then a year later, I had like on a fair with one time. I had in the fair with like the chick that worked in the at office. She's the one that had the one leg. He's gonna check and he's food to it. It never stopped. And you think of those chunks in your life and go, what the fuck was coming on? Yeah, he ran out of control. Like, it's 31 years and I still won't come back to bowl because of the shame I endured. Seriously. Like, I won't go there. Everybody goes, why don't you go back to the bowl? Because I'm ashamed. And that was such a beautiful city. And I treated like it was Newark. Right. Like, I did what I wanted. I would go to Kmart, hang on outside of fucking the lump of more department. And people will come out with new lawnmowers and the receipt would fly off. I get that receipt and go to lawnmower. And get that lawnmower for 400 and walk it up and go, my mother bought me this. I don't want it anymore. And I give them the receipt and they give me 400 cash plus tax. What does that? That fucking toys are us. I took that thing down by myself with those Jeffrey bucks. I took them down. It's like when you bring a stolen computer in there and they give you, they won't give you cash. They'll give you Jeffrey bucks. So you have to spend it on the fucking store. You know, I had a million dollars in Jeffrey bucks or one time. I was buying bicycles and fucking. I was an animal. And I feel really guilty about it today. I'm thinking of booking the Fox Theatre and Boulder. And one of like, because Lydizio is opening back up. My Italian joint. So they call me and they say we're opening back up. I'm like, I'm thinking I'm doing Boulder. I'm like, Fox Theatre. Just take my lumps of power, Jai's donate to something there and just call the fucking mic. Because I still feel guilty, man. I'm old, but now I feel guilty about the damage. I pulled it through fucking eight. I mean, I chased through more by security. I'm throwing fucking CDs at them. I know that the Denver Broncos are playing Cleveland in 87. Those big playoff games. Do you remember those Jamie talking at the mall one day and everybody's in the hallway, looking at TVs. I'm like, who's mining the stores? I want him to radio shack and they popped out the fucking CD player, brand new one and just put the quarter on and walked out. Like, nothing. Who does that, dog? That's animal. I'm ashamed to admit this shit. But it was like you said, when you first went to Boulder first time, you're like, this must have been a fucking grocery store for Joey Diaz. That's exactly what I said when I went there. I'm nervous. It was a shame. Everybody's so, they're so peaceful and sweet. I brought chaos. Yeah, chaos. And there was too much. When I was in the prison, I brought chaos in there. I had myself open. I did what I wanted. It was just too much. And I, to his dad's, New York, you could shit like that because that's what New York is about. I was a fucking piece of shit in New York too, but I don't feel guilty about that. I still walk around the city now. Got so many pieces of shit in New York. Yeah, I was sick and bold. What was your need? But in Boulder, they didn't have anything like me. I was shaking down people. Some guy kept telling me I saw you on A&E. Remember in the 90s and 80s, A&E was a mafia channel. They talked about A&E to call the own family. And this guy saw me on the way, like, hey, you're the guy that's in the witness relocation plan. This is 80 fucking night. This is way before Sammy and all those guys went in. This guy's telling me you're a witness relocated. They got a little telling guy. I saw you on A&E. You're joined the animal, something from Boston. Like, dog, that's not me. Stop saying that. I already got problems in fucking Boulder. You're telling people that I'm a witness relocated and off your guy. He pissed me off so much, but I just kicked this fucking door down here. Like, when I was Italian, Nick next to us, I went in there and I said, dog, since I'm joined the animal, I am. You're going to give me 200 a week. Bro, he started giving me 200 a week for like three weeks. Then he called to sit down with Antonio Lydizia and Antonio was like, yeah, you got to keep paying it when the guy closed up shop. Like, three weeks later, I never saw him again. Little Telling Guy would always kick his shoes up. Oh, that's crazy shit. I was not coconate the M. And Boulder had a next to Murphies. There's an ATM you could walk into with the door. I would go on there with a case of beer at night and just put cocon the metal. People would come and go. I can't take this shit back, but it was darn that I can't undo it. But are bothers you now? Well, the bother is it just make you listen confused. No, they fucking remember after shit I'm saying. Nobody ever remember this shit. People are on, they moved on with their lives. They saw me, and they were like, well, no, that's a kind of kidnapped guy. No, you know, my name was in the paper, my picture wasn't. And I would picture me, but everything else is in the fucking paper. It's a guilt. It's a weird fucking guilt, man, that I could've done so much better there if I would've played my cards right. I got to graduate college with a fucking astronaut because they were going to give me everything just because I was scuba. They had no Spanish people at that college. They had only like eight black that played football, so they were doing anything to get Latinos. I would've been a fucking astronaut. What did you eat deep? Yeah, but we would've missed this, Joey. Yeah, but it's good that it turned out this way. Who may ask you something? Have you ever gotten into this fucking thing? What would you think you'd be doing now? If I hadn't gotten into which one? This thing that we're doing, stand up. Can I ask you? No. Stand up. I'm gonna open up everything. What would I be doing? I don't know, man. I don't know. I probably would've fought again. Would you be a chef? Would you be? I mean, that capenua is a chef. You loved the cook. Yeah, I do love the cook. I'm a chef. I'm a mason. I haven't found something that I enjoyed doing. What? I don't know. I would've figured it out. What's your second love? The real problem would be if I had a kid really young. Well, so if I know a bunch of my friends got married and had kids when they're like 22, 23. There's nothing wrong with that, but then that really limits your ability to just go for it. Because you have mouths to feed. That's a different animal. You know, I think about the early days of stand up when I was 21 and how I had zero money. I mean, zero. I had zero money. I barely could eat. I remember at a big fucking jar of pennies and nickels, dines and shit. And I remember rolling it all up so I could go get a sandwich. Like I had no money. And so I could imagine like if I was trying to do that, I said, well, I'm just gonna live like this for a couple years. And I think if I work hard enough, I could eventually start making money doing stand up and if I keep getting better, maybe I could be a professional. You know, that was the idea. It was never like have a career. But if I had a kid and I had a wife, there's no way I would have done it. There's no way I would have to have gotten a job. And that's where a lot of people get into. Or maybe you think it's gonna be a good investment to get a house, which it is. But now you've got a mortgage. So you got a mortgage. You can't just fucking lose everything. I got my car repossessed. I was broke, man. I was broke. Well, I used to have to hide my clinic or else they were repossessed. Shit. Yeah. I mean, it was 100% checked the check. I don't have any money in the bank. I don't know if this ever happens to you, but it happens to me a lot, though. And this is why I started this grateful shit because dead days I pull up to my house, I don't know who lives in. Yeah. I go hold him for you. Is it me? No, it doesn't feel real. And then you ask yourself, this is the most important thing when people listen. I want you to listen to this. If you have a dream or a goal, you go. I got to pay for that with comedy, which I always thought I was just gonna make an unlawful set. And I would have been fine with that. If nobody would have a bother me in my life, I would have been fine with her. And I was just sat getting in my beat up car and doing that. Getting you a dick socket and STDs. What if there's all that shit? You know, that's what it is. So when you look at your house, whether it costs 40,000 or 80 million in go, I paid for this, doing $15 set at the comedy store. Yeah. When you got into this, you just wanted to survive. Never mind the fucking house and cars. And you never dreamed of this would stand up. I know I didn't. I never dreamed of this with anything. No. I never thought I would be a person who had money. I dreamed of being a funny person and to be funny enough to make a living and stand up. Yeah. I never saw this part of it. So when I pull up in my house and I go, that was paid with $20 sets. $25 here, $15 here, $100 here. Yeah, that adds up. I'm not saying that, but that was paid by a dream. Yeah. Not a job, not something my family did. I wasn't forced him to like raising lemons or whatever the fuck people do. Yeah, the decent, you know, grow lemons. You know, seriously, we were born into this. This is something we got into and said, I just want to survive. I just want to be able to eat three meals and get enough gas to go to the next thing. Forget money in the bank. Forget it. It's overrated. I would never even open up a bank. I didn't open up the bank house. I was 40 years old. You know, I just ran on whatever the fuck I would open and put 20 in and write a bounce check and fucking move on and pray that nobody caught you. You know, and people have no idea what that feeling is like. I get in my car and I go, holy shit. How many cars do they have? What are those bungee cords? Yeah, bungee cords. They'll have a car when I first took comedy. Had a closer door to bungee cords. Across my thing, it was like my combination seatbelt because if I took a fucking right turn, the door would open. You know, the door would just ring open. Now I'm in a car that's fucking I paid for with comedy, not drugs. Not anyone. Not anything. No, whether it's nice or not you paid for this without nobody's interference with somebody with something that somebody told you you'd never be good at. You'd never be good at. Somebody at least said it to you one time. Joe, come on man. I'm sure. You're never gonna, what do you think you're gonna be on HBO or fucking Richard Pryor and George Collin you laugh, but you're like, they kind of right. They were fucking wrong. We didn't know it. We just didn't fucking know it. Well, it's like telling someone I'm gonna run 200 miles. They're like, no, you're not. You can't even run around the block. Like no, one day I'm gonna run 200 miles. Like no, you're not. You're not gonna run 200 miles. And most of the time they're right. But if you're one of those motherfuckers, it's just like it might take me 10 years to develop the endurance to run 200 miles. But I can't, if I start right now. Next month I'm gonna be able to run five miles. You know, in six months I'll be able to run 10 miles. And I'm gonna keep going. But then you quit before the miracle happens. Well, I should be somewhere along the line. How many people do we know that we know that we're really talented, that we're really funny. And just disappeared. And now you see him like for the shame anybody. But there's a few guys and this is one guy at the early days of the commish store that I really tried to help. I connected him to my manager and I was like, this guy's legit. I'm like, you're funny dude. Like you're good. If you just fucking stood in there had a bunch of personal problems, had a kid. I think he had some legal issues. Damn. But that guy I'm like, I'll tell you later. No, I know. Yeah. Yeah. But I was like, that motherfucker was funny. He was funny. Wait, funny. And I was. He was great. And he was fun dude to be around. He was a cool dude. I was like, he's gonna make it. There was people I looked at and I go that way for man. I am. Holy fuck. Holy fuck. He was like the same age too. We were like 27 when I first met him. And I connected with my manager and he was like, nobody ever did anything like that for me before. He was like, nobody tries to help me. Nobody. I was like, listen man, you'll do it too now. You'll make it and then you'll do it too. Well, I'll do it. It helps and it doesn't hurt. It doesn't hurt you at all to help somebody, but it helps them and it helps you. It helps you feel better. You feel better that you're helping someone. It's like, I always say that being generous is kind of selfish in a way. because you feel better too. Like when I'm generous, I feel better. I do. Yeah, we all do. And when we're kind and when we try to help people, you feel better. It's good for everybody. And it's like, that's a message that the world needs to hear. Like, you could be good to people. And if you're good to people and you're nice to people, it'll help you too. If you find someone who's got something, and you're doing a thing, like you're doing a thing, and if someone's got a spark, it's a little talent. Help them. Help those people. Give them advice. Give them a push. Let them open for you. Watch their set. Give them some feedback. Help them. Because, you know, We're not in the comedy business show. I'm never in the comedy business. I don't know what anybody's talking about. We're in the carmen business. It's a little of that. I'm in the carmen business. I am not in the carmen. My goal every day is to make somebody's day. One person. A woman in a supermarket. You're looking for fucking bad at a motherfucker today. How's thought that Joey? Yeah. That. I just made her a fucking day. Her husband sees her every day and never tells us she's banging. And I'm going up to this lane. I don't even know. I'm like, damn. If I was 20 years younger. You know, they're older than me. That's my thing every day. Just make somebody's day. One person. You can't save the world. But one day, a gesture, a handshake, a couple dollars is not going to set you back. That is kind of what you, if you're, if you're doing a thing where you're doing something that people enjoy, like think about like your sets. Like think about how many people have gone to see you and you change their night. Gone to see you. Like how many nights at the store people come in. You want to see a show? Let's go to your show. You go on stage and rock that fucking place. They leave their whole their side like, ah, and they go out and get some to eat after us. They're already set up fucking thing about. And they're like, change people's evenings. You change their feelings. You change the way they feel and you feel good because of it. It's like this weird exchange. The reason why we love killing, especially people that are really good at it, what they love is that they're making other people happy. That's really what you love. I love it. You're making people happy and you feel happy because you make it. And when you don't hold, you feel tear. I feel I do better when I look at the audience and they're laughing at that. I'm like, you're done with them. Once I laugh, you're done. Yes. You're done. Once I start laughing and giggling. If it's real. Parties. Yeah. No, it's real. It's real. When I look out there and I see somebody that should not be laughing and they're laughing. That's something blue is shit that I said and I don't expect them to laugh. That's what makes me laugh or the look on their face from the shock of you saying something. That's what always kicks me into this fucking mode. It is a fault. It did get a thing I want to talk about in this podcast because I was talking to a friend of mine and Jersey's standards. And this is the other thing people don't see. We're very blessed because we went to LA or the fuck we went. And one day you're talking to somebody and two weeks later, they're in the fucking the biggest movie in Hollywood. Yeah. And it's very hard to explain to people to sit, believe in yourself and just keep showing up and that this happens. But since people don't have to see that happen in their world, you know, in Jersey, what do you see? A guy hits the lottery, he can win his a million dollars. That's their way out of this life. For us, it was like we saw too many people make it like this. Like one day they had nothing in the next day they're on CBS fucking doing a show for eight years, whether it's cabin or whether it's fucking the other guy, the great guy from Pittsburgh, you've seen that. So it gives you hope. Now at that situation, you could say, fuck that dude, he's a fucking loser. You could go good for him. He just moved the notch up a little bit so I could get on that conveyor line. That's the beauty of it. Not looking at that person going, fuck him. He sucks. He stole my joke in Pittsburgh. Who gets a fuck about Pittsburgh in 89? Guys on TV now, you know, whatever he is, be happy because you're next. You know him. You fucking do that to him. You're there in the rotation of the story nine. Yeah, it can happen for you. It happens. So once you see it, you go, oh shit. Okay. Now I know that. That's if you're real. That's if you're real. I need to get off Coke. I need to cut the shit out. I need to do this and this just to get me closer to that because I see it too much. I see people living in a apartment with eight people and next thing they got out of some Beverly Hills. Most people don't see that. Right. So it's tough to explain to them what they have because everybody thinks you're going to hit the ladder and your life's going to change. Boy, are they mistaken? Everybody thinks $10 million is going to change their life and make them a better person. It's not. It's not. We think it's going to. Like when you broke all those years, you used to say I can't wait to have money. Yeah. You never said I can't wait to have money for what? I never thought I would have money. We made that. I never said I can't wait to have money. My thought was I want to like make a living. That's it. That's why I was. Even when I first started with stand up, like it was just to make a living. It was just doing this. I was a fucking loser in like regular society. I was good at kicking people. I was a loser in regular society. I was like I didn't graduate college. I barely got out of high school. I wasn't paying attention. I didn't care about school. All I cared about was whatever I cared about. Whether it was drawing or whether it was martial arts. Those are the things that I cared about. That's it. So I always felt like I just need to find a way to live. Because I'm never going to be a successful person. I had like resigned myself to that. I had no aspirations. You. Yeah. I thought I know you were way worse than me, because you were in and out of jail. No. I had no family. Families. No G D. I was set to fucking die. Yeah. And that little fucking accident I had when I was 25 years old. You know, it's like right now you're going, you look at the news and there's this big thing going on by the I facility, by my house in Jersey in Newark that keep racking bangin'. And I'm sitting there going, it's how stupid we are as Americans. I don't know Americans know this shit. When you go to jail, you lose all your rights. You know, I don't go to jail, Joe. Because that's sleep apnea machine doesn't mean nothing in jail. We don't give you dying. Right. You know what you have to do to get them sleep apnea machine in jail. You got to go to a manufacturer at the center to you directly. Which we'll get into later. But my point is that fucking, what was my point? I don't even know. I got so high before. Your point was that you never thought you were going to go anywhere. I never thought I was going to go anywhere. So comedy came around and you realize, oh, this is a thing that I can do. But all I wanted was 4,000 a month. In my mind, I was such a loser that I said to myself, if I can make 4,000 a month, I'm a millionaire. And today, 4,000 a month doesn't even get your rent. Right. Not even nothing. But back then, 4,000 a month was like 8,000 a month. 8,000 a month now. And you would say, okay, if I made 100 grand a year, I can live. Like you can live off 100 grand a year and be comfortable. Like that's the goal. The goal was always just to be comfortable. But the thing with you is I realized it was like very early on. You were going to take a different path. Like I remember watching you emerge when you really started like killing on stage. And I was saying, and then, you know, all these agents, you remember I had one agent that would get mad. Take your own hand. He would get mad. I was like, what the fuck is wrong with you? He's not, I don't think he's fine. I don't think he's talented. I go, you don't know what the fuck you're talking about. You don't know anything. I go, why does he make me laugh so hard? Well, you're a degenerate. You're a crazy person. You've got to realize the audience is offended. And that's your audience. Shut the fuck up. I knew that you were a different path. So for you, your emergence came with the emergence of the internet. And when the internet came around and we started doing podcasts, I'm like, this is the way that Joey's going to break. Because they'll get to see the real you. You're like, oh, stories. Well, listen, it's like 24 seven on HBO. You may hate fucking throwing your name up. You may hate that box for some reason. Whatever he's cocky, but then they show you his house. And they show you he's got four daughters. And they show you that he wakes up very morning and feeds the daughters. You thought he was a fucking animal. In the cage isn't animal. But in life, he's just a regular guy. And you get to see that and go, no, I like him. I don't see a guy that just punches people in the head. I see a guy that's, look at him. He's got fucking makeup on for his daughters. And he's cooking breakfast every morning. And he goes, trains like that Jason. What was the name? The big young brother from the UFC, Alexander, memory came and he was knocking heads and they found that he couldn't do Jiu Jitsu. Great guy though. I was just, you know, he was raising four girls. His wife, the crack mom left. That dude was a tank. He was a tank. And he would train in the mornings and then go home, cook for the kids. No one in knocked out Keith Chardin. Big upset. Big upset. And then he just tried to take him out. And Houston Alexander was throwing bomb. He was big and fucking strong. Jack. And he was a radio DJ. He was a radio DJ. I didn't know that. Yeah, he was a hip hop DJ. Find out where Houston Alexander was. I love to know he is. Like a big DJ. He was successful. He always talked to me at the airport. Very good guy. Very good guy. And he was like, wow. But you know, I knew that once I was able to tell my story where I came from, it was, I didn't know how to do it on stage. Then after I done a podcast over the years, I got better enough to learn how to do it on stage. But you did figure out how to do something on stage. That was the switch. And the switch was you figured out how to be Joey Diaz in the parking lot on stage. And stage. So that was killing me. But it went like that. Like that. Anybody flip a switch from struggling on stage to crushing like you. I was like, this is wild. And I'm going to tell you some of the reasons. I was too focused on material. You're too focused on your fucking material. And you know what at the end of your material sucks. I've heard it already. And that's what I would think in my mind. So I would do better when I went up there. Just one thought and attacked it. You know what I mean? I mean, it's hard to explain what I'm saying to you. Yeah. No, what you did was you treated the audience like they were your boys and we're all hanging out versus treated the audience like I'm a comic. Here's some jokes. Like when you first started, when I first, what did I meet you in 96? 97. 97. When I first met you, you were doing jokes. Right. Go on stage and do jokes. And I'm focused on the jokes on that paper. Don't focus on that. At 11 30 at the store, your jokes don't mean shit. They just saw three hours of top-notch comedy. What do you bring into the table? You're going to go up there and tell me what I saw in the news. And who taught us that? Poor money. How did relax? He would just go up there in my mind. He was just biding with the audience. He did a lot of that. And it worked. And I took that realm of relax. Mooney taught us a lot. Relax. He was a real veteran. You know, he was like one of the only guys when we were there that was there during the prior years. And was respected. He wasn't like one of those. There was a few guys that were still hanging around that had literally acts from the news. There were still doing like springsteen jokes. It was just bad. But his laid back. Yeah. I had to always talk about it. I was always new shit. Anytime new shit was going on the news, he had 10 solid minutes on it. And quick. Yeah. That day. Yeah. You told him he was that night. That day he was that night. I remember he was crushing on stage once. We were dying in the back of the room. He was, oh, that's right. I write motherfucker. I write. Yeah. No, no. He was fucking weird dying. But that calmness taught me how to, I was going up there in Russian. Yeah. I was going up there two mistakes. Rushing and worrying about that material. Like it was Bible. Right. I'll give you an example. Sometimes I get an audition. Right. When I was doing all the auditions. And this is what I learned that early. And I was auditioning. And if I focused on that line, those lines, I wasn't going to book that part. So I had to dip into Marlon Brando's fucking tools. Marlon Brando didn't reach it. He put those signs on you. So you thought more organic. But it wasn't even that. It was no who your character is. I could tell you to go fucking mother 18 different ways. Right. Right. So it's the same thing. You have to just learn not the words, but what he's trying to say in that. You don't need the words. The words are bullshit. What is this guy trying to say in that? Yeah, you take some of the sentences that he's saying, but you slow it down. And that's what he did in that scene. When he tells everybody of my son should hang by a bolt the lightning, you then I'm Marlon Brando in the hotel scene. That's a beautiful fucking scene. If you love that shit like I do. All those motherfuckers were in science. You seemed behind the scenes of that. So their words, the script was on papers. So the vow was sitting across from them with a billboard. That's hilarious. That boss was sitting across from them. And you see him like he just looked up. And that I will not forgive. And he'd take another pause and look at another cue card. And because he wanted it to be organic. He didn't want it to sound like those fucking lines. Just write a wrote. Right. And that's for everything. If you know the character, I know the character. I know me. See? There it is. Everybody had science thought. That is really crazy. But it worked. Isn't that crazy? And the godfather didn't work. Okay. So go fuck yourself. It was watching this thing where they were very skeptical about him playing. Oh, did you see the Sony thing? Yeah. The Sony thing is very good. Yeah. Very good. Yeah. What an interesting imagined skeptical about Marlon Brando playing the godfather. Well, brother, he had shot a movie. Butnty on the bounty. And they went down there. And the motherfucker fucked that chick. And he wasn't even directing anymore. He wasn't a hut. He gave like the AD, the camera. Did you hear about that? Yeah. That's a huge story. That's a popular now, right? No. And then a popular snail, he went to a meeting. The game, love his loot. And they told me you got to show up 180. Like you're supposed to be a green burray. Right. He showed up 400. Well, that's why they kept him in the dark. They kept him in the dark. And he shaved his back shirt. Yeah. He didn't give a fuck. He didn't. However, and that's why they hate him. But at the same time, you got to love the motherfucker because it's working. Yeah. Well, it was authentic. Right. Yeah. That Apple TV show was very interesting. It was. And very. And I met that dude. Remember, he created the longest yard. I already did the longest yard from scratch. When he did the Godfather, I think he didn't take two. And he went to do the longest yard. He loved it. So he created the longest yard. So we shot our longest yard. He was very Friday for his little chechie poo. Big motherfucker. Big dude dog. Good dude. Big hands and shit. We just talked to you about stuff. Good dude. So I got it. Like that motherfucker. You know, be it ruddy. And then I think he did something else after that. Look at the movie. See that. Just talk to you about stuff. Good dude. So I got it like that motherfucker, you know, Pete, Ruddy, and I think he did something else after that. Look at the movies he did. Look at the movies he did. Jamie, when you got a minute Paul Rudy's films, what was the other question that I asked you earlier? About I asked you to look something up. Yes. Oh my God. What radio station? Is he still doing it? Yeah, it says it. He currently is. Still. Look at that. We got to call him. I think he fought recently. I think he had a fight like within the last couple of years. Denny? This says 2017 for MMA, Box, bare knuckle boxing in 2023. That's it. Yeah. The 104 of his bare knuckle fights. Yeah. Bare knuckle fighting. Dude's a DJ. You have to see veteran. It's a bucket. Let's get some bare knuckle fights in. Oh fucking greatest thought that you could DJ him and go fight somebody on the other side. Crazy. Yeah. And that's life, man. That's just life. That's worth living. You got your money. You get your money. Your money's worth. Yeah. You want to sit at home, be sanitary, whatever. With like, you know, watching TV and you scared. They're going to bomb you. You're done. You got to keep fucking living. That's what you know. Yeah, you got to do things. That's the thing about life. You got to do things. Too many people just sit around wanting to do things and not doing anything. It's hard to get moving though. That's what a lot of people find. They find it's hard to like go out to that club. For that first open mic. Step into that gym the first time. Like D-Rod. Daniel Rodriguez. Did you see that podcast? We talked about how we got arrested in Tijuana. You know D-Rod from the UFC? Yeah. So D-Rod beats Kevin Holland. Right? It goes to San Diego, celebrate and his boys like, let's go to Tijuana. Fuck yeah, let's go to Tijuana. Just go to drink. Have a good time. Just one huge fight. Top 15 UFC welterweight has a ounce of weed in his back. He thinks, well, weeds legal in California, weeds decriminalizing Mexico. Who cares? Maybe I'll bribe somebody. I'll get out of this. It's a federal offense to bring weed in. And even though weeds decriminalized in Mexico, it's not for visitors. It's only for Mexican citizens. Yeah. Bro. How do you got to know that one? Well, one of the things he had to do is become a Mexican citizen. So he's got dual citizenship now. Yeah. He was in jail for fucking eight months, man. Oh my god. Yeah. He was just training in jail. He looks great. He looks great now. But when he got out, he's like, I had no protein. So I'm in there working out every day with fucking eating noodles and potato chips. No protein. No protein. And so he got real thin. Like he showed a photo of him like the day he got out. I mean, the fuck was training every day twice a day in jail. He's like, I'm going to make the most out of this. But it's, he has no food. The food's terrible. So he's fighting waste it away. I think I used to get protein. He couldn't. He tried to get it. He said, you get girls. You get all these different things. He goes, you couldn't get fucking good food in Mexico. In Mexico. Yeah. And he was a cellmate with a cartel guy. The cartel guy took care of him. The cartel guy recognized him. They looked what they carry. Hang on with us. And he just said, I'm going to just keep my nose down and just trained. But he said he got a bunch of guys training with them because they were inspired. They're like, fuck yeah, let's train with D-Rock. So he had all these guys in there. He said, some of them were fucking talented. No presence fun. I don't give a fuck. What everybody tells you. Once you get to your destination and you meet your homies and you create a little thing, it's like anything else. We just can't step out the walls. But you make it happen. I laughed a lot in that, bro. I laughed at you did. Because nobody's funny and prison and black people. I don't give a fuck. What they tell you. They're the true kings of the prison system. And I had the two best. I just had the two best. And you know, sometimes that's what you first did stand up, right? First did stand up just for the end, mate. Yeah, Wednesday, Thursday night. It just talks about shit. Going to movies. They were going to this movie sucked. They'd be like, P.P. 109. You know, we don't want to see fucking Canada in a movie. Get up there, Cuba. And I would just go up there and fuck around. And it was nothing that was, I had the thought about anything. Like, you said something before. Thinking about the first time you went to that open mic. Boy, was that scary for me? Terrified. Took me eight months. I was such a pussy. I'm a college comedy works in Denver every week and every week. I can't. I can't. So he did. I was three minutes. But I don't feel good. And then my ex-wife, God bless her. And what's his, I hate her. She heard me on the phone and she had some mother, the baby sit. And she drove me down and I said, I'm going to be getting off that stage going, how am I going to do this? I'm married with a kid. And three months later she came over. She's like, you're a loser. I don't want to be married to you. You don't want my yes. Holy fuck. You just did me fucking solid. Then she did me shitty afterward. But the point is, she at least got me to that open mic. So I have to be grateful for something that she did. It's the first step's the hard one. What I was saying about D-Rod, the first time he ever went to the gym, his girlfriend got him a membership. She was like, he's because he drove by at a bunch of times. He thought about training. Never went in. He had a bunch of street fights. Never went in. He's like, I think I could do that. And then finally, she's like, look, I got your present. I got your membership. Hold that thought. Can I go pee real quick? Let's go pee. We're at the two hour mark. We'll be right back. We'll be right back. I got a little pee. And we're back. That was a tremendous pee. Oh my God. Is the worst is when you try to concentrate and you have to piss. No, that's the worst. You can't fall. That's the fucking worst. You have to drive and shit and you have to pee. And I'm up to an age. I just pull over. Yeah. So I wait. Whatever. I open up the boat doors. I make believe I'm looking for something. And that dick is out peeing. I pee on the looly field. And then I got, I first surgery. They gave me a handicap's barking. I'm living like a doctor. You don't know what life is until you have handicap parking. You just pull right up. It's always a spot. Always. Yeah. When I got in the mail door, I was happy. And that made me so happy. Fuck walking. When I go to events now in Philadelphia, I just pull up and shit. Put a neck brace. I walk out and shit. Oh, it's been beautiful, Joe. What do you have to do to get worse? The doctor. That's it. So it was like, do you have it after surgery? I get a fee for six months. And then he goes, hold on one second. And he went online. He's like, go, you qualify for everything. You got everything on this list. Everything. Go. And they gave it to me for fucking like three years. Oh, nice. Yeah. I fucking, oh, tremendous Joe. How does it feel right now? You're all right? Yeah. I just, I'll listen. What happens is you do something every week. Like the second week I went, third week I went, a couple weeks I went boxing. And it was good for like three times. And one day I went and I had a plan, twenty for five minutes, eight rounds. On the bag, well, to speed back, but I do the bags and I alternate the bags. Sure enough, round number six, one of the guys comes on and he goes, Joe, let's hit the mitts. I'm excited. You know, he's a young guy. Let's do it. I left there and my fucking leg blew up from that right punch to cross because everything you won't walk into it. You're also moving around with your little brother. You're a little brother. So I said, fuck it. Now I gotta stay in front of the bag. So I learned my lesson. And then last week I went to PT and had motherfucker had me. I mean, I love him. But TJ, this motherfucker had me doing deadlifts, lifts and wall squats with a thing where you're waiting on the back and go. So it's all just just strengthen the muscles. But you have to, you have to strengthen. But I prepped. I listened to you guys. You know, I did everything I could before the surgery. That's what made it easier. Man, a lot of easy. I called you. I was doing shit in five days. I didn't have a cane no more. You know, I was done. I started driving at eight days. Not because I couldn't, but because I was sick and tired of my wife driving me places. And I got, you know, arguing on the right hand of length. No problem. Yeah. Like a motherfucker. Wow. That's great. It was the right foot, which is the accelerated break combo. Yeah. But yeah, I was out of the house. The pain pills were done after eight days that I had to bring them back for PT. They were fucking killing me after PT. So after PT, you pop one, go home, put ice on it, rub it down with the cream and stay off for an hour or two. But that night I take a walk around the neighborhood. You're trying to strengthen this shit. You know, we're talking about outside. Let's see. You're in a hospital for five days. And you eat cereal for five fucking days. You gain weight. You muscle breaks down and goes away like five days staying on an hospital. It could fucking kill you just because again, there's not that much protein. You're not getting 150 grams of protein or that. And you're not moving. And you're not moving. Yes. So that's the big one. I prepped for the surgery. I took all the supplements ways to well tell me everything. Best barine. I took shit. My fucking pisses like glows in the dark at night. Purple, yellow. It's fucking amazing. I did all my PTs or my BPC's 157 or my TB 500. I did them for fucking to the tea like they told me to. And you know, listen, I'm 63 and it's a 63 year old knee. So I'm expecting being the UFC fighting no guarantee next week. But I could walk around and enjoy life with no fucking pain. Or no, it's not pain. It's like you always have an issue. You know it. Yeah. You always have that thing where you need sometimes. It sticks. Well, then you have to do simple shit. You got to get your piece of paper put on the floor and just roll your heel back and forth 20 times and do kicks when you're sitting around. All those things help to me. You get that band and you put it on your leg. You just straighten out your leg. I do that at home. This is shit I do at home. You know, instead of watching TV, it takes 15 fucking minutes. 15 fucking minutes of your time. And I got the bulwark or they sent me a bulwark. What's that? The thing I told you last time about is isometric shit. Oh, okay. So I did the bulwark right there. The dead list at the bulwark. And now I'm fucked because I don't know how to change the strings. So I got to learn how to fucking change the strings. But that's all I was. It was preparing for the surgery. Right. You can't just go in there and not strengthen the little muscles around the area. Yeah. That's it. Yeah. You got to do something. It's very important, especially if you're going to go into surgery. I know a lot of people that have had knee surgery and didn't do that. They won't go to PT. They don't go to PT. But what the fuck as well were you? Yeah. That's, they came listening. I had the surgery Thursday on my house knocking Friday, fucking afternoon. I was home Friday from the hospital. And they said they coming over today. My mother fucking had me going up and down stairs walking outside with the cane getting in out of the tub. He was, I don't even have a tub, I'm walking child, but he was like, I'm going to do everything with you. So it was pretty fucking. Like I said, this surgery was a lot better. The company that I did business with was a lot better. Last time I did a senate state that's like a medical network in New Jersey. I'm bad to have a great facility there, but You know, well, I went to do the surgeon when I could puncture said when you go talk to that guy before the day before the surgery Ask him about the sanitary conditions at the hospital So when I went well, I said hey, what's the sanitary conditions at the hospital? I said I hear rumors and I went for the surgery They prepped me up they gave me everything they gave me the IV they were right about to do that thing I'm gonna go back and he said when I'm doing the surgery, I don't agree with Sanitary I was pissed, but I'm like happy I could have done a doctor didn't agree with the sanitary conditions He came on said oh no, not today. We'll do it next. We got a different hospital Yeah, that's cool. So what were people getting MR. or something something that's the most during the night No, everybody was telling me be careful with the MR. in that hospital Mercers fucking terrifying but the funny thing was he gave me a 20 milligram Akshay which they never gave you that's a strong motherfucker. I forgot I took it. Remember I told you Yeah, I forgot I'm gonna Chinese restaurant. Yeah, let's you know What the fuck is wrong with me? Oh shit, I think that's funny. I was fucked up. I was on that thing So they give it to you before the surgery. Yeah, just one of the precaution. They did that the precocious Yeah, precaution whenever the fucking so you don't wake up in the middle of surgery. Yeah, I don't the fucking scream or like a pussy They do that the epidural the epidural was tough because I felt it in my nut sack Like they give you a couple shots a little shot made me actually go like this Because I felt it on the bottom towards the end of the nut sack not me but they those part Which was the end close to the muffler. I was like this is not boy. They're done. What is the thing they do? I saw this video online about it It's like I think it's called nerve ablation. I might be making that up But they they literally like cut the nerves off when people have back pain like some people with back pain It's like they're in constant nerve pain and they were showing how they just snip the nerves And I was like wait wait a minute. Is that hinder your movement? Like what is what happens there? Is this it? Yeah, so what is that? Radio frequency ablation for back pain management. What does it mean? Like what does that what do they do? Because the way I was looking at online, I'm like it looks like they just cut the nerves a minimally invasive outpatient procedure uses heat to intentionally damaged nerves Carrying pain signals from the spine to the brain primarily provides long-lasting relief for chronic back pain caused by arthritis or facet joint degeneration Wow, but does that mean your back just keeps getting worse, but you don't feel it What happens when you do that duration? Yes Back please the procedure typically takes 30 60 minutes. You could usually go home same day Pain relief is not immediate often takes one to three weeks for the nerve to fully settle relief typically last Anywhere from six to 12 months although it can last for several years for some patients are the nerves permanently destroyed No, the nerves regenerate over time when the nerve grows back your pain may return, but the procedure can be repeated Was the recovery and risks was the risks Complications are rare but include infection Leading at the insertion site temporary numbness or skin irritation. Oh normal stuff Interesting pain that's not man just shut shut off the pain You kind of want to know if it hurts though, no, I would imagine like you're doing more damage if you're If it hurts Right that call it as long you're numbing it right and then it keeps getting worse, but you don't feel Well especially cortisone with cortisone you can only do that so many times for like joints Like it can degrade Tendons and stuff because some people their knuckleheads. They just keep getting cortisone shots next thing you know your shoulder falls apart You don't know yeah, the worst. Yeah, you could tear tears. That's what though let you do if you let them So this is what I'm saying unless you check out what opt listen this 2026 man I'm scared of needles and I tell you half my life. I fucked up because I was scared of needles If I would have just I don't know what it was. I just scared of needles Now I'll fucking take a needle wherever the fuck you want to give it You know what I'm saying like now you can shoot me while I stand it up I don't once you get used to doing peptides needle. Yeah, and those just die better. They don't do fucking Good to stop taking medicine if you don't want to make sense So if you're in pain anyway, yeah, so a success rate is 70 to 85% It's most stressful when the procedure targets the medial branch nerves responsible for facet joint arthritis Success typically refined to find us 50% are greater reduction in lower back pain Better physical function reduced need for pain medication. That's big Because some people they're just to fucking and especially back stuff some people are just in agony every day They wake up and they're just in agony and It's a long road back You know to get in if you have back pain. It's a long road to heal that shit You got to be very very smart about it and you got to stretch That's one thing that a lot of people don't like to do a lot of lower back pain You a lot of that is just everything's tight and you can stretch and relieve a lot of that shit a lot of that Yoga coming in and you don't go anymore I do a lot of yoga things though. I asked. I haven't yeah Well, I still have a yoga room in the studio. I've never used it We got a heated room. We could crank that fucker up to 105 degrees And I haven't done the real light them. I tell you what else I did after the surgery that worked the hyperbaric chamber. Oh, yeah That's I did that twice a week. I still got two delivery covering for recovery. That's fantastic My oxygen level is always low Joe. I got to figure I got to talk to ways to eat tomorrow. Every morning. I wake up 88% you know I'm always in the red zone. I got to because I think lack of oxygen is helping me burn fat a lot of the shit I'm oxygen so 88 some days any fucking five Why would that help you burn fat because how you need oxygen to do everything you need oxygen for a fucking fire So they have low oxygen you burn fat. How can you recuperate? How can you fully recuperate? We know oxygen in your fucking I Think I don't know I'm not sure that's correct, but I think that The more you exercise the more you're gonna get oxygen in your system for sure Well, I'm a bad pain chamber will help but once you're like fully healed up and you can really exercise on a regular base It'll get back to normal Not because I do breath exercise every morning I have to do you have to breathe through your nose like ten times and then hold it and then I take the what do they think is causing it? The low oxygen they don't know no no no no no no no no Find I'm not but I'll take the cord and the clip that you put on your finger put on my ear it gives you better read What's more accurate so far the ear for me I learned that from an old Filipino lady Yeah, the hospital she had all the tricks So I do that I tested you know when I wake up in the morning I have it I check my blood pressure like twice a day It's the best in spending 20 fucking years. I think some of those fit bits can do that shit now Can they do that do they measure oxygen levels? So there's some of those really advanced wearable devices can measure oxygen levels too now I think But this is that real or is it yeah, yeah, they all do they all do that's part of the deal they measure your Heart rate heart rate variable like those wearables with the wrist stuff. Yeah, oh really so I tell you what I got in mind I got Fuck in the mornings. It tells you where and whoop. Yeah, what's that? Yeah, yeah, test oxygen levels No, it has Respiratory rate. I gotta get back on the whoop. It's got I see use it all the time They've gotten they've gotten even better. Yeah, they could this one is a lot better my heart rates good today My oxygen is 91 because I'm here with you then my skin temperatures minus one so it takes all that shit I Yeah, my problem with wearables is all these tattoos So like this Oh, okay, it's reading it now this reads my heart rate. This is a garment It reads my heart rate something now. It's not like it doesn't read through the tattoos very well I have to like move it around Yeah, that's fucking insane. Can't read through the tattoos Because it's the inks in the way doesn't you know, it's it's literally using some sort of a visual System it's like it's light like if a look at the back of the watch There's a there's like a light back there See yeah, I have to say that is flashing beans and then it somehow or another gets information from that and that's how it tells you I'm the same thing. Yeah, so the problem is all these tattoos I thought about like removing my tattoos just around the hole the circle where the watch goes Just like go get it lasered. I might do it because I don't see that anyway Moises no I always have a watch on and so like now speaking about you know burning your nerves I know that shit in that thing that One year I had a fun I still got a fun guy told now But I had the really bad fun guy told out and I saw a thing in group on for a company in studio city that blow toids it with heat For six sessions. Yeah, no, it never worked But I went anyway the lady would put like a mask on Fucking and she looked at my tone like you could see a fucking and as she was burning it you could smell the fungus Burning it smells like dead fucking ass holes and she would be And that would ask a question so she'd have to pull the mask Take a whiff of this fucking fun guy told out All this times I buff it out myself now because nobody will buff it out for me Like I can't take it to a Chinese woman to lose their mind Can you put like anti fungus cream on everything not is to be bit this fungus runs deep This is this is the fungus that brought back from Cuba And it's getting fucking pops up from time to time I get under my tent like it's just the fungus just grows I don't know what I have to eat like some days I eat something and it backfires And I got all these fungus marks. I get all itchy and shit But this bitch Burt that toe for six weeks and every week I asked him more creepy questions She wouldn't have to take that mask off and smell that fungus Doggaw is horrible, but she would walk out. She closed the door like I was like nope And the thing never works. She never burned me once but she was serious of that blow torch And didn't work? No, it did not that I tell you the fungus is too deep So they to get rid of that you have to do a little test to see how strong because the zapping is fucking hard on your body And it's really hot on your liver. So my liver didn't cut it so they can't zap me with that medication Did you hear about that lady who had Alzheimer's? She couldn't talk anymore They gave her five grams of sillside been mushroom and she's singing opera now Also, and she came back. It's I'm already talking They said she hadn't talked in a long time She could remember things. I know for a fact. I got a good buddy mine. They started that was his childhood thing Every time you smoke crack you should have seen that motherfucking not a strut in there. He talks to you straight Paul, you know Paul Stamets the mushroom expert. He's been on this podcast No, he's an illegitimate mycologist like a scientist He had a horrible stutter. He was a kid took 10 grams God God it's unreal people still gone Mushroom is a deadly they're gonna kill you. Fuck you You need to see a devil every once in a while That's what people are they don't see the downside because eating those mushrooms in time to time makes you step out like THC Does and make you look at yourself and make like a judgment call on what the fuck you're doing with your life What are you doing that fucking zen and talk about the same time? Yeah, I don't know. I don't have big enough fucking gums I guess I don't know don't stay there Yeah, it's the real problem is that it's illegal You know what they should do with that you know what they did with Colorado with 39% tax Make mushrooms 100% tax it 100% will still buy People still buy make illegal tax it 100% you know much fucking money they would generate and I guarantee you Well, I was gonna say people wouldn't be doing more mushrooms what they definitely would if you but it'd be good for everybody Listen, I want to ask stalls people from mushrooms is the taste Most people put it in the grinder and they put it in capsules and they do it that way all different That should not be hurt on the way you told me you were gonna get that property a couple years ago But you didn't get I thought you were gonna grow mushrooms out there I get somebody to set up Joe Rogan's mushrooms. Well, I would never be your fucking recipe like no That's that's not legal. I would It's not legal in them federally. That's the problem I mean this is part of what Trump is trying to change with this psychedelics act So all that shit was made illegal in 1970 it was their Nixon administration the controls substance is act if that hadn't happened in 1970 We'll be living in a better world like legitimately we would be living in a better world You'd have way more people having access to this stuff way more people that could get over whatever the fuck Their hurdle is whatever problem they have whatever it is Not for everybody. There's a lot of people that shouldn't do it There's a lot of people that just gets a frantic and that they just need one mushroom trip One push gone one never coming back. There's a lot of people that are hanging on they're hanging on and one edible one mushroom trip one One one one meeting with the devil and they never come back That's true, but those people were already fucked. That's the problem But for the rest of us for the rest of the world Which is like most things like some people eat a Brazil nut they're dead Right some people eat peanuts and they're dead. They have a deadly allergy to peanuts I could eat peanuts all day. Can you look up on many people diarrhea from fucking peanut. It's quite a few come on Yeah, it's quite a few. It's kind of shocking Some why well, here's the really crazy thing a lot of people think it has to do with vaccines They think this is Brett Weinstein's proposal is that when you take that vaccine So there's aluminum in the vaccine that's an irritant right and this is what fires up your immune system And then there's the dead virus or your body develops these four annually give people No Four people for all people go about in the world how many people died about it's four in the world who none of them die anywhere else Food allergies in general response about a hundred deaths Yeah This all made up white people shit. Well, there's a thing people though They just avoid the peanuts, but there are people that if they get peanuts, they'll die Brett Weinstein thinks it has to do with eating peanuts right after you've been vaccinated and that something I don't know if he's right, but something about your body reacting It's the reason why your body creates this antibody to the dead vac the dead virus is in the vaccine You know if you give someone a whatever it is any figure out whatever the disease is you have a dead virus And then you have this irritant and they're so the two of them together your body reacts to this aluminum and it used to be What is the other shit that don't put in it there was? Mercury ethyl mercury and methyl mercury the two different types of mercury they've tried to do that in vaccines But there's problems with that too obviously mercury's toxic so is aluminum But he thinks that if you have aluminum from this vaccine and urine contact with other things at the same time You could develop an arrow analogy for those things whether it's wheat gluten whether it's animals Whatever it is like it's possible he believes to develop an allergy when you get vaccinated And he thinks that's with the rise in vaccines and the rise in food allergies. He thinks those are connected Tell me I should I don't know if he's right if you went to your great your grandfather in the work He's an immigrant and came over and you told me you had a pizza out. You have me times Back in the fucking face Well, he wasn't a violent man. It was a good story. I know what the fuck bein it. He would make fun of it I could only find this every fucking day do pine nuts. I'm a I was loyal to maple syrup Well, the idea being allergic to bread back then was preposterous first of all He would get bread like every two days. They would go down to the local Italian bakery and buy Italian bread It's the only bread everybody ate in the house It's so funny like I didn't even appreciate it back then Like when I'd have a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, I'd be like why are they giving me on this bullshit thick bread? Because you got to cut the bread. Yeah, you know, I'd be like give me some fucking white bread like a real person Well some wonder bread. That's what I wanted when you're a kid. You won't wonder Peanut butter and jelly sandwich on a what like I get whole wheat. I'd be like what is this? What is this terrible fucking shitty brand filled wheat with all the the fucking chunks of wheat That's it fuck out of here with your whole wheat bread. I hated it Now I love it now. It's the only like if I see like regular white bread Shoulders that bread that your grandfather was getting yeah in whole bulk and then Newark Yeah, who blocks away? They were old school Italian people They made everything in the 70s and 60s with all the shit that said now. I remember the bags Yeah, white back there. Pippin back Yeah, and the the fresh ice and grace and fucking great with pieces When you dip it in the red shot you go fuck crazy So good with butter you put butter on that bread and you dip it in that pasta sauce. Holy shit. I'll stop eat month Right, that's my favorite dish muscles with spicy Because you need to loaf a bread. I can't my body can't fucking do that no question with the red sauce. Oh No, for bread. Oh, I'll go through the whole with the butter You know I said I can't eat muscles. No, I love muscles. I got a Rudy's I got some muscles that big there's a fucking Chick six looks like a six-foot woman's clip there's that fucking big good muscles You think I'm Kenya these fucking clip muscles when I go to other restaurant You get a little muscles and you got a couple big ones. No, no, no, they give you nine big chick gorilla raised fucking pussy clips They put a little sauce on it so good Makes me go fucking there's a tight place that I used to go to I like Thai food and they had muscles and big fucking spicy muscles. They were huge So good. Oh not the Thai place every took me Place to go to TIE food and they had muscles and big fucking spicy muscles. They were huge So good. Oh not the type place Eddie took me to the one next to the fucking 10 planning on La Brea. Oh, yeah. I went in there with anyone. I already ate Thai food. Eddie took on my lunch. I'm broke You don't like Thai food? I went in there. It was Anton the wall Like what the fuck but I like The one that you took your shoes up. They had the best shrimp party in the country He took your shoes off. Yeah, there's one on sunset right across the comic book store Toy oh toy time. Yeah, I played the gym. The solid play The best place ever was what's the place next to the left factory Greenblasts don't know that was a great joint. I tell you this story I mean there were a Ralphie male in day and he gets a roast beef sandwich And he's eating a roast beef and I could see the answer on his arm And he opens it up and his answer all of a sandwich listen to me call the waiter The waiter still charges a faffa sandwich Like he's like I pay shit this motherfucker had answer. I didn't even eat the other one the answer Are this fucking arm Joe they weren't in the sandwich? They were on the sandwich too. Oh, so it was just all over the place We're all over the place greenblasts greenblasts which I'll stoolie that I don't I don't even think it's that I only ate there a few times which is weird because it was right next door to the lab factory It was good too. I kind of stopped going to the live factory after a certain point It was a certain point in like the 2000s from like I think I'm done with this place And I was mostly at the store. Yeah, I like the lab factory I was like at the store. I love the improv still. I always did the improv still But the lab factory to me was like there was something about it that was like sterile There was something about it. Not a bad thing, but it was like very much like a lot of people Got TV deals out of the lab. That was a big thing every kind of comedy You know it was uh the store was the dream You know the lab factory was nice and everything But it was also like remember Scott day He would discourage we tried to scourge you from going to the lab factory It's like you're a comedy store comic. You know I've gotta come on. We're listening man I gotta go up everywhere. I can't I'm developing I can't be just limiting myself to one of those. That's why you like I developed better at the store Well this thing about the store too You got three totally different environments You got the belly room environment, which is like very intimate very small 70 people And then you got the OR which is the gritty That's that's the psycho pass at 11 30 on a fucking Tuesday night And then you got the main room, which is the big show There was so much offer. You can always hit the main room till the last five years I just couldn't get the formula for it But the original room I knew it like Everything the original room you're locked into a little rock into it And yes, and then the play piano and the whole fucking thing The main room was big big stage big crowd. It was big ceiling. Everything was big. It was different It was a different kind of a show. Remember the first time I showcased for Jamie's like man What are you doing here? You belong in Las Vegas man in a show room You know that way comic That's hilarious Jamie always had the craziest ideas for people But he at the end he was a really good guy at the end of the day he really tried hard Well, he loved comedy. Yeah, he loved all those people were very nice You know, I just went to Nashville for the comedy festival I ended up doing the old osprey. You know that theater that what's name of the theater? Grand old osprey. Yeah And it was great, but the great thing about that that everybody from the improv is still last night I saw people that were there for 25 years And we just would drop in stories Aaron The guy Hartman Hartman looks great. He's a big peptide guy big everything guy. It was a Nashville Joel from Florida You know when you get to see those guys and you're like wow, we've been in this shit together For I told Aaron I met Aaron in Irvine Then she came to Hollywood and I was like psych because she gave us an 11 o'clock show and she was pregnant Hot she used to wear the farmer those things that overall the overall She was so high still telling when I talked to I always talk Aaron you sexy savage always fucking tormentor But it was really nice to see them and What we didn't you know, Harman me told the story when I told him I was gonna bang his head Off the wall, you know just laziness that look at us now We're all in there having a great time 20 years ago. We were always at war With one of you guys we cursed too much, you know, we're talking about what I got fired. We're Pablo And then he found out I wasn't doing coke and he felt really bad, you know, so It was uh, it's just great to see what we've been through together and now after everything you like fuck I was there to fucking my Joel started That was in Miami right? It was on Miami 98 New Years of 99. That's crazy. And Madonna came in with Chris fucking rock Wow To watch somebody new years Eve. I forget who the fucking was But yeah, that's you look at those people like we took the ride with kids We were fucking kids together. And also you have to think like imagine having to Employ you Imagine being a businessman and you got to employ you in 98 God bless him not good God bless him Darmament the improv really liked me and I fucked them over like two thousand seven guy the original guy a coconut grove The guy I liked the party. I forget his name now rich Jeff Give me a minute. Yeah, the original guy. Yeah crazy. It was fun crazy Really from Cleveland. He lived in Cleveland Like the party and his wife hit the lottery for a million of them people didn't realize how nutty coconut grove was That was the nuttiest improv that improv we would go out afterwards and have Cuban coffee and he Cuban sandwiches I've got two o'clock in the morning. You're gonna go have a news thing Yeah, it was open until five and it closed for an hour of stories Yeah, and you could drink till all night. Oh, yeah, so they closed from five to six Whatever booze you're out on the table You could keep so you would take give me like eight beers And then they would open up again at six and you're right there. Hey They close for one hour Oh, come five in the morning Remember one night you were on Conan O'Brien This is 97 right no you did somebody's late show. Okay. It was the week that our friend gotcha Oh, the heartman apartment that you can't believe I remember him. I'm just telling you that I don't know shit Look up the dates when Martin got shot you were on that show like you with me all weekend And I stayed and then you went to New York to shoot that and then that weekend apartment, you know But I'll never forget I was involved in the threesome When you were on that talk show And I'm it's a chubby chick and a hot chick and with snutting Coke I'm trying to eat ass and I'm looking at you. I go pull on put on NBC. So I go watch Joe And I'm watching you as I'm trying to tackle these two animals. I'm like Who the fuck gonna believe this? Chubby chick got up. She's like you didn't want to be with me anyway. You always wanted a hot chick and slammed the door was a full night Cocaine down But all that shit you see these people now you're like, we all went through it together Yeah, we all went through it together What a great fucking thing to have at this time in your life that we all Wore here You know, fuck him really nice man to make you Go wow this comedy life was worth every fucking penny. I got into it It's a fun ride when you look back and you think like imagine when you first starting out Imagine that it would turn out this way You'll never imagine it and then you look back at what a fun ride What an extraordinarily fun life I'll never forget you had a pin down from the beginning. I never even told you this One of my I got to LA like January 97 on that summer like August Nope, no, that's Cleveland improv One of my ami too. Oh, no, what's the manager? No worries. Thank you. We go Something pinned down manager What a fucking house we were talking about Oh Never imagining They looking back on this life like When you first started. Oh never imagine turn out this way You said some about me once that was right. I always love the podcast, but you're talking to something You know, I remember when that guy first came on the scene. He was scary. Yeah, let's jack it and all this shit He was fuck wild You know, I just got tell hey, and I I do a couple spots. Uh, the guy is at my my first town coordinate at the improv set to me Would you like to work or buy it? I don't know and I go yeah, he goes. I got an MC spot go do it next week My first time I go down and I had a crazy girlfriend then with all the teeth. Oh, yeah And this motherfucking head shaft comes up to me and her and he goes hey She's got the same mouth as Gina Davis a nice cock suck of mouth That's my first week in an ever And at first I took it kind of weird now after the show I went up to him and I go hey man What a fuck do you think you all say something? I thought he was what are you doing? If you go at me, you'll never work on improv again I just kicked them in the fucking stomach as hard as I could they call me the next day Joey come on man. I kicked them the guy fell apart all of a sudden. He wasn't a tough guy No, I was just so pissed. How can you say that to somebody's fucking girlfriend to a face? I just fucking front kicked them and I had him somewhere in the stomach. He was holding on I'm all an arm and call fucking arm. I don't give a fuck I'm ever getting the cargo and Joey you can't let the old Joey get them away man This is not good. You should have just walked away, but no why would I walk away fuck that shit? That was the problem a lot of people walk away from that shit And you just lost you just became a Hollywood asshole When you say fuck you they'll respect you fucking more you lay and they did they ended up giving me more work So is that guy still there when you went back? No, he was like a cute cook that thought he was cute like he orange county Wasn't gonna get smacked. I don't give a fuck who you are. I fucking kicked that mother fuck I didn't give a fuck Jack. I was so buck wild at the store in the beginning when I hit the kid in the head with the microphone And then they came and got me in La Hoya and I took the pool cute the pool member they had that pool table in La Hoya the bumper They had a bumper pool table in La Hoya, right? So these guys kept threatening me the other one come game So I got I became fucking Chuck Norris and corner silence. I took all the pool balls and I put on different places So I had to throw them at him as a weapon When I hit all the fucking pool queues, you're gonna see call this islands That's the sense of gao stole it from him in that fucking Bobby loop on movie, but that was sick That was Chuck Norris when he was full of bag with Both pool queues and hit you in the head with it and the pool hall with the Columbians Doug and that motherfucker. I saw them. I was sitting outside the comedy door La Hoya storming at that little bench Facing the Chinese restaurant. You don't remember La Hoya no more And I saw them at the light and they made the turn and I took one of those walls and I kept it right here And they pulled up and took water pistols out and I fucking took that ball and through with everything I hit that car and all sudden the fucking car went boom These motherfuckers took off Jack Code of silence. I remember this because this was like the first like real movie movie That like got respected by it wasn't just a karate movie. It was a movie that was about like an undercover cock movie, right? Yeah, I'm gonna get the Columbia But it was the fighting part was just part of it But it wasn't that it was you know it was just a karate movie like most of his other movies were just karate movies or You know, they were kind of campy like missing in action. It was a lot a lot of it based on the karate. This was oh We got hit by the pool ball Oh, they jump them It's a terrible movie I thought it was a shit back then dog, but it's so when you watch it now You like this is the corny as fights eat a bomb. These guys would overwhelm him Listen man Good man where black Chuck Norris had a couple movies where he showed his shit. This was not one Walker Sheriff Marsha was not one okay with the wig the push-up still on Channel 89 That wasn't him I love Chuck Norris, but Chuck Norris made some good movies early on that were dark That's why nobody talked about good men. Black. What's the other one? Yeah, oh, yeah You forget about all this good men good guys were black 1978 Wow How many fucking people did this guy get in the martial arts? Like how many people because of Chuck Norris movies wind up doing martial arts of fucking shit load I got into tanks who know because of him Because he was one of the first tanks who go guys, and he split They made his own thing or whatever the fuck So it's kind of amazing when you think about how many karate guys didn't make it Like how many guys Didn't become karate movie stars and Chuck Norris did how many of them were there? How many karate guys wanted to be movie stars and couldn't figure it out and he did So I saw every martial arts film made in the 70s even when the black exploitation the movie was called three the hard way Jim Brown Jim Kelly and the other really good black looking about Jim Kelly Kelly was trying to break into that thing There was a lot of movies and then after Bruce Lee died the whole thing opened up. Yeah, jet lie jet loose lie you had all these fucking bruises and that despite that was the end of it, but I was notorious I want to see all those fucking movies growing up Billy Jack Remember Billy Jack Indian. Oh, yeah, I remember I remember the black hat. I remember the whole You face all this shit, you know, they even had a white woman dude be of Marshall everybody Chinese black everybody played fucking Kung Fu Everybody and that movie called a silence is Dennis Purinas What was first movie? He says yeah, he's a psychic in that movie Fucking you just you know people forget how many Kung Fu movies or Marshall our base movies to actually made in the 70s Fuckin unreal. Oh, yeah, I'm in the shit that was getting sent here from China It's like a kid porn. They would just send in the area weekend Fucking Chinese people beating up on Chinese people jumping remember the more they got old the like by 70s Bruce died in 73 by 76 There was movies at the guy like I think a gold Wait like time two tons and he would throw it up the hill and then jump and catch it on top of the hill Come on now you lost me the one arm swordsman you lost me, you know the guys got one arm You know those love those come for boys. They were completely forget about black people like recreate like you know When people talk about Bruce Lee, it was a sensational cultural fucking Phenomenon when you have and the people that think about all the people he opened up to Marshall art movies and Marshall Watch in general me. Oh, yeah, Chuck Norris was the second half of it You know Bruce was the first Chuck Norris was the second and I hate to admit it you have seized a third big wave of that That yeah, you know, nobody goes to karate number Okay, how many karate schools you got it's the kids 10 they make them hit a paper You know the gunner's you did so school. Yeah. They wanted all the men school. So yeah, it's changed the culture is changed You know in 73 everybody went to a Wing Chun Kung Fu Yep, you taught judo you became a Wing Chun dude now because you weren't gonna give me no money out of judo Nobody was doing judo back then you had to go to Brooklyn to get some bad classes number so bad Yeah, the French yeah, you had to go to Brooklyn in those days New York had everything But then went like our friend the one who does the MMA podcast with you Matt Sarah Matt Sarah got into Jiu Jitsu you would have to go from Long Island All the way to like close to Philadelphia It'd be three hours on Sundays Jiu Jitsu wasn't everywhere yet Well, he got into it. He would have to travel. I think he told the story when these podcasts He would have to drive to Jersey just on Sundays They just did Jiu Jitsu on Sundays because that's all I was available Now you got a Jiu Jitsu school whatever you fucking call him who's that because of that's because of UFC man It just blew it to fuck right open. So who knows I may be wrong No, I think you're right I'm sure the UFC opened up for Brazilian Jiu Jitsu hoist Gracie hoist Gracie winning the first UFC's that opened up Brazilian Jiu Jitsu all over the country saying what the fuck is this? Yeah, it was a completely new I mean there was no Brazilian Jiu Jitsu in America You never even talked about it. I did martial arts my whole life. I never even heard of it You heard of it, but I don't even know so far off to you. I barely even paid attention to it It was like you could have been anything and then all sudden the UFC came along. It was like oh my god That's the thing that everybody needs to learn That's what's wild now. It's like how many people trained martial arts in comparison to like 50 years ago It's not there's no comparison there's way more people that know how to fight now than like ever before and ever before At least they know how to Neutralize somebody Well a lot of people are training now Wait, but there's way more people who listen to neutralize people anybody who studies Jiu Jitsu ain't got a bullet Okay, they're gonna neutralize on the street We're gonna do break your fucking show down the street. They try neutralize you hold you down a take a breath relax Don't swing at me cuz I'll break this fucking arm. Do you ever see the video Matt Sarah? I think it was in Atlantic City and Might have been Vegas somewhere in a casino some drunk guy has caused problems and Matt winds up taking him down and mounting him until the cops come He's just holding on to the guy just sitting on the guy hold out there. It is The guy swinging look at Matt like you've got a literal Brazilian Jiu Jitsu world champion And he's just mounting you laughing like you think about picking on the wrong guy He's just all that I mean the guys completely helpless. I Don't remember the whole story behind this like it was a cure to go. I was like relax I got this guy and I both know Matt could name kick him in the face and get up and leave he get literally This is what I'm telling you did you do that atmosphere doesn't teach you to do that Just hold you down a little mate. Please not to the proof. You know, no catch your breath. He's laughing He's a world champion. I mean I don't know if he had been the UFC champion by that time But you know what? You can borrow somebody on the street and break their shoulder now. You have to live I know Jiu Jitsu people take it down like the bounces. Yeah, they just neutralize you Okay, so that's way past the time that he won the title. Yeah, that's hilarious That's that's very funny that poor guy imagine like knowing that guy could have killed you and he was just so nice All he did was hold your wrist and sit on your child's phone Both have a good time. He's like hey somebody got me a water or something guys literally helpless He has no fear whatsoever that guy hurting him, you know, it's like it's like a child It's like your little child's having a temper tantrum like come on. It's Matt's error. It's funny There's so many dummies out there This is part of the problem in this world. It's hard to get your shit together so many people just stumbled through life Just never getting their shit together for my friend last night. She has like a cooking shop on YouTube Honest I'm Tony Joey My mother would watch and these people would say Like the weirdest like you know everything show me a touch show me a pussy. You can't cook bitch I think you're like, you know, how much longer am I gonna take this shit? People are so hard fucking horrible I'm here today, you know, young girl looking good. I tell you I had a cancer the fucking thing She was doing like a workout a cooking thing. She does not I just play with my cats That's him people love cats Because that's it, but it's impossible The shit is so many animals out there and they're out there. They don't give a fuck and they say shit It's also the zero consequences for saying horrible shit And they're trying to get a rise out of the other people in the comments too So they're trying to say outrageous shit so that other people react to it so that you'll read it you'll react to it You know, it's the dumbest fucking thing ever It is I was thinking this last night It's kind of a crazy thought But you know everyone is addicted right now to social media and addicted to going online and just addicted to content You're constantly getting content you're constantly interacting with your phone And this is a very new thing right it's within the last 20 years. This is happened to people This is like prepping us for what's coming next We're gonna look back on these days and we're gonna realize Oh the addictions to the phones the addictions to staring at the screens and checking your email and looking at YouTube and looking at Instagram and looking at Twitter That's just preparing you for you being completely connected to electronics forever This is like the early stages of it I was thinking about it last night while watching this television show. I'm watching this crazy show It's called from have you seen this show? It's nuts by the guys who made lost One of the dudes that's in the lost is the main star of it It's fucking great show like really good show like very unpredictable twisted just like loss like crazy show But these people stuck in this town they can't get out it's impossible to get out But I was thinking while I was watching this I was like why why is everyone because no one has a phone there and everyone's just locked into this place I was like your phone is preparing you the addiction to our phones are preparing us to the next stage Of what life is gonna be like as a person This is just the gate the phones are the gate But what's coming next you're gonna Reminisse about the days of the phone. Oh, you remember when we had phones We had to look things up. Yeah, a little thing you got to charge it. Man when you had to charge it That's how we're gonna be we're moving into some weird new area They're building these fucking data centers everywhere And everyone's like oh, this is sort of well great like what is that? What are you doing? Why are you building these things that need to be powered by nuclear reactors? Why do you why you building these things that are sucking up all the fucking water? Why are they putting these things out in the middle of the desert? Biggest fucking five-foot ball fields huge fucking giant buildings Filled with computers like what the fuck are we doing? And the gates is this goddamn phone this phone is the gate Where we're opening up the door. It was killing kids. No, I'm gonna take it. My daughter can't watch a whole movie Dev no attention span good 40 minutes and she has to leave and then she'll start it from the next day I had to watch Garface film. You had her watch our face Yes, we watched we do experimentals at the house We did the fight club we do all action so she said that I always only watched the apartment He shoots the Brother-in-law, you know, that's the only part of it. It's always on when I come down I go I want to watch them beginning she enjoyed it for a little while I went upstairs After one scene. I'm there. I can't watch this again. She goes. I'll stay up Two days later mother goes. Did you see the review she wrote on it? I don't know she goes take a look at it. She's like I enjoyed the movie I was a fan because it was Cuban American But then as the movie rolled on and I figured these Cubans don't know how to treat women Smack them and she went on for me She didn't fucking like that. Oh, she's like I know my dad's Cuban, but Jesus Christ. They saw me to their women That's like drag like that's gonna. Oh, but that's okay days She said she goes that gave men a different fucking thing. I know mercy. I was 40 fucking years ago Not only that you dealing with the people that were the criminals of Cuba that were kicked out of Cuba They made their way to America like this is not normal people. No, no Another about to let the second half out What are they doing to Cuba right now? They're not surviving they don't have any power no gasoline it's funny because every couple days I get an algorithm Wish just promoting Cuban videos Cuban videos people in Cuba get that had kids going to work out Job they took them to like this little place Everything had papers on it. They didn't pull ups Sit-ups with the head the pipes were broken. You got to see these fucking kids doing full workouts What we wouldn't even look at Their body weight workouts, you know They talking they they go around by redarrow and the interview people and I don't know what this is doing I don't know what this is doing because we're two years away from Cuba being legit They're gonna go back down there after this whole thing goes or all whatever Whatever they decide they can't get fuel from Venezuela. How am I gonna take? I mean they're not gonna be happy today. I have a Starbucks in Cuba So what happened was they were getting their oil from Venezuela, right? We took over Venezuela We cut off their oil cut them off and so what is the United States trying to do with Cuba right now? They're trying to get rid of the communist government. They're trying to well They're gonna they charge roe Castro with something recently. That's the beginning this gonna end up with a Daily Dells brothers you want to wake up one day and on a They are in Cuba pulling people out and doesn't China and Russia have a relationship with Cuba is not a problem Not really because they're not paying that bills. That's why Cuba started When they had Russia Russia was fucking doing everything but then then in need of them when they cut them off I think there's they do small trades for sugar. It is kind of crazy for the United States to have an enemy That's 90 minutes offshore in a boat Trump administration said on 2026 May 20th indicted former Cuban president Rho Castro for murder based on the downing of two planes near the Cuban coastline in 1996 it killed four people as a historian of Latin America and US foreign Policy I believe the indictment may be the prelude to a direct US Cuban at the beginning This is a KELOLAND A young from UMass Amherst Before Castro the last US indictment of a Latin American leader occurred in January of 2026 that's the Venezuela thing since January US has ended the flow of Venezuelan oil to Cuba and has economic and military pressure to prevent other nations for trading with the island Trump recently threatened a friendly takeover of Cuba I believe what's missing from most recent analysis of this situation is the history of US aggression against Cuba His essential context for understanding the Trump administration's recent escalations Yeah, what's the end date you they come for you just a matter of time Like the senator starving the country we walk up yet They just then they'll come up with a solution. Here's your solution I'm shooting you leadership. I'm telling you there's a shooting a tune cube every night. You was not getting There's no power there's no electricity They have roaring really cool and that was yes Yeah, so they just fucked him they're doing everything they can Jimmy's is was the biggest one and over 150 years. Oh my god. Yeah, so everything is looking like right now That's it. They can survive this Fuck so so what happens to those people? They just wait this out or the United States and we have to think it no resources No supplies you got two things in Cuba. You have people that don't know You never watched that 30 for 30 without doke when they won the championship and they said people in New York We're throwing toilet paper and the wife was grabbing it saying in Cuba. This is gold Why are you throwing away toilet paper? We have no toilet paper in Cuba. That's some entirely so 50% of those people have been brainwashed To the where they you know every day there's a bull on When those days, but I feel tough, you know when the communists whatever they call each other. Yeah, comrades We're winning the war. We're getting close. You know what I mean? I'm getting closer. I'm down on 18 I was walking on a 170 Yeah, we're getting closer to a victory so they're getting sick of that shit They say the bugs that land on you at night are fucking just atrocious these but you know that real fucking bugs on that island Not to mention they all have syphilis Cubans have if I think half my fungi tornado is syphilis because It smells like it you don't say but only a fucking not jokey thing The cube has got two weeks left two weeks from today And so you think they're gonna invade you gotta go invade take my door take roll out and then what do you got? You're gonna install some new Remember a couple months ago. There was a shooting in Cuba of a boat You remember that right right Jamie? Some people out there fishing and the Cuban Navy shot him What like three months ago. Oh, yeah, this is why they shoot. I don't know. They were investigating it Cuba hands our weapons to citizens and tell them You've been maybe shot him? What? Like three months ago? Oh yeah, this is a good issue. I don't know. They were investigating it. Cuba hands out weapons to citizens and tell them prepare for invasion. Holy fuck. Holy fuck. That's June 7th. That's Sunday. Sunday. Holy fuck. Which will we survive? That distributing weapons to its citizens in fear of a US invasion. The report really started handing out weapons to civilians as the government urges population to prepare for a potential US invasion reports from South American publication. Version final stated against the backdrop of the deployment of American military power near the island. The government of Havana began distributing weapons to citizens officially urging them to prepare for an imminent foreign invasion. What if the citizens use that weapon to take over the country? Which they should do. That's what they fucking should do. Just call the fucking risk. That's kind of crazy risk. It started handing out guns to people. Like I said, man. People all sudden your population is armed and you're telling them what to do. And they don't have any money and you don't have any money either. Look a man. When I started doing okay, I contacted my sister. I offered her a free ticket out of Cuba. Money. Whatever I got to happen is yours. You're my blood. You know? Right. I don't know if I can do that. Okay. Why don't we do this? When I fly to Jersey, you go to your mother's grave. You go see where her house was, her way of life. And then I take it back. You told me I can never do that because I'm married to one of the Dels guys. I don't even want to go to United States. Oh, Jesus. So she was so brain. And at that the latch, you were still my sister, but I couldn't help her. Well, you're used to what you're used to. Yeah. And that's where you get a big chance of coming to America. And it's what it was. Not knowing where you're going to eat or how you're going to live and where you're going to get money. Are you going to work? They got programs for all those people. They got churches, Cuban people have churches, they're Catholics. There's also a thing where you if you leave Cuba, I think there's it's a cleaner path to get to become United States citizen. Right. You're fleeing. Yes, it is. I think so. Yeah. Something like that. It's a clean for a dictatorship for a community. A dictatorship. Fuck, dude. It's just like what are they going to do about that? And then you got to we're talking about Vegas. What's going to happen? Vegas with Cuba reopening. What do you mean? They're going to put gambling back down. You know the Americans going to put gambling back down. They're in the grocery stores already with the habres. Already. They're talking. Turning to a resort. A location. They're not going to rip down the architecture. That on original architectures will make Cuba and the cars and shit. But also some town else. But I know America knows this. Those oceans of booby trap up to a mile out of Cuba. There's a ton of shit that they have. Booby trap. Minds. All that shit. They planted those during the Bay of Pigs invasion. Look at this. About 1957. 1957. Back when the mob ran it. Look at everybody dressed impeccably. They would go there with flip-flops. They know nothing. They loved it back then. They loved going to Cuba. People would go there, live it up. And sex was free and cheap. And you could fuck a chicken those days. You'd get fucked in the ass by a guy who would be amazing. Dog, it was unreal. That's why the whole point of Canada and all that was for them to get Cuba back, the Italians. They were making too much money on the Cuba. And now they want to start to put drugs on there and shit towards them when they took it down. Cuba's been fucking riddled with bullshit for years. Every bad luck that they have, they created in the 50s and 40s because it was a sex heaven. Americans would go down there on a Friday and not come back. And you know, whatever cost here, 8,000 will cost you $80 to get you dicksuck with three days and fed people rubbing your feet and shit. Castro revolution had a major effect on Las Vegas. Look at that. Close your off of anacacinos. spurred exodus to the desert. Wow. Frank Mears. Well, especially people in the, who? Frank Mears father. What do you mean Frank Mears father? Frank Mears father was a casino. So that's how he ended up in Vegas. Oh, Frank, like you said, Frank Mears mother. Frank Mears father was a casino dealer in Cuba. Cuba closed down. He went right to Vegas. So why those people went right to Vegas? Wow. Really interesting shit. That is interesting. It makes sense. Because those are the two places. And if you're on the East Coast, the trip to Cuba is easy. Which 30 minutes? Like going to Florida. 30 minutes. It is what you and your wife would do on a weekend. How far is the flight from New York City to New York City to Florida? It's what? An hour? Three. Three hours? Yeah, because Trump is down there now. So they go a different way now. No, you go straight to Fort Lauderdale, old Miami. You've got to go outside that range of these. What do you used to be? Two. Two. Two. Two. Two hours. So New York City to Cuba is only an extra half hour. That's it. So like less than three hours. Three hours you'll be on the end. So it's basically the same as Vegas then. Yeah. It's the middle. To middle. But you have the, you're on an island. It's a resort. Nobody knows what's going on. It's beautiful. You know, I told you that. My mother would tell me all those Hollywood stars would hide in Cuba, especially when you're in the kitchen. They would go, that's when they would suck. They're gonna wake up. Rockhuts and that makes sense. All those Hollywood people would go to Cuba, locked themselves in. There was no TMZ and there was no press. Right. You know, these people in Cuba don't have a new, you know, how they're gonna get the pay. And everything's run by the mob. Yeah. It's like just all sin and vice. Whenever you got a minute, you run, you read that event and not turn. That book. What is it called? The Vannanok turn is the revolution from three different places. You're in city in New Jersey, New York City and Miami. And no, no, no, that might New York City Tampa. And now those three cities were like involved in that hole. What do you think is gonna happen to Cuba? If you had a guess. If I had a guess, come on. I'm already seeing dollars. If you're a casino right now with how bad casinos are doing here, you're looking at that right there. You're looking at the- You're not an octurn. How the mob owned Cuba and then lost it to the revolution. Yeah. Excellent, but actually. And so that was Kennedy trying to get rid of the mob. That's why they- Well, when the mob put, listen, can these father went to Chicago? And he talked to those people. They had the pool. If you live in Chicago or where else, you win the primary. I don't know how it works. John, I'm not a political guy. Well, they definitely helped Kennedy get into- Right, they helped Kennedy get into office. But then when he got into office, he didn't help other people. They didn't help out. They didn't help out. And the brother doubled time, and then they started shooting, and they were like, I don't know who shot Kennedy's. I'm just saying this. Well, the mob definitely didn't like him. They were very upset. They cut into that pocket. And he helped the mob help them get into office in the first place. Right. And then once they got in, they started prosecuting people and like, hey, let me fuck them with the- The bay pecs. When he pulled off air support. That's a last one. And he didn't know that they were going to do this. And then when they told him about it, he denied air support. And air support was critical to the success of the mission. Absolutely. And Operation Mongus, Robert Kennedy spearheaded his secret government project to topple the Cuban Communist regime, working parallel to the CIA's mob assisted efforts. But this is after the revolution, right? This was when Fidel was running Cuba. Right. They were trying everything they'd do to kill fucking Fidel. They were doing everything they'd do. This after- So what spurred the Cuban takeover of the military's taken over of Cuba? Mob bosses like Sam Jean Conner and Santo Trofacante recruited to help eliminate Castro using methods like poison pills. Mafia wanted to castro gaunts. They could reopen their multi-million dollar Cuban operations. Wow. I thought it was with money. Wow. Paid money. Untrasable. Untrasable. Nothing. And you're over there living the life. Nobody knows not in my last key. He even fucking Cuban food every day. They probably had it all set up. It was nice. And then the revolution came. It was Cuba food every day, fucking my last soul. What did the people think? The people think that these mob motherfuckers they've taken over our country. Let's let Castro come in and we'll be socialist and everything will be great. Or did they just get taken over? They got taken. What happened was Castro went in there. But Tester was horrible. But Tester was fucking no better than Castro. So when Castro took over, it was to take over Tester and make Cuba a bubble in the conglomeration, he became a communist somewhere along the line. And then when he took over Cuba, that's when he shut the casino. He destroyed the fucking casino. And then the Italians got mad. They all came back. And then they were just, they thought it was going to be temporary. Now this is going to be temporary. We'll clean over this. So for years, Italians were just watching a move, waiting for somebody to kill fucking Castro. It was the Italians. And then when they thought that the United States was going to go in there and invade, they were like, oh, good. We're all set. I wish there was more film from those days, so people could see, like my mother explained things to me. I wish she was still alive because I got that. Like she said, the Italian food was different in Cuba. She goes first of all, the pizzas had lobster on them and shrimp already back then in the 50s. They were making us to, because she didn't like the pizza in the United States. She goes not the same. They put fresh shrimp from the fucking ocean lobster, all these other things. They got these pies now in New York. I'm scared to try them. I can't. They put calamari on the pizza. How fat can you get? How fat do you want to be? You got these pizza plates in Jersey dog. It's like, ziti, a pound of ziti on a slice of pizza. There's pizza places in Jersey that are just going off. And the sandwich places in Jersey? Oh, your boys. Your boys going off. Oh, Giovanni, but that's white planes. That's phenomenal. Not like Italian delis on the East Coast. There's nothing like that. That smell like that cheese that you walked in and the fucking olives and shit. Oh, it's insane. Unbelievable. Unbelievable. They're too much pizza. They're just too much. You know, it's funny. When I moved down, like I'm scared of game weight, the pizza. I eat one slice a week, maybe. Maybe. Since I had the knee surgery, I've been doing a podcast at the house. So I've been ordering pizza from this one place and my buddies go crazy. That's the best pizza we've ever had. It's thin, sweet red sauce. Oh, yeah. Extra cheese, you burn it. It's fucking thin. Oh, my God. The sweet red sauce. God, they know how to make pizza on the East Coast. And they try out here. They do a pretty good job out here. They try. It's just not the same. It's something. Same as the sandwiches. There's some good Italian sandwiches out here. They're pretty good, but they can't fuck with like Giovanni's place. Oh, Giovanni sent me two shipments that were. He's the best. I had to give half of it away. I know. I know. He sent you so much. Fuckin' so. I mean, he's a fucking dryer. He's a whore. The cheese is incredible. And the cookies. He's fucking cookies. He's fucking cookies. He's a fucking wibebrow. Yeah. You know, and that's everywhere. Like I just thought, yeah, fucking around. Like, well, when I go to these cohesives, I assume I'm gonna take you to this place. Which place? You've took me to El Nito. That was phenomenal. El Nito now is co-host take house. Whatever. What's the steak house now? Yeah. Is it great? They fucked me up a couple weeks. I went in there five tonight. I've been there three weeks in the row with big party. And then my wife went to another friend once. I go in there one there five times. Like when we get to 14 house, what a fucking beer. And they're like, we're closed. They ain't nobody in here. You can't make another steak. Now we're closed. Not even nine. No reason to go back. That's a bummer. That's the people want to go home. Yeah, I don't give a fuck. It's a steak. You guys have, there's nobody in here. The bar is cute in there. Nobody's ever in there. They got a male bartender. They got a blonde with big tits. You can just take the fuck up. You got a little Spanish guy. That's a great guy. But I go to this place now. They had on the special three weeks ago. You ready? Stuff's out. With lobster meat. Ooh, at a cotton sign. Oh. I think it gives you five of them to tray. Oh, chill. What's this place called? Osterea. Where's it at? Marlboro. This is my spot. Yeah. I go there because the dude will do whatever I ask him to do. Like, he'll, he has a menu. But then he'll go, Joey, have you tasted my Italian fried rice? You're like, what are you talking about Italian fried rice? And he makes risotto with lobster and shrimp fried rice. So he's going to add it. He's got a new restaurant opening. So he lets me sample everything. He makes a cheesesteak to die for, with the bread with the seeds on it. Oh, yeah. There's a little semolina bread. Oh. Osterea. There it is. Oh, that looks good. Yeah, there's nothing like yeast coz to tie food. Nothing even compares. No, Steve and Angelo in there. Bro. Get a fuck around. All right. Let's wrap this bitch up. Bro, thank you for having me. My place. I love you. What are you reading? Thursday. I'm gonna ramble with it. All right. But I'm Atlantic City, seventh and eighth at Ocean's Casino. White people casino. July, seventh and eighth. No, August. August, seventh and eighth. Okay. Cago got announced. November 5th. What's the website for people to go to find out? I'm fucking, you know, website? JoeyDiz.com. Was that real? I don't know. I don't know. I'm not even. All right. I'm where's the casino? Ocean's Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey, the seventh and eighth. I'm on this. Beautiful. All right. I think the government is coming. The governor? Yeah. Like you, Cheryl. I don't even like it, but I do like like you, Cheryl. I do like Mikey, Cheryl. Because she's a Democrat. You're not supposed to like him. But it was funny. I went to a restaurant and some guys like, hey, man, life would have been so much better with Jack, Cheryl. I go, I know, but he lost by 400,000 fucking boats. He tried to a Republican in Jersey. That's not gonna fucking work. They've been Democrats. They're Democrats. Jesus showed up. So 400,000 boats, bro. That's a lot. I'd be in my house with the windows fucking like Sunny Black and Donnie Brasko with the windows. The shades drawn for a year. 400,000 fucking boats. You know, I guess I did with Joe Piston. Yes. Very good. He was very good. He was amazing. He's a good dude too. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. He's a good guy. They never recovered now. Even while he was captured, he fucking came out and they found out he was a cop. They're like, oh, you were better than me. That's like one other guy said that to him. Hey, you won. You beat me. Wow. Not. All right. I love you brother. I love you brother. Thank you brother. We're gonna have fun tonight. Bye, buddy.