I'm so grateful that you're here and that you're running against Dan Crenshaw. I don't just because I don't think Dan Crenshaw is the worst person in the world or anything like that. I feel sorry for Dan Crenshaw. It's clearly a very troubled guy. But it just does seem like the Republican Party shouldn't have to have a Dan Crenshaw in it. And I think you're going to beat Dan Crenshaw. And I just want to say thank you for doing that. I'm honored to be here with you. I really am. So I've been jealous of you because my wife loves you so much. So you're in the Texas house. You represent an area that overlaps with Crenshaw's district obviously. You live there. It's one of the most conservative districts in Texas. I think it's probably a- My country county is absolutely the reddest of red counties. Yes. Um, Taren County's bigger, but it's purple. Yes. The biggest red county left in Texas and 100% of my district is inside congressional district too. So that would mean it's probably the biggest by population red county in the United States. Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. Once we lost Harris County to vote out. Yeah, I'm yes. So how does that the biggest I'm just kind of guessing, one of the biggest Republican counties in the United States get Dan Crenshaw as a member of Congress. Like how does that happen? So this is my co-mayacopa, said I said, meacopa, yeah, it's still hitting fault. In 2018 when Dan Crenshaw came around, it was kind of a man crush for me. Yeah. Yeah, Navy SEAL war hero. And I only knew one person. They're like eight people in that race. And there was only one person that was kind of emerging as the person that was going to win. And he was kind of a rhino. He was he was very weak. This guy comes along that says, look, I'm going to up in the apple card. I'm going to be a disruptive influence. I am going to absolutely stand against the swamp where it's Ted Cruz called it the Washington Cartel. Yeah. I'm going to stop it. I'm going to fight it. So we got behind him and damn, I would have voted for him too. Yeah. Yeah. So my encouraged our local tea party to mail into the district to spend money into the district and help them raise money to move move mountains to get Dan Crenshaw elected. So I feel a sense of responsibility for this major screw up because no sooner did he get there than he became part of the problem. Oh, he became a leader of the problem. And I have so what year was that? 2018. I'm sure he has official opinions on issues related to Texas or the United States, but it's also very obvious to me watching him carefully that his real interest on all his main interests are outside this country. It doesn't seem like his agenda really is anything to do with America. A self interest or anything. You see this revolving door on the part of people in Congress that line themselves up for lobbying positions as soon as they leave Congress. And so in order to get those kind of cushy jobs, you've got to do the lobby's bidding up front early on. He's a young guy, right? And he's not the kind of person that's going to be there for 20 or 30 years. He is the kind of person though that's going to line himself up for a cushy lobbying position once he gets out. So you've got to go along. You cannot, you cannot, ruffle feathers. You can't go against leadership and you can't go against the lobby. Well, none of us need to not go against the lobby. I mean, his campaigns are the most, we pulled the numbers the most recent one that I saw suggested that his two biggest donors are giving him money because of his foreign policy views. One is a foreign lobby, I think is his biggest donor. One of them literally a foreign lobby. And the other is a hedge fund guy called Clifford Asnes who's, you know, I was one of the sleazy or people in American business. There's that. But also is not paying den crenshaw for anything related to the United States. So it only has to do with influencing his vote on questions pertaining to other countries. I mean, if the opposite of America, first it's America last. Yeah. It's been my greatest heartburn is his total disregard for the border and what we've been dealing with at the Texas border. And yet his obsession with Ukraine's border. Yes. What is that? I mean, I can't get my arms around it. So three years ago we went down to the border and pretty much all of the Texas delegation was there. Mike Johnson came from Alabama, heard from Louisiana. Yeah. The southern state congressional members came down to be with us and we interviewed Ice Age and Sweet Interviewed, US border patrol. We interviewed US border patrol union. We interviewed ranchers. The only person from the congressional delegation that was not there, Dan Crenshaw. It's like, why don't you want to know about what's going on down here? This is not about working with the Mexican government. This is about on boots in the ground, right down on the border, understanding what we're dealing with down here. You understand firsthand what's really truly going on because he has no clue what's really going on. But you're in Houston. I mean, it's not that far Houston has been completely, I have family there a night. So I go completely transformed by legal immigration, completely. It's unrecognizable and it hasn't gotten better. It's gotten much worse. That's my readers of visitor. But how could he ignore that? 58% of the births in Texas are Medicaid births. 58%. So think about this a second, Tucker. 20 years ago, Medicaid was 3% of the Texas budget. Now it's the number two driver of the budget. And it's doing large part to illegal immigration. People come across the border, have their babies. Sometimes they go back, sometimes they don't. So that's like collapse. I mean, that's not sustainable, not even in the short term is that sustainable. Good hearted people want to say, well, we should do this. To which I say, I think God would say we should do it. We should do it. Not the government. Exactly. We should do it. The church should do it. What we used to go down to the Mexican border. I mean, to the border towns in Northern Mexico and build churches, we would build schools, we would build homes. We'd go down there and do medical missions work. We can't go down there anymore because Mexico for all intents purposes of failed state. I mean, it really truly is. It's a failed state. And so you can't go down there anymore. And so people say, well, we can't go down there anymore. Therefore, the United States government needs to bail this all out. No, we're destroying our children and grandchildren's ability to have any kind of future whatsoever. We're drilling holes in the bottom of the lifeboat. I mean, Crenshaw doesn't know this. I mean, his constituents, I know are upset about it because I know a lot of them. Walker, he came to a town hall meeting three years ago when the Senate bipartisan, which anytime you hear a Senate bipartisan border bill run, run fast, right? Democrats are not looking for any kind of solution on the border. Democrats are not looking to close the border. They created this. They completely created this. And so they have this wackadoodle bill that allows 5,000 people into the country a day. 1.8 million a year. And if you look at the bones of the bill, yes, the bones of the bill say it did call for more ice agents, but it wasn't to close the border tucker. It was to process people coming in to the country. So all they did was to just streamline their ability to come in to the country and be lost into the system. Okay, show up for your court date and a year and a half, two years, which they don't show up for. They're gone. They're lost into the fabric of the nation. And you know, they're a drain on our schools. They're a drain on our infrastructure. They're a drain really huge drain on our criminal justice system in Texas and across the United States to killing us. Well, they also make it impossible to have a cohesive country. I mean, if a huge percentage of the population just got here, then what is it to be American? No one is pausing to ask that question. When there was a financial downturn or a national disaster or were tested as a nation, how do we hold together? Yeah, 20 years ago, a friend of mine, they grew up in Toronto said, the great thing about America is that you're a melting pot where Canada is more like a quilt and we're tearing apart as it seems. Yes. Y'all have a common language. Did I just say y'all? Yes, I did. It's okay. You have a common language. We don't have a common language in Canada. We have French and we have English. And in America now, we have English and we have Spanish. And we are becoming a quilt that is tearing apart at the seams. Yes. And do you feel that where you live? Oh, terribly. Yeah. Terribly. You see it, especially see it in the classroom right now. We keep hearing the left say we're losing teachers in public education because they're not being paid enough money. Well, it's not what the polling's telling us. I sat down with Texas classroom teachers association in 2019. And I said, quality of life, violence in the classroom, teacher pay. What's the most important issue? Quality of life and violence in the classroom. Violence in the classroom. Violence in the classroom. Teachers are being assaulted like you have never seen before. I mean, there is one school in the state of Texas. And I think it was on TikTok 72 assaults or I'm sorry, 72 fights on that were recorded. So that's basically two fights a week in the school that were recorded and then we're on TikTok. And those are just the ones that they've caught. And you see this in classroom after classroom, after classroom. So you're bringing, you bring children together that can't speak the language. And then you poison them with critical race theory to tell them that the children of color are oppressed and the white kids are oppressors. What could go wrong? Right? Man, it's just got a lot of attacks on whites as a result of that. You have a lot of issues. And a lot of attacks on white teachers as well. And again, a lot of this, it stems from what we've done with the border and our unwillingness to close the border. This is not about understanding better understanding what's going on in Mexico. Mexico's a failed state. And we've got to treat it like a failed state. We've got to close the border. What do you keep your most valuable possessions? Not your necktie or a pair of socks, but things you wouldn't want to replace or maybe couldn't. Heirloom is from your parents. Perstificate your firearms, your grandfather shotgun. Where do you store those? Under the bed, the back of a closet. That's unwise. And maybe unsafe. Liberty safe is the place to store them. I would know. I have a colonial safe from Liberty safe. It's in my garage. I keep everything in there. It's a pro flex system. Allows you to design the inside of your safe in a way that works for you. It's not a fixed setup. Someone else puts the shelves in. You have to deal with it. You make it the way you want it. Have a stock of rifles. You can make room. Need more shelves for handguns, for documents, for valuables, for gold. You can do whatever you want. You can configure your safe in minutes. Maximum flexibility. Maximum convenience. Liberty safe is America's number one safe company made in the United States. Great people. I know them. Visit LibertySafe.com. Use the code TUCKER 10 at checkout for 10% off. Franklin and Colonial Safe featuring the pro flex interior that you customize. You're going to dig it. We definitely plus our good looking, I will say. And yet, Crenshaw, every time I've seen him speak, it's about Ukraine's sacred borders. It's territorial integrity, standing up for democracy, fighting Putin Hitler, whatever. What is why the emphasis? I mean, I think it's fair to have views on all kinds of foreign questions. But in his case, it's so much the center of his focus. Why? And I get that you can go from Trump was, Russia went into Crimea under Barack Obama in his silly line of the sand. And Trump came in and where Obama had given them blankets and band-aids. Trump came in and gave them, and I take missiles and he gave them serious weaponry to stall the Russians. And then Biden comes in and does the exact opposite, right? What starts talking tough? And so I guess I can get initially saying, okay, I want to get back to doing what Trump did. But the obsession that he displayed in the midst of it was sickening, was absolutely sickening, especially again, when you call into account the fact that we have an open border in the South. And he was doing nothing to help us. In fact, when the Senate deal came about, he held a town hall for elected officials in our district. And I put my hand up and I said, Dan, you're allowing 5,000 people into the country a day. And he just absolutely pissed, really, that I was bringing this up. And I'm not the only one, Senator Creighton also was like, we cannot do this. And he said, you guys should be absolutely thankful that we're doing something now to close the border because you can't do it and like we have done it. We just need you guys to stay the hell out of the way. We could tax this on its own, could close the border. We just need you to keep out of our business. If you're not going to help us, get out of the way. And he was just in fact that we couldn't do it. We needed, we needed to pass this legislation. Meanwhile, Trump was saying, you don't need any legislation. You just need to close the border. You just need to show some stones, some backbone and close the border. And some of that, you don't have an actual garden Texas. I never understood that. But I'm interested in his reaction. I've seen this with him a lot and it suggests that there's something, I think he's mentally I'm just going to say that. I'm not saying that. I'm saying that with sympathy, there's something really wrong with him. I think he was damaged by his service. I think it's partly our fault is a country for sending these guys into these horrible positions and then not helping them when they come home. I know that you help run mediocre, which is a group dedicated to helping service when they come back so they don't kill themselves. So I know you spend a lot of time on this. So I don't want to attack him too much personally because I want to be compassionate. I've never seen any elected official respond to criticism the way he does. I mean, it's like anyone who asks him a question. It's like you're evil. I saw him recently say if you don't agree with me on this foreign policy issue, you're evil. What is that? You can't enter into any kind of dialogue with him. He just takes it personally, he gets offended. He's completely thin-skinned over it. I just can't then attacks you for asking them. Then attacks you and attacks your integrity or character and your intellectual capacity. I can't put words to it. So who's for him? I think the lobby is absolutely for him. I think establishing Republicans and the Karl Rove, the Associated Republicans of Texas, are for that. It should be called the Associated Rinos of Texas, but it's so sick. These guys associated Republican and Associated Republicans of Texas. So they come after conservative Republicans every two years. I've got one of the most conservative voting records in the Texas House, a blight in the top five, top four, my last four sessions. I've passed some really important critically important comprehensive legislation that's part of the Republican priorities, banning critical race theory in the classroom, banning the social transition of children. And yet this group comes after me every two years. Two election cycles ago, they spent $300,000 against me. And we're able to get 36% of the vote. This last election cycle, the Associated Republicans of Texas, spent $700,000 against me and got 34% of the vote. Really? But Dan Crenshaw helps fund them. Why? So he takes his lobbying money and he writes checks tens of thousands of dollars, these Associated Republicans of Texas, that isn't doing anything to help us expand the majority in the Texas House. So they just come after the conservatives. It's trying to make you more like Democrats completely. So what is it and who runs it and where does its money come from? It's car-rove and it's just kind of biggest establishment of money, lobby money. Car-rove every time I ask someone involved in Texas politics, how does this conservative this great state get such horrible? Like how does it John Cornyn or Dan Crenshaw get elected in Texas? Like always mentioned, Carl Rove. Texas is the eighth largest economy in the world. Our economy is bigger than Russia. Our economy is bigger than Australia. It's bigger than Canada, it's bigger than Mexico. It's a huge economy. We have a $300 plus billion budget, right? And so when you're talking about just a state budget, over $300 billion. Yeah. Yeah. Per my name. And so when you're talking about that kind of money, it attracts a lot of bottom dwellers. So you hear about the Washington cartel. Well, it's pretty much the same thing in the Austin, Texas. It, there's just a lot of money, just a ton of money. And they will get fixated on things like bringing gambling to Texas as an example. The neo-cons desperately want to bring gambling to Texas. Why? I'm very libertarian on this issue. Like if you want to have a card game and you want to gamble. What you do in your house is up to you. It's not a great. It's not in my business. But at the end of the day, if you're going to say this is state sponsored and we're only going to give out two or three licenses and we're going to give them out to our friends that have given tons of campaign money, right? Then it's corrupt. It's crony capitalism to the max. Right. Does it improve people's lives? Doesn't improve people's lives. And at the end of the day, you look at any of the states that have implemented it. And we have a national treasure in Houston by the name of Jim McInveil. His name is Mattress McInn. He owns Gallery Furniture. He's the most amazing man in the whole world. And he's a gambler. And he would say the worst thing that Texas could possibly do would be to bring gambling to Texas. Why? They build these billion dollar resorts with cash, these multinational corporations. What happens to that money? People go and gamble and that money leads our economy. So you have less money moving within the economy. They'll say, well, yeah, but it's a great tax revenue. There's great tax revenue from it. Yeah, but eventually the pool in which you're drawing from dries up. Well, where's it worked? I mean, it was going to save the state of Maine, for example. No. It was going to save East St. Louis, Illinois. No. It was going to save Mississippi Gulf Coast? No. Is there a place where gambling has actually made people's lives better? No. Just enriched like some of the worst people in the world. It's all it is. And this past session, the past two sessions they've been trying to do it. And they, I got a call from the lobbyists, which they assigned too lobbyists to me. So there are 150 house members. Each of us had too lobbyists assigned to them for gambling. And it became the no-lobious left behind session when it came to gambling. And they're like, hey, we want to write you $25,000 check for your reelection campaign. I'm like, I don't want it. We're not asking for your guaranteed vote in favor of it. No. And I'm like, I don't want it. If Planned Parenthood wanted to give me money so I could vote against a portion, I would take that money so I could vote against abortion. But I'm not going to take your dirty money that came at the hands of somebody that lost their house or lost their marriage or lost their businesses result to that. Just dirty money. What were the gambling lobbyists like? Some of the nicest guys. Oh, I mean, I bet. Very wonderful people. Do they call it gaming? Some did. Yeah. Steve, don't you understand about the money that we're going to be able to spend on public education is a lot of doing this? Right? It's about the children's teeth. It's about the children. We're sorry saying, but this is not a very safe country. Look through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there could be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. It was obvious on video and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti-gun movement will do. They'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to burn up. They proudly American company, Burna, make self-defense lawn sures that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty-handed. These pistols and I have one, fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from up to 60 feet away. They're no background checks or no waiting periods. Burna can ship it directly to your door. It can't be arrested for defending yourself with a Burna pistol. Visit burnabyRNA.com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay. Burna.com. So what happened to the legislation? It went down in flames. So it typically, and I appreciate Dan Patrick over in the Senate because he pretty much guaranteed that as long as he's going to be the light like of. And hopefully Brandon Creighton will come in after him will do the same thing I think he will. I don't think it has a future in Texas, thankfully. Yeah, I'm blank. gambling. And I want to be clear on this because you know gambling. Again, you want to have card games at your house and invite people over again. Of course, I don't care. Bringing in casinos. Yeah. Yeah. Wow, that's so where was Dan Patrick on this? Did he killed it over in the Senate? Okay, so he's lieutenant governor. Where was Crenshaw? Silent. Really? That's the problem is that there's so many things that are threatening Texas right now. And Dan Crenshaw has been absolutely silent. So in 2014, when Abbott became governor, when Ken Paxton became the attorney general, those guys won with 23 and 24 point margins over the Democrats. We're winning now with eight point margins. Where did the margin go? Where did these huge wins go of Appray too? And it's not people moving into Texas, seven out of 10 of them. Tucker, Texas is still read from people moving into it. Republicans that are refugees, if you will, were losing it is our children. Our kids are kids are being absolutely indoctrinated in the classroom. In immigration, I grew up in California. I was at Reagan's last rally in California in 1980 and it was a right wing state. It was California was a, it built Clinton lost California in 1992 and one West Virginia in 1992. So like, now California is of course bright blue and West Virginia is bright red. Why is that because California is a completely different state due to immigration and West Virginia has had less immigration than the other state. The big problem though is that politicians like Dan Crenshaw refused to take on the teachers unions. They refused to stand up to the teachers unions. Why? They're afraid of them. They spend tons of money and Randy went, wind gardener and her ilk scare the heck out of these people. So Crenshaw is afraid. So he's like, I mean, it's the only thing I get, you can't, I, there's been zero activism on his part whatsoever. It's standing up to these people. You hate ever to suggest that someone's doing something for the money. Right. But in Crenshaw's case, like his position on Ukraine is so far how that it's obvious to me he's being paid to have that position. But you tell me is sending 100 billion more to Ukraine. Are you cranes borders or these like really huge issues in your district? It's the border is the biggest issue. The US border. And when you ask people, and this is not anecdotal, it's empirical. There have been plenty of people polling in Congressional District 2 in Montgomery County. Why? Because it's the biggest red county left in Texas. The governor pulls it. We pull it. Other people are polling it. And it's people see the contrast between the way Ukraine is being taken care of in the Texas border is not. And they draw a contrast and they should. It's kind of that simple as a man. Where's Karl Rove on this question? You know, I think a lot of these guys are just big government neo-cons that don't care. They don't see it as a threat at all. At all. Do you ever see Rove around? Never. But he still has a hand in Texas politics. Completely. Do you ever talk to Crenshaw? The last time I talked to him, the last time I talked to him was at that town hall three years ago when he dismissed myself and Senator Creighton for not accepting and not wholeheartedly bind into this crappy Senate bipartisan bill that they wanted to push through. And again, they blamed President Trump who was out of office at the time saying Trump is just torpedoing this thing and they're all angry about it. And Trump was just saying you don't need legislation to close the border. Right. You just need to have the will to do it. And no, Dan Crenshaw and 100% of the Republicans are 100% of the Democrats in Congress said no, we need this legislation. You don't close the frickin' border. Who among Texas elected official supports Crenshaw? You know what's funny is when the day we announced we had, I think, 30 of the most conservative members of the Texas legislature that endorsed me. And he came out with a list of people to endorse him. That one single member of Congress was behind him. That one real, that one active Congressman came out to endorse him. Do you ever talk to members of Congress about him who worked with him? What do they say? I'm not going to comment on that. I just can't. I just can't. Okay. But it sounds like he's not a favorite among his colleagues. Yeah. So a lot of, you know, I came in when I came into the legislature, I came in with one of the biggest classes and since the sharps sound scandal in the 70s, I think there were 42 people in our class and many of them have gone on to serve in Congress in Washington. And I have a good relationship with all of them. Yeah. But Crenshaw doesn't sound like he does. You see close to a corner. You know, I don't know if they have a relationship or not. I know that Cornyn is supporting him for obvious reasons. But that's one of those reasons. Well, just they're both donor class, lobbyist, centric people. We're called representatives because we're actually supposed to represent the people that photos into office. And they're just some that just don't give a flying flip about those. No, that's obvious. Well, in Crenshaw's cases, clearly he's hostile to them. Yeah. So it's not just you that he's a snap dad for asking a question. I want to play a video and maybe you can explain what we're watching. A young girl comes up to him, she looks very young in the video and asks him about comments that he made about Jesus during a podcast. Before we play this, can you tell us what the backstory? So he was on a podcast and Dan Lutz has shown himself off as this intellectual. Dan is dumb. No, I'm not being mean. By the way, my dogs are dumb and I think they're going to have an eye. I don't. self-off as this intellectual. Dan is dumb. No, I'm not being mean. By the way, my dogs are dumb and I think they're going to have it. I don't think that's a moral category. I'm not attacking him, but he is dumb, like head injury dumb. And I don't, anyway, sorry, sorry to be mean. No, I think I actually think he's, I'm going to disagree with you. I think he's incredibly smart. I think he's vacuous when it comes to wisdom though. Maybe that's what I'm referring to. So I think he knows a lot. And when I've sat and listened to some of his podcasts and some of the different things, he's a really smart guy, but he completely lacks the wisdom to know what's due with all those smarts. Yeah. And so he's doing this podcast with this guy and they're talking about he brings up, well, the American people need archetypes. Spider-Man, Superman and Jesus Christ and they says, and then real ones too, like Rosa the parks and Abraham Lincoln. And they're like, what? You just actually said, Rosa Parks is real. Jesus is not. Jesus is not. And so this is the curl of position. Yes, I probably. I saw it on Wikipedia. Yes, so this young woman at the Montgomery County Tea Party on a Monday night asks, Dan Crenshaw, she said, I'm trying to get my arms around this. And then she read the statement verbatim of what he had said on this podcast. And he said, I can't get my arms around that. And he said, you put a period after Jesus and don't question my faith and the whole place just lost it. So let's play that. You not only might about Jesus walking through, why about being a Christian to give context to anyone. Yeah. Because of her, Christ knows that the quote, the most important thing here is that we have the four hero archetypes that we looked up to. Jesus is a hero archetype of Superman is a hero archetype. A real character to it too. I could name it out. Rosa Parks, Ronald Reagan, and quote, I can't wrap my head around this. Well, I'll help you put a period out here where Jesus and don't question my faith. Wow. Wow. So I think it's fair to not want to be attacked for your faith. OK, I'm with Crenshaw on that. But she wasn't really attacking him on the face. She was asking like, what do you want to clarity? What do you mean? Yeah, exactly. Like, if you ever said anything, you're like, I could have positioned that differently. If I ever said anything. I could ask that all the time. So I'll come home. My wife will be like, did you mean to say that? OK, what should I have said? Right. Oh, I've lived like, OK, yes. Honey, that makes sense. But so you just say, wow, I guess I could have handled that differently. I guess that's not what I meant. I would have put a period after Jesus and then I would have shut my mouth and laughed and laughed it off. Totally. But instead, he got all defensive at this young woman and tried to ridicule her. Oh, he attacked her. Yeah. Instantly. So the first amendment is the one truly distinctive thing that makes America America. It makes this country great. You are a citizen. That means you can speak openly and honestly without fear about what you actually believe. The government doesn't own you. You own the government. That's the premise. And for 250 years, we've lived it. We hope to keep living it. Our sponsor, PureTalk, understands how important this has so central it is. So if you want to support brands that defend freedom and American values, we recommend switching your wireless service to PureTalk, which is way cheaper and uses the same towers the other guys use. It's the best. We know what you're thinking. Of course, giving business to companies to share your values sounds nice. But at the end of the day, you don't want to spend more for the privilege of buying products from a company that loves America. What you don't have to, PureTalk's plan started just $25 a month, $25 for the same 5G coverage the other companies provide literally the same self towers. And you support a business that believes in this country and creates jobs here in this country. If you're interested, visit puretalk.com slash talker to switch to our wireless company that when we use PureTalk. Right now you save it additional 50% off your first month. Again, puretalk.com slash tucker. So what you're seeing on display there is a fragile, very unhappy and above all hostile person. I mean, why would a person like that want to be an elected office in the fresh place? I don't know because you are the realities that you are the center of scorn. You just are. Of course, you're going to take some hard positions and you're going to get shot at. Of course. So how did that video go over in Texas? It went viral like overnight. Yeah. And the next morning it was on all the different radio talk shows and yeah, went over like a lead balloon. Yeah. And not at no time did you ever say, well, I handled that. It was a bad night for me. Probably shouldn't have said that. That was silly on my part. Right. I mean, there's just no ability to be gracious and kind of that young woman, even in the absence of and seeing whatever, what happened. Nothing was just bizarre. I want to play one other clip that I think reveals a lot, not just about his about his temperament, but about his agenda. So he was asked by a reporter whom I respect, William Cosgrove. Well, coming out of Congress, this was earlier, this was the spring early summer. And he was asked about legislation that he had voted for. And basically his position was the intel agencies are not in any way playing in American politics. Here's the exchange. With data and with access to your, you know, math that you're addicted to, you can vastly manipulate an entire population, which Chinese have done. Are you worried that our intelligence agencies are doing the same thing domestically? Am I worried that I know that they're not? They're not manipulating Americans or not. Yeah. Yeah. Did you have some evidence? Otherwise, that you'd like to share. I mean, okay. Before that's like, I mean, there is countries in the Congressman US for an example of the US intelligence agencies meddling in our information. What about before the 2020 election when 50 members came out and said 100, 100, 100 Biden laps out was Russian disinformation. Is that count? No, because I mean, they were, they were retired. They were retired, but the FBI had the laptop frozen. You got to think even close to what they talked about. So that. That I felt, again, I've spent the last half an hour sort of defending Crenshaw in a backhanded way. I think he's a victim of the war on terror. If I'm being honest, that's what I think. He's clearly so damaged and screwed up and tragic personal life and all the rest. But when I saw that, I thought this is like not a good person actually. The most egregious thing about that is that as I talk two friends in DC, they see this this like an Adali basis. Yes. And sweet, see what this is the deep state. This is the deep state at work that he's denying exists. The intelligence he's playing an American politics. Right. So what the left is done is they've positioned this fourth branch of government so that even when they're not in power, they're in power. Yes. That's what they've created. They've created a system whereby so you lose Congress. You lose the White House. We don't care. They don't care because they have the fourth branch of government that's still running the show. It's so blatantly honest, or obvious. I had a quick little story, I had a young woman call me. She was referred to me by someone from Texans or vaccine choice. She transitioned and she's transitioning. She bought into the lie that she was a male and at 26 years of age, she's trying to transition back. And she called me and said, she's been shot full hormones and the whole thing. His direct to me. Oh, come on. Massed back to me. And when you shoot somebody, he has direct to me in her 20s. No, earlier than that. And the problem is when you put people on cross-sex hormones, I'm getting way of field here, but it screws up their system, right? And she's the most beautiful young woman. But she has a driver's license with a male name on it. And so I just, I called up the had a DPS and I said, can we take care of this for her? And by the next morning, she had a new driver's license with her name on it, brought her to tears. Well, that's right down in you now, right? You can do things like that at the state of Texas level because we haven't turned the fourth branch of government into anything that can hurt people. It's been done at the federal level. There's still democratic control too. The people still have a voice, it's screwed up and corrupt as the state may be and it is in my opinion. Yeah. There's still like a possibility to make, especially in the text-education agency where you see a lot of the stuff, but you still can make change, right? No, at the federal level, like if you were to call immigration or something like that, they'd laugh at you. Of course, you're just a silly congressman. We don't care what you think. Why would they? Why would they? Right? And they do the same thing with the executive branch. They're just completely aloof. They don't care what we think. They don't care what the elected officials. They don't care whether a constitutionally elected person, the hold's office, they don't care what you think. Even though your department may be underneath an agency that you oversee is a sitting member of Congress, they don't care. Well, if this is why Doge was a good idea and really no one's been. Tell people if really fired people who work for us, then there's no incentive for them. But here's the problem, Tucker, is that we've got a responsibility, I think, as elected officials to say to the American people, this is going on. I see it with my own eyes. This is what's going on. Guys like Crenshaw are like, no, I'm going to defend it. How could you defend? So how could, I mean, he was asked specifically the intel agencies have basically nullified democracy because they are playing a role in American politics, a very big role. And that's documented. It's not a matter of guesswork at this point. We know that. And as you just said, anyone who works in Washington sees it every single day. So like, he's denying that angrily. What does that say about his role? I mean, he was asked specifically about the right, about Hunter Biden's laptop. Yeah. And it was called Russian disinformation by the intelligence community. We asked, and he blew it off completely blew it off. Just like they blew off Biden's daughter's diary. Of course. Well, they put the people had it in jail for the crime of having Ashley Biden's diary and what she said she's showered with her dad and it's scooter up sexually. How could that? That's what it's, well, exactly how couldn't it? But that was just they put the guy in jail for that. I mean, for having it. Or the young woman. And that was a staffer for Joe Biden when he was in the Senate. Oh, I know. Terror read. I know her well. She lives in Moscow now because she's basically driven out of the country. They just strider. Oh, I know. I know her well. Yes, that's literally hard to explain. Hard just breaks for her. Just sweet woman too. Very sweet woman. Yeah. She had to leave this country, be away from her family, her child. I mean, it's, it's, uh, and no one cared. The fact that says no one word. The same players in government don't, don't treat Republicans that way. I mean, if it's only, it's only people that say bad things about the power structure of Washington, DC, they're the only ones that get held accountable. No, it's, it's so sick. It's just so sick. Alpa's a pretty new company about a year old, but we have a surprisingly deep and I mean, subterranean flavor vault. We have a massive index, a library, if you will, of our country flavors, all of which have been approved by the fellow governments. It's all totally legal. And so our archivists went down to the flavor vault last week and came up with a kind of sexy flavor, something I never would have thought of myself. They call it spearmint. Introducing help, spearmint from the flavor vault. It's incredible. It's like a spear. It breaks the heart of the flavor zone, wherever that is. So why do you think I just am fascinated by the very first thing you said when we sat down was I have to confess my role in Dan Crenshaw's victory because he made this really compelling case that he was going to fight the corruption in DC. And I understood that. He knew what we wanted to hear. But how why not fight corruption a little bit? Why immediately start making excuses for the CIA controlling US elections? Why would you ever make excuses for that? I can't, I can't for the life of me get my arms around it. OK, well, I have a little bit, I just have a guess. I don't know either. I don't talk to Dan Crenshaw directly. But there was this kind of amazing moment right after COVID when people started taking a look at the performance of various members of Congress, the stock portfolios. And you know, I personally know hedge fund managers who've underperformed the market. Right. The people who do this for a living, maybe billions some years they just don't, you know, it's very hard to beat the market. But Dan Crenshaw did somehow. We made a lot of trades, including after getting classified briefings on COVID policy. And he was called out on this and he wasn't the only one. Nancy Pelosi famously. But Dan Crenshaw did pretty well. And, you know, I don't think there's any evidence suggests he's like a market expert. So like how exactly did that work? And this was his response. He didn't, you know, he immediately started attacking anyone who asked him and he said, you don't let us trade stocks. You don't let us make any money either. We haven't gotten a pay raise since 2008. So I mean, I don't think members of Congress are overpaid exactly, but they're paid all multiples with the average person makes and they get a lifetime pension. So it's a pretty good deal and free healthcare and dental. So it's like he's clearly very focused on money. He was vicious too about the way he said it. I mean, the level of anger in his voice that he would be questioned about the way he's trading stock or what he gets paid. So the average tax in is paid $76,000. Dan Crenshaw is making $174,000 of your tax dollars. He's being paid by our tax dollars in taxes. Of course. And he thinks he should make more. Well, for a young man too, the lifetime value of the package that he's already gotten because he's already served multi-terms. So is many millions of dollars over the course of a life? Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. It is crazy. So I mean, it does like what do you make at the stock trading? How did Dan Crenshaw beat the market? Well, multiple people have talked about it. And multiple people over the years have said that we've got to stop it because we have access. They have access to information that the average person doesn't have access to. It's really not a lot different in Texas again where the eighth largest economy in the United States. I see deals that are coming our way and I could own stock in those companies. But my wife and I have chosen to stay out of the market. And for that very simple reason. You're not in the market at all. At all. So I own real estate. I own some rental houses. And that's my retirement. But I don't want to be, I want to avoid the appearance of evil. This has been an issue. This one all the way back to member Eric Cantor. Very well. Eric Cantor was thrown out of office. Dave, I can't think of his last name. He's, I know the both. Yeah. But anyways, Cantor lost because of his defense and voted against legislation. This is going back 10, 12 years that would have stopped this. And the American people just had enough with it. They just have absolutely had enough of it. And I don't blame him. It's just absolutely stupid. You're taking advantage of the system and enriching yourselves. And that creates a perverse incentive inside you to do the wrong thing and devote the wrong thing. If you're Nancy Pelosi or if your Dan Crenshaw's politics are very similar, by the way, Dan's a liberal. I guess if that's not obvious, I should just say that. Dan's a liberal. But both of them have taken a lot of crap for this. I mean, they've really been attacked for the appearance of insider trading. I can't call it that, but certainly what it looks like. Clearly it looks that way. Why wouldn't you just ban it? And then you can get rich when you leave and you can go lobby for a pack or whatever. He's going to do. But I don't, I don't. The simplest thing would be to file legislation and then dump your portfolio or dump it into a blind trust. It's a very lease. If you're going to say, okay, you can't own stock at the very lease, we should be encouraging these guys to dump them into a blind trust so that they can't manipulate the market or manipulate their own portfolio as a result of what they know. Does it make people cynical about their government? What's the problem? I mean, I think probably the greatest threat to the United States right now is the cynicism that we have towards our elected officials. Yes. I think especially conservatives, every time we hear locker up, they're not going to lock her up. No, they're not. Throw them out of office. They're not going to throw them out of office. I'm just not going to throw them out of the liars. It's just, we're so sick of it. And this is going on here in Texas, right? As well with the corn busters that while we were trying to do redistricting, they went to Illinois and they went to California and we heard lock them up, lock them up. And we're going to lock them up. We're throwing them out of office. And it just, it feeds the cynicism that we all rightfully have right now because it's so fake. I feel like that cynicism is the most intense and the most dangerous among like patriotic normal Americans. They have really been betrayed. Oh my gosh, because they really believed it. I mean, practically everyone got arrested on January 6 was carrying like a pocket constitution. Like these were people who really believe in this system. Yeah. And yet you see people that were part of rabble rousing and Washington DC that day that never went to jail. Well, they don't even, they hate the system. They want to tear it down. So I'm talking about the insider. Of course, no, no, I agree. But I mean, someone like Crenshaw or Nancy Pelosi, they don't believe in the system. They're grifters, obviously. But like the people who do believe in the system and in the victim of this just serial decades long betrayal, those people, and I feel like I'm one of them being honest, it just makes me so mad. I can barely see because you feel like you're betrayed by your own leaders. Do you feel that? Oh, completely. And it's harder because when you're in office, you're kind of like, okay, because what you're doing right now, I'm going to get panned with that same brush. Oh, so you, I mean, you're in the Texas house. So how often do you see that? All the time. And like, I'll post something about what's going on with the cornbreakers right now. They're like, oh, your piece of crap. You're going to tell us what we want to hear. And it's like, I don't blame that guy for feeling that way. Yes. He should feel that way because our government has done nothing to bring the hammer down on these people. It's just all talk. I mean, it feels like we're getting just like a dangerous level of anger. I feel it anyway. I feel like I hate everyone. All these people, especially the ones who claim to represent me, they're just liars. I know. I'm less mad at Pelosi than I am at some Republicans who I formally believe to. I'm more mad at us right now. I'm way more mad at every Republicans than I am Democrats. Oh, I agree with that completely. Look, Democrats are like trail horses. Each one's sixest nose in the ass of the horse in front of them. And Republicans are like Mustangs. We're biting each other. We're kicking each other. We're fighting. They work in lockstep together and they take people out that don't believe in their radical views. There's a woman in the Texas legislature last session, Sean theory, Democrat that voted with us and against the gender mutilation of little girls and boys. And the Democrat party responded by running somebody against her and spending a million dollars to take her out. Did they? They did. They took her out. For that? For that. We, on the other hand, we try and take out members of our own party that fight for our values. I've noticed and it's just it's so sick. But here's the reality is that the modern day Republican party when we win elections, we take office. When Democrats win elections, they will power. They fully believe in what they're fighting for. We just have people that want power that want to get elected. It's sad because like don't you care about anything? Because there are no holy discontent inside your soul that bothers you about what's going on in our country today that you're willing to fight for. Where you just willing to play it safe so you can stay in office. Democrats fight. They believe in everything that they're doing. What do you think the answer is? Honestly? Yeah. I think we need a spiritual renewal in America. And we need to get back to our founding principles and our, our constitution was meant only for a holy and religious people. And we're starting to see our nation and our society just fray and tear apart right now. And as a result of that, we're raising up people that should not be in office that are serving and have no place in serving within the Republican. I'm talking about within the Republican Party. Of course you are. Oh, I believe that and I know so many of them. I've always felt like the problem was the, you know, what they call rhinos. I'm writing sure what our public in is now anyway. So it doesn't even, I don't know. I'm not even sure what a conservative is. I'm not either. When Mitt Romney says I'm an extreme conservative like what? What? No. You're an extreme conservative? No. You're a guilty old lady. But it now it feels like there are, you know, people jumping up and down about America first who are, you know, they're biting. They're time until Trump's gone. Oh, yeah. You feel that? Oh, completely. Yeah. So among people you serve within the, in the House in Texas, how many are released in Sierra? Do you think? So 88 Republicans, 62 Democrats and 67 of us got together and selected David Cook as speaker. Mm-hmm. And the balance, the small balance. This is the new, the new speaker. No. He should have been the new speaker. Okay. After all, 67 of us got together. You had the drunk guy. David's gone. And we led their four of us, the letter evolved against David. And he, this guy was actually hammered on the House for it would appear from here. I'm sure I'm trying to. I have to work with these people. Let me just say as a former drunk person. I recognize that. Yeah. So 67 of us got together. We started cobbling together this, this coalition. We got it up to 67 people out of 88 Republicans. So more than a majority. Yeah. A super, super majority. And then this little group of Republicans got together with all 62 of the Democrats. And they picked boroughs. So yeah, we have, we have a speaker that was picked by the Democrats. So the Texas House is overwhelmingly Republican, but it's actually run by the Democrats. There are about 40. I would, I would put the number at about 40 strong conservatives out of the 88. But even a sort of, a sort of, a sort of, a conservative, even a rhino by definition, wouldn't want the Texas House to be run by the other parties yet they do. Do you think the Democrats would abide by this? Do you think the Democrats if they were in the majority would include any of us on their team? Of course not. Elections have consequences. And also the people should have a say. So if the majority of the state votes for a public and leadership, you should have it. Because that's called democracy. It's about responding to what the citizenry, the owners of the United States won in the administration of their government. And they're getting once again the opposite of what they voted for. Correct. And on every issue, they get the opposite. There's never been one public opinion poll in the last two years said number one issue for me as Ukraine. And yet the money's going to Ukraine or to all these other foreign countries. It's like, why are we giving us money to Egypt? Is there some other people in your district were like, we need to add another billion dollars to the foreign aid budget this year? Like it's a big issue. Yeah, so lemonade stands and everything else working hard for Egypt. So I just feel like, well, let me ask you, do you feel like we're at a point where people are becoming, I'm feeling way more radical than I've ever felt in my life. This is no one's listening. Right. Thank you. No one's listening. And we just, after a while you just get frustrated and angry over it. Yes. It's the sincere people who were the most angry, right? Because the cynical people never expected. And a real system in the first place. The only skin that they have in the game is their patriotism. There's nothing financially in it for them at all. It's just love of country. It's just, Tucker, it's just love of country. Yes. So that's why I wanted to talk to you. And I'll just be honest. I think you're trying to be one of the most sincere thoughtful politicians I've talked to in a long time. Because I'm not a politician. Yeah. So I'm going to play with my wife when you hang out with me. My vet will be like, you can't hang out with Steve if you call him representative. But the real reason I want to talk to you is I don't want Dan Crenshaw to get reelected, not because I hate Dan Crenshaw or think he's actually going to make good on his promise to kill me. I don't think he's going to. It's not personal, it really isn't. It's just that if you keep electing people who are transparently corrupt and insincere like Dan Crenshaw, then after a while, like your country falls apart. Not because he's so bad, but because it's such an obvious lie. I guess that's what I'm trying to express. Do you worry about that? I think cynicism is the greatest threat to our country. Yes. And scripture says where there is no hope. People perish. Yeah. And that's where we're at today in America. And I think one of the things that I love about Trump, and I think the reason why people have overwhelmingly flocked to Trump is Trump leads with actions and not words. He leads with words to capture the news cycle, right? Yes. But he doesn't use those words to do anything other than to throw the mainstream media off. He leads with action. And that's what we want out of our leaders. We want people that are going to lead with action in not rhetoric. We're tired of the rhetoric, absolutely tired of the rhetoric. It's hollow, it's empty, it's useless. Some comments almost always get reelected, especially from Republican districts. It feels, maybe not especially, but they definitely Republicans, bad Republicans, John Cornyn multiple terms in the Senate. I can think of probably other 40 Republican office holders. It's like, how did you get reelected? Particularly in Republican states, right? And Idaho and this all through the deep south, they reelect people with, what are without timers? It's crazy. How hard will it be to unseat Dengue? this all through the deep south. They real like people with what are with Alzheimer's? It's crazy. Um, how hard will it be to unseat den cruncho? It's going to be a lot of work. We've had a lot of people coming to my website, Steve Tote for Congress dot com or to Steve Tote.com. Both work, but it's been pretty cool. We've, we've had people from all over the United States. Um, contributing the widows, my 10 bucks, 15 bucks. It's so, it's so amazing. Yeah. And, um, this is doable. But the biggest problem tuckers that there's, there's just like this belief, well, they're, they're a city member. They can't be beat. Yes, they can. We've proven it. We've, we've seen it. We've shown it that when you, when you mobilize as a, as a community against these guys, you can take them out. Yes. I just think it would be an important statement about democracy and that it still can work. I've wanted to talk to cruncho put in a million interview requests. He will not do an interview period, except with a moderator. Oh, that's hilarious. Um, I'd love to talk to Clifford Azsas, his main, uh, funder, the guy who's like publicly defended short selling. Um, sleeves, true sleighs ball. Of course, he would never talk to me, but I would like to, I would like to know how someone like cruncho could get reelected. Like who would support him? Do you feel support for him in the district? It's not there. It's just, it's not there. So we did, uh, we did a meet and create in his neighborhood on Saturday and the place was packed. His neighborhood, a great neighborhood where he lives. And, um, it was just, I walked away so encouraged with the support that we got. And it's just, it's really exciting. It's going to be a lot of work. I mean, you know, he outspent is opponent two years ago, 121 and the guy got 42% against him. And, um, so when that happens, there's blood in the water and it attracts a lot of people. But we're the only ones that have launched a really legitimate campaign against him. We're going to be able to raise the money necessary. We're going to be outspent. We get that really. Oh, yeah. I mean, just the amount of support that he's going to get from the lobby is just off the charts. But I can't ever think Tucker of a time when I haven't been outspent two or three to one, um, in one. So we're okay with it. We're going to beat him. And, um, we're just going to work with the primary March 3rd. That's March 3rd. Yeah. So the district is overwhelmingly Republican. Completely. Okay. So whoever wins the primary will win the general will win the general. How many people are in the primary? Do you think do you expect? Um, we're, we're pressing for a roughly 160,000 votes. No, I mean, how many candidates? How many people are running against him? Um, I think they're about five and right now, five or six. Yeah. And more we'll get in. More we'll get in. It just, it happens. And how does that work? Is it a guy who gets the most votes or is it there? You have to get, you have to get 50%. Yeah. Or, or goes into a runoff. Oh, wow. So if you're Carl Rov, or Clifford Eznes or some lobby foreign lobby, you have every incentive to get as many people under this race as possible. Right. Correct. But we're already hearing from people in it that have come to me and said, you've got the best chance of winning. I'm probably going to drop out before the filing period. So the filing period hasn't even opened yet. You're just allowed to pick a treasure or say that you're running for Congress and make a statement. But, um, the filing period hasn't even opened yet. And we think a lot of them are going to drop out. I've got great relationships with a lot of the people that are in it right now. Yeah. And they feel like, you know, you've got the best chance to beat him and we want to help you up. So I have, I mean, the reason I want to talk to you is talk to a lot of people in Texas about it just because I think it's so important to make good on your promises. If you say you're going to put America first, you have to have people who are willing to put America first. Amen. And we need it badly, so badly. And everybody I've spoken to has said you have the best shot at unceding him. This is not directly related to you. But since you swim in the same pool, where is Cornyn's reelection right now? Would you say, how would you assess that? He, he's in, he is in real trouble. So we've been looking at his numbers as well. His numbers are not as bad as Dan Crenshaw's numbers, but they're bad. How about our Crenshaw's numbers? He's at 43% unfavorable in Harris County, 44% unfavorable in Montgomery County, 44% percent. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. That's really high. That's really high. And I think Cornyn's about three points below that. But that's still bad, right? So I mean, you typically people that have unfavorable numbers above 40% don't even run for reelection. Interesting. So Cornyn who hates Trump obviously hates Trump, right? Um, has always hated Trump. He's like sucking up to Trump now, right? It's sick. Really? It's just sick to watch it. Yeah. What's he doing? Um, this is so funny. So a couple months ago, there's a picture in, in acts of him reading the art of the deal. And it just above it, it says, what a great read. And then John Cornyn, who's like wants nothing more than to like be accepted into some club. Yeah. You know what he made? And then I'm a mother too later. He's got a picture of him outside. There's a, there's a restaurant in Texas called Trump burger. And he's outside the restaurant with the, the marquee behind him. He's holding a, you know, a Trump, Trump burger in his hands. No way. It's just so silly. Cornyn who dresses like, uh, JP Morgan vice president, you know what? It's like big Trump guy now. Yeah. Do people fall for that? No. No. They don't. So he's running against compaxed and is in race. Um, are there others? Um, that's it so far. That's it right now. You got to think, I mean, I'm so crawl row of trying to take out Ken Paxton, your attorney general, uh, in a, you know, I mean, truck put him in jail basically helped run this impeachment against him trial. Uh, is he involved in the center race? Do you think I think he will be? He was sure involved in trying to take compaxed now. There is no doubt about it. I should take him out, but in prison. Oh my gosh. So that impeachment was the biggest scam. Should have been the biggest embarrassment is I think it is the, it will go down in history as the biggest embarrassment of the Texas legislature at the Texas house. And I was so proud of the way the Texas Senate stepped up very seriously, deliberate, deliberative. Every, every single charge against him, um, they put it to the test. And we rushed, we literally rushed it through in 24 hours. We were given, we were given this 60 page document to read of the charges against Paxton. No witnesses were called for their side. None of the none of the, um, witnesses were sworn in, which is a violation of the Texas Constitution. Um, this is exactly what Karl Rove and Eric Holder did to the Alabama pro life governor 20, 30 years ago. They took him out through him in jail. And it was later found out to be all, you know, all, all nothing was big, nothing burger. And, um, he was set free, but he, it just destroyed him, right? It destroyed his life. It destroyed his political career. Um, it took everything away from the man and they tried to do the same thing to Ken. And it was just absolutely and Ken's real sin, even if you disagree with Paxton, you have to say he's been very effective. Oh, my gosh, she's been incredibly effective. Right. So that's, that's the crime right there. That is the crime is not just getting up and being like, Oh, I'm a war hero. I have an iPad, you know, I'm going to drain the swamp, but actually doing something actually did it. And Ken, you know, like to know, Ken is to know that Ken's not like the most articulate charismatic speaker in the world. No, he's anything but that. And so I like him more for that. I know it just, he bleeds with his actions. Hmm. Um, interesting. It sounds like how influence were the bushes still in Texas politics? I think they're very influential still still. Yeah. But I think it, I think it mainly, it's mainly through crawl row. Um, they don't support the president. They refuse to support Trump, which is an embarrassment. Should be an embarrassment to them. If they're lack of support and everything that he's doing for our country right now, how can you look? How can't you look at everything that Trump is doing right now and say, um, what he's doing with the border? Um, what he's doing with Doge? What he's doing with public education? And I don't know. And look at it. I do not look at that and just say, wow, this is all the crap that you guys said you're going to do. He just did it. Like you said, you want to do away with the Department of Education because of the way they're destroying public education in America. He's, he's doing it. You want to root out the corruption through, um, um, um, these government agencies that are blindly giving money to other Democrats, if they can, they literally are funneling and laundering money through the United States government. Um, these, these different organizations that doge is uncovered more. I mean, specifically USA, right? Yep. USA was the piggy bank for the Democrat Party and act blue. And that's why the Democrats are angry about it because you took their funding source away. Everyone knew it. Everyone knew that that was going on. Trump's the only one that had the stones to get up and just do it. Do you not care about America? You don't care about America. These politicians don't care about America. They call themselves Republicans. They don't care about the Republic. They care about sustaining power and keeping their own little click and control. That's all they care about. What's it like to go to work in the Texas State House? Um, you know, was it true? And then said, if you want a friend, go buy a dog. Yeah. It's kind of like what it's like. And it's, it's hard. It's difficult. And so I've been, I've been blasting that I don't go there alone. I don't, I don't live alone. I don't go anywhere alone. Um, they'll destroy you if you live alone. They'll accuse you, they'll accuse you of everything and anything. I live this past session with Nate Shasline. Nate's a way, we wait back up just for one second. What do you mean if you live alone? So your session is how long is the session? We're in session for five months every two years. January through May and then specials. So you live north of Houston, but you have to go down to Austin for the session. You have to live there. You've got to live there. If you live alone, they, why does it matter if you live alone? Oh, they'll accuse you of something or they'll set you up with something weird sex stuff. Yeah. For real for real. And I'm convinced that's why a lot of guys have gotten into trouble. Individuals that I know that came there with the best intentions to do the right thing. And now are just part of the problem. Are you serious? Completely. Of course you are. Yeah. I guess I shouldn't be surprised, but I am. Also, it's not wise for a man to live alone for five months. I mean, it's not. It's just, it's stupid. It is stupid. I totally agree with that. Let's stop lying. But the way men are. Wow, that's so, is that widely known? Oh, I think it is. Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of gossip and stuff, but you know, and I feel badly because I feel like there are some really good people that get accused of it where it's not true. And I feel badly for them, but that's, you know, that's what you sign up for when you go to text. But it's a means of control. It's a leash that someone is yanking to keep people in line. Yeah, completely. And so you think there are people who arrived with the intent of doing good during the swamp. Yeah. Representing their constituents who were caught up in some sort of immoral behavior. And that has been used as leverage against them. Yeah. Yes. I believe that completely. Really. So I just, I make a point of just, I don't, you know, if I, if I go to an event, I don't, I don't drink. I quit drinking back in 2019. It didn't serve me. Yeah. It doesn't do anything for you. I, you know, my wife and I would have a glass wine or two at dinner, but I just completely gave it up. Oh, you weren't like a slobbering drunk. You just know, um, I, I'm a cheap date. So I just know I just, but I, I never wanted to be seen with, you know, with beer or wine in my hand. I just, it doesn't serve you at all in any way, shape or form. I agree completely strongly. Uh, yeah. Good for you. So, but you, but when you showed up in Austin for your first session, you were aware that you could be subverted. I don't think I was as aware, aware then, you know, you'd heard about stuff. Is that really true? That can't be true. These guys are really good. They're Republicans. They wouldn't do that. I was completely naive when I first came in like 40 of us showed up. We had this group called the known name group. We're like, they're going to be so happy that we're here. They're going to love us. Oh, this, he loves us. They're going to love us because we're true. We're fighting Republicans. They're going to love us. Now they scorned us really. They being the Republicans who are already there. Yeah. Yeah. And then no time flat. In fact, I can remember one of them said, um, we were called for such a time as this, pointing out, sure, the book of Esther, of course. And the reason why they hate us now, this is what we, this is what one of them said. The reason why they hate us is because they remind them of what they used to be. And like, I like, I look at most of those guys that said that and shook their head like I am. Say, yeah, and that's who you are now. You've, you've got, you've turned. You're not with us anymore. How long ago was that? That was in 2013 when I came in in 2013, served for two years and I left for four years. And then I came back in 2019 with the guys who stayed. Most all went bad. Really? So what apart from sexual blackmail, which you've said is real and I believe you, what are the other, um, means by which good people become bad people? You want, you want to be effective, don't you? Tucker, you have to serve your, your district. You want to be effective, don't you? Well, you're going to be in the penalty box if you don't become part of this speaker's team. And if you're in the penalty box, you can't pass any legislation. And I'm kind of an outlier in that. Um, I get really lucky. Like I passed some legislation. As an example, I picked up a bill to take on critical race theory and no one had even heard of it when I carried the bill. And then a guy by then in the dick weekly from Texans for loss who reform. I heard about my bill, I heard about my bill. And Dick's daughter is, is a passionate follower of Christ. Um, Allison, Dick is a good man. He, he, and he got behind my bill. Yeah. And by God's grace and I care, I, I carried that bill in the 87th session. We passed it into law. It was the best one in the United States. And so, you know, I got that done. And it's like, I came home and I said to Bobat, I said, we didn't sell out. God proved to me that he could still use me. And I didn't have to sell out to do it. And it just, it made me more passionate that, with God, there's way to get things done. And he can still use you. You don't, you don't have to sell your soul to these people, these people are evil. They don't want to do the right thing. They're not concerned about doing the right thing. They're just concerned about holding on to power. But it's interesting that they, they say right to you want to be effective. So they appeal really to your best instincts because you do any good man wants to be effective for me. So it's, they don't come to you and say, Hey, I've got like hookers and cash for you. They say, no, you, we can help you be person you want to be. Right. You want to be effective, don't you? Yeah. In fact, a couple people that were going to vote with us left us at the last like one, one guy, he left, he was going to vote for David Cook. And he came in with me as a freshman, David Cook for speaker for speaker. And the last second he switched over and voted for burrows. I said, why'd you do that? I mean, I knew. And he said, he voted with the Democrats. Yeah. I wanted to be effective for my district and he ended up getting a chairmanship. committee chairmanship, which these guys love getting committee committee chairmanship. They love being called chairman outside their office. You know, it says Steve tov. House District 15 and it shows the committees that you serve on. Well, for those guys, it's chairman. That's like a big deal. And these guys love, you know, the, the, being called chairman in the Texas house. It's just, it's, it's such a, you know, it's just such an ego boost. Do they end up getting anything done once they make that deal? No, you pass the legislation, but you sell a little bit of your soul in the midst of it to transaction. And then you just become with time more corrupt. Once you've yeah, been corrupted. It's such a, it's such a slow, it's such a slow process. For some guys, it happens a lot quicker than others, but it's a slow process where you just lose your soul. That's so dark. Yeah. Does anyone ever come back? No, I can't even, I can't ever think of a time when I've seen somebody that's gone over and said, wow, I blew it. I mean, I've seen, I've seen guys that have had a bad vote that have come back. Next session said, gosh, that was a stupid vote. I was part of their team, but they hadn't sold their soul. They just, they made a bad and then they come back the next session. Yeah, I've seen that, but none that have fully gone over become chairman and lost their soul and come back. No, have you ever seen a really honest man of integrity get rewarded for that become chairman of a committee? No, we're not. They want you to become, they absolutely want you to go there and lose your sense of conviction, your holy discontent that you come there with to change. They don't want you to change anything. You're willing, your desire to change is what puts them in jeopardy of losing their authority and their power. These guys cut deals. And if you're going to push for legislation, if you're going to push, if I want to transform the way we do elections in Texas, so I want us to be able to audit. We have to, once there's an election, you have to hold on to the data for 22 months. But unfortunately, Tucker, we don't have the ability to audit any of it. So why, why do you hold on to election material for 22 months if you can't audit it to find out if there's been corruption? So I don't know. I'm just guessing, but I've just seen this a lot. Basically, that was legislation. I'm guessing that was passed to protect corruption, but it sounds in the telling like a good government move. Like it was designed to expose corruption. In other words, under my election, integrity bill, every candidate left to hold that data for 22 months. What they don't tell you is, they can't look at it. It remains secret for two years. Yeah. And so myself and Paul Bettencourt, Senator Bettencourt, have introduced legislation that the president supports fully supports. And these guys know it, the Republicans all know it. But what's the piece of legislation that Democrats say when they're going to get behind a speaker, they're like, they're these things that are not going to pass this year. Toes legislation on Bettencourt's legislation on doing audits. And the transition of kids. So like I had a bill this year, House Bill 2258, I think it was 2258. I had like 70 piece of legislation. But they sent it to Ken King's committee where Ken King killed the bill. I had three members of his committee that became joint authors on the bill to stop the social transition of children. And they never gave the bill a hearing. Why would a Republican want to protect like the destruction of children through transgender ideology? Like why would a Republican be in favor of that? I don't think they are. I think they basically are against it. But they compromise and say the only way I can do good things for my people back home is if I maintain my chairmanship and the only way I can maintain my chairmanship is to cut a deal with Democrats and Democrats don't want this piece of legislation to pass. And so they kill it. They just kill it. But we turned it into an amendment and we stuck it on a Senate Bill 12 at the end of session. And now social transition of kids is illegal in the state of Texas. Nice. So was that distressing to Republicans? Here's the hard part about it is that we knew that we were going to try and pass it as an amendment. And so I didn't make a big deal about it during session because I didn't want the Democrats to blow it up. I didn't want them to know that we were still going to try and put it on something. So we just take kind of quiet, quietly kept looking for the right bill to put it on, found it in Senate Bill 12. We worked with Brandon Craiten to make sure that he positioned 12. It's different in Texas than it is in the United States in that if you're going to pass legislation at the federal level on ice cream, you can't put something on it that has to do with bicycles. Right. They're not germane in Texas. Our legislation, the amendment has to be absolutely germane to the bill. And so we worked the Senator Craiten quietly behind the scenes to make sure that when the bill came over from the Senate, it would. So if that bill had come over from the Senate with banning social transition of kids, they would have killed his bill. They never would have left that bill out of the House floor. Because the Rhino Republicans and the Democrats would have killed the bill in committee, or they would have killed it in calendars and never would have made it to the House floor. So the bill came over. We, and I was able to put the amendment on it and it passed. Wow. It's crazy that in an overwhelmingly Republican legislature, it's that hard to ban something is transparently evil, absolutely to the core evil, destroying children, like just destroying them. Yeah. So last question, I just want as a lover of Texas and some of the other family in Texas, I go to Texas a lot. I always wonder if the people who run the state, like drive around the state, just look around because the last time I was in Texas a couple months ago in Dallas, which I city I really love dirty. It was getting dirtier. I mean, it's just noticeable. And I guess some people like, do they notice that the state needs attention? I honestly don't know. I do people talk about that. Not at all. Not at all. What are the reasons I just like Crenshaw so intensely? It's like, do you notice that this is degrading like the physical environment that you live in is not as nice as it was 10 years ago? Like that's kind of a concern. It should it be the hardest part of Austin, Texas. And I believe Washington DC is pretty much the same thing. The very first time I stepped into the Texas house, it was about a month before a sworn in. And I had never met any staffers had never talked to anybody, no one know who I was. They said representative, so good to see you. Another person says, hey, representative, great to see you. I heard your pastor. I am too. Hey, representative, you're in this business. So, and they start calling your representative right? And it's like they slowly, yeah, you know, they slowly pull you in. And I'm telling you, you're ego digs it, totally digs it. And after a while, you don't know who you are. You don't know where you are. You just know you want to be part of that. Yeah. Of course. Can you become tone deaf? But since the legislature is in Austin, it's the prettiest, you legislative building in the country by far. I know. Pink or Janet, is that right? Yeah. When I first went there more than 25 years ago to for work as a report, I was like shocked by how beautiful it was, how cool it was that had just been restored. And I was shocked by how great Austin was, the Driscoll Hotel. And yeah. And then I went back years later and it's like, you're like, homeless people sleeping in the vestibule of the of the Driscoll Hotel, six street is dangerous. The six street is a mess. But it was so cool. So, I'm not a Texan. I'm just a perennial visitor. And I noticed that. I wonder to the people who go to work at the Capitol building. Did they notice that? So talk about that. Yeah, we actually have Texas. Austin has actually gotten a little bit cleaner. Yeah. And we passed legislation banning that. We said there are areas where you can't camp. Right. And why don't you go to camp on public land? It's crazy. But the problem is that while we did that for Austin, nothing's being done about Houston. Nothing's being done about Dallas. Nothing's being done about El Paso. And so it's, you know, it's kind of putting makeup on. And, but at the end of the day, there's still a lot of scars underneath the makeup that are being hidden in Texas. So what's more important than how your constituents are living day to day? It's I don't know what's more. I don't know why you crane or any other country's more important than that. I don't either. It's just, it's a lack of putting America first. And I think people like to say America first, they believe in America first. But what does that mean? Yeah. What does that mean? Just care about your own country more than any other country. Yeah. Well, Godspeed, I really appreciate your coming. And I, I, the day that you beat Dan Crenshaw March 10th, March 3rd, we'll maybe run March 10th. I'll call you to offer you congratulations. You don't just be a good day for America. I mean, it'll just be, it'll just remind all of us that the system can still work. It's can. It absolutely can. Steve, thank you. Thanks, Tucker. We've got a new website. We hope you will visit. It's called new commission now.com and refers to a new 911 commission. So we spent months putting together our 911 documentary series. And if there's one thing we learned, it's that in fact, there was foreknowledge of the attacks. People knew the American public deserves to know. We're shocked actually to learn that to have that confirmed. But it's true. The evidence is overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States. They knew they were planning an act of terror. In his passport is a visa to go to United States, remember, before a national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell and later said he was in New York, quote, to document the event. How did no there would be an event to document in the first place because he had foreknowledge and maybe most amazingly, somebody in unknown investor shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers used on 911, as well as the banks that were inside the Twin Towers just before the attacks. They made money on the 911 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? We have to look at the evidence. The US government learned the name of that investor, but never released it. Maybe there's an inspiration for all this, but there isn't actually. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether there is or not. The public deserves to know what the hell that was. How did people know ahead of time? Oh, I was no one ever punished for it. 911 commission, the original one was a fraud. It was fake. Its conclusions were written before the investigation. That's true. And it's outrageous. This country needs a new 911 commission, one that actually tells the truth to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing happened. 911 commission covered. Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation into 911 almost 25 years later. Sorry, Justice demands it. And if you want that, go to We need to force a new investigation into 9-11 almost 25 years later. Sorry, Justice demands it. And if you want that, go to newcommissionnow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this or do this because we really mean it. Newcommissionnow.com.