Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Oh, Joe Roman. Nice to meet you, and person. I've watched many, many of your videos on YouTube, and I really, really enjoy them. That's quite flattering. But we share a common interest. This fascination with ancient civilizations, and the mysteries that come. The first video I think I saw of you was this video of these concentric circles in Africa that are remarkably similar to descriptions of Atlantis. The Rashad structure. Yeah. And then I started reading it up on it, and I'm like, this is pretty wild. And then I got into your whole YouTube page, which is called Bright Insight. And it's really excellent. So first, before we even going to start, how did you get interested in this subject? Well, going back to the sixth grade, that was when I fell in love with the Egyptians. Oh, yeah. Bring that sucker up to you. How's that sound? Perfect. I've always had a fascination for the ancients. I ain't grown up in school most topics, bored the hell out of me. And math, I'd be like counting the ceiling tiles, more than the counting numbers. And, but something like that, the ancients science history, I always thought was fun. But I never would have thought that I would grow up to find, make a career out of it. Like my story is pretty unique in that, I meet a lot of life changes about five years ago. I was heading down a path, I was really unhappy, I was doing a corporate life, and I was more depressed than I had ever been and yet I had all everything in my life. I had a good paycheck, beautiful wife, house, everything, except for a soul sucking path of a career that was going to bring me nothing but misery. What were you doing? Well, I was a fraud investigator for a large retailer, one of the largest, I'll say, it's not Walmart. I just hate Target, who cares? Oh, Jesus, you're crazy. Can't believe you're saying it. It was a sweet gig for a while. I was doing, I swear, a couple of responsibilities. Internal theft and fraud, so it was investigating employees that steal from the company. And I also managed the team that would bust the shoplifters, external theft and fraud. And that gig was awesome for a few years until, and I'm not talking crap about Target because it's a corporate thing. They're all doing the doermore with less philosophy through attrition, they get rid of other positions, and then they pass on those responsibilities to you. And then you end up doing less of what you really wanna do. For example, I was good at it, was busting people that were stealing from the company. Salaried managers. How is he still? Like what's the most clever way? Well, so it could be something as simple as stealing cash, but that's like the easiest thing to catch so that's more rare. Some people steal merchandise, so you gotta think about it. Like if you were to take, because we were joking about DVDs earlier, no one's doing them anymore. But when I was last during 2014, DVD box sets for like television series, those things go 50, 60 bucks, but if you still hold box of them and you sell them on the black market, then it just no overhead. And other things that people do is mark things down. Like you'll have a TV or a patio furniture or something, whatever, you think about it. And you just mark that stuff down. And yeah, but it could be something simple stuff. It could be people that are just trying to, I don't know. I mean, you think about it. Like it's actually, let me put it like this. And this is for the external, this is the shop lifters. You wanna guess what the number one most stolen thing out of target is out of anything else? Dump. No. I'll give you a hint. I think something you could slip in your pocket. I'll give you a hint. Oh yes. It's women in something it's just dropping their purse. It's nail polish. Nail polish. More than anything. Really? So they just walk by and they just go, I can get away with this. Yeah, just grab it. And you catch them on cameras. Is that how you bust them? Yeah. And so that's the thing a lot of people don't realize. I tell you, I don't steal from Target man. Like you will send your picture to all the other stores and you will memorize your face. The little bit of it just don't steal. Yeah, don't steal. Do the right thing. Don't be a fucking piece of shit. Yeah, it's like, some people think, well, it's a big company. And it's harmless, but I'm like no, like payroll matters. And everything comes down to these fractions of percentages. And this can hurt employees from having hours. Like, well, it's just gross. Like, yeah. So you did that. And then you didn't like it. So how'd you get into this YouTube world of these awesome videos? All right. So I was at Target. I was unhappy. I tried to find another gig. Nothing was pending out. So I'm like, all right, I'm going to go back to school and get an MBA. Masters of Business Administration. Even though I wasn't a fan of school bike, this would get me that six figure corporate gig, of the manager. And I was sick and tired of all this bureaucratic red tape shit of knowing that there's something a company could do better and has to go through so many people and no one listens on my Christ. So I'm like, well, let me become the decision maker. Let me go get a high power job. And that will satisfy me. But maybe with you, the program, we got real depressed. I was married. And I was like, once I graduated, I was doing some soul searching. We moved to Boise, Idaho for a change. And nothing was piano for finding a job. And so I was like, I said depressed. And I was like, fuck this. I'm just going to go become a school teacher. I'll bite the bullet. I don't care about the money anymore. I just want to be happy. And I always thought being a teacher would be fun. But truth be told, I'm like, I'm not doing that for $35,000 a year. Like that's your poor. Teachers school teachers are practically at the poverty level. But anyway, so I was like, I'll do that. And then they're like, well, you got to go back to school and get some surgeons. Like another year and a half. I'm not going back to school. I just got to masters. And so I was like, well, I had heard people were on YouTube and making money. And I'm like, I can teach anything on there. And so I started shotgunning it. I started making videos on all kinds of different topics. All kinds of crazy stuff. Joe, if you saw my earliest stuff, I mean, I've deleted more than half my videos. I was trying all kinds of woo-woo. Well, you had to learn. You have to learn how to do it right. Yeah. But YouTube is, YouTube has a lot of dumb shit on it, like undeniably. But you can learn a lot of things on YouTube. There's a lot of legitimately fascinating information on YouTube and legitimately informative videos. So that comes to you. So you start making these videos on ancient civilizations. Those were the ones that got the most views and it all made sense because it was the most fun topic to make videos on. So you were the most enthusiastic about it. And yeah, and then it ended up making sense. It worked out that way. Because even just doing the research wasn't hard. Because if I'm reading something, I'm not interested in my brain just course. Yeah. Same thing. But I'm very, very interested in ancient civilizations, which is why I got into your videos. That's very flattering, Joe. And I guess it's interesting. Because before we hadn't chatted on, it's like, which videos had he seen and what stuck out? I see quite a view. I've seen most of your videos on construction methods of Egypt, of the pyramids, and some of the videos on all the other structures that are there, you've got to stop messing with that. It's going to fuck with your head. Is it? Going up and down and up and down. I know. I've been constantly turning it down. You're fidgeting, just relax. Well, I'm not used to hearing myself like this. Right. Yeah. You get used to it. But it's the best way because it stops us from talking over each other. Right. People normally, in normal conversation, they talk over each other all the time. When you hear both voices at the same time in your ear, you realize how annoying that sounds to people listening. I got you. Like if you do a podcast with four people, and I've done a bunch of them with four people, it's a fucking nightmare. If you don't have headphones on, it's a disaster to listen to. Yeah. I heard your one two weeks ago on Tim Poole with everyone else, Alex Jones, and everyone who's a disaster. Oh, it's only eight of you. It was a disaster. So what was your first one that you realized actually caught on? Like what was the first subject? It was on Nikola Tesla. And I was talking about his thoughts on intuition and where his inventions came from and how he would just sit around thinking up all of his inventions. It wasn't through tinkering around. He was convinced that there was ideas coming to him from the universe. Yeah. Yeah, he was convinced that he was some sort of like a radio. Yep, for signals. Yep. Which I think a lot of people who are very creative, they think that way. A lot of singers will tell you that their songs come from, just like they come from the air. Some of the best jokes that have ever written just seem like they've come out of nowhere, which is really confusing. Because it's like, that's what the concept of the muse is, right? The concept of the muse is you sit. Like, have you ever read Stephen Pressfield? Yes. Is that with the? The word of art? Yes. Yeah. I thought it was the resistance, actually. Am I thinking of something else? Yeah. No, Stephen Pressfield. Same guy. Okay. Resistance is the thing that he talks about that everybody struggles against. This is like the procrastination and that the muse, he treats it as if it's a real thing and that you just need to sit down and then be a professional and give yourself this amount of time. Like this is when I show up every day and then the muse will meet me there. But if you don't treat it like your profession and you don't respect the muse, it won't show up. Right. And his idea is that this is like a real thing that's giving you this data, which is very similar to the way Tesla thought about things. Do you believe that? I don't know. But you said it. But if you treat it that way, it's real. It's like my same feeling I have about God. Like if you live life, like there's a God, if you live life, like there's real morals and ethics to the universe, I feel like you can get a better result. And it's not like that you should only be ethical and kind because you feel like there's like a big guy in the sky watching you. But if you do uphold the principles, like the primary principles of Christianity, right? Do you want to others as you would have to do them to you? Treat everyone as if they are your brother, your sister and love and kindness and that all these different, very, easy to understand principles of love and happiness and camaraderie. If you just follow those, they're really beneficial. They really work. Now, does that mean that a guy came back from the dead and walked on water? And that seems a little fishy. But if you just follow those principles as if there really is a God, I believe that it's a great framework for life. And then I think that you could live a better, more fulfilled life if you live like that. I totally agree. And it makes you wonder, Joe, I do have a wonder like, what is all this about life? The universe, like where did this all come from? Yeah. And the very fact that we're sitting or talking about it. So I was thinking not long ago, that's like, OK, let's say big bang. Like the creation. And I can wrap my head around an expansion of energy. What I can't wrap my head around is how there was ever nothing. And then something. And then so essentially, if the big bang happened as they say, that's essentially an explosion. So that aren't explosions. Essentially, that's death. But yet, here we are, we're made out of stardust. Right? Like that's science. I think we are made of stardust. And yet, here we are discussing meaning. So I look at love, humor, the desire or the pleasure of art of all things. Whether it includes comedy or the way we feel when we see nature or painting or anything else. And yet, I think that the meaning is the evidence of the divine. And I wouldn't say it as like, you're talking about like, god, it's like someone in the clouds or whatever, like, you know, going to judge us or something like that. But doesn't that mean that we're the universe experiencing ourselves or itself in some way that the fact that we're? That's many people described it that way. Yeah. That we're the universe experiencing ourselves. If you wanted to be really pragmatic, you would say that all these things, or whether it's love or creativity or the desire for success and to have your work appreciated, what all those things really do is they encourage camaraderie, which encourages cooperation, which gets more work done. Creativity encourages innovation, which creates better and newer things. And the desire to be appreciative for one's work makes one work extra hard to achieve these goals, but ultimately, what are all these goals? Like, what's the end result? The end result is better things. Constant innovation, better thing. I mean, I've talked about this many times before because I'm obsessed with it, but for the people that have heard this, please forgive me. I am obsessed with the concept that human beings are essentially like a caterpillar that's creating a cocoon. And that out of this technological butterfly will emerge. And we don't even realize why we're doing it. The caterpillar's not consciously aware, hey, it's time to make the cocoon. The human beings stuck in traffic, working a nine to five, working for Apple every day, is not really thinking, hey, I am a part of this thing that will one day give birth to artificial intelligence and to sentient beings that are made out of carbon and silicon and they're created in the laboratory rather than in a womb. But I think that's what we're doing. Yeah. And so it gets me back when we're talking about where these ideas come from and the idea of them used. Because you've got these ideas for jokes that have panned out quite well, right? And it's like, so I look at my videos. And sometimes I'm really struggling with a title and a thumbnail, which is I would say the most important thing because you've got to get people to click, right? And then after that, you need good content. It'll just click off and it'll never come back. But it's interesting. It's that sometimes it's when I put the intention out into the universe, I'll give myself this feeling of self belief that I am getting just the right title and just the right thumbnail to get me views. Because that was my, that was my original goal, was like, I'm like, all right, I'm going to go down this YouTube path that I might as well do it. I'm going to go big. I want one million subscribers and I want to get videos to get millions of views. And I want to teach something to somebody in the process and have fun doing it and encourage other people to look into things. And the thing is is that sometimes with some of these ideas and like from one second to the next, all of a sudden the idea comes and it worked out quite well in many, in so many times over and over again. But focusing. I mean, you think about what you're doing. You're sitting down there and you're thinking about it. You're focusing. I will. And you're choosing your creativity and your concentration. It's not, it doesn't necessarily have to be mystical. Well, true. Except for that. Sometimes I'll be tossing in over these ideas for weeks of focusing on it. And sometimes it's would delay me so long because if I have a good content, like I need to know how to share this. But if you can't market, especially with YouTube and how big it is now. And if you got to show somebody why they should click on your video and just focusing on it enough isn't necessarily what brought me my ideas. I've struggled tremendously by focusing too hard. And then all of a sudden when I maybe let go a little bit, I'll get this flash. I'm like, ah, that's how it should look. Because especially when I'm, these topics I'm talking about, like the say it, Lantis, which we've got, we've got to have to talk about that. How do you make a video when there's like 10,000 other, or Lantis videos out there? What's going to make someone want to click on this one more than the others? So it's got to be a title. It's maybe perhaps a little provocative or have certain keywords for the algorithm. And I've learned like with thumbnails, you got it because if people are leading- Do you think about this shit a lot? Yeah. How to get people to watch a lot. How long have you been doing this now? I created, all right. So August of 2016 was when my first videos started coming out. True, June, July, but those videos don't exist anymore. The earliest one you'll find on my channel will be, I believe, August of 2016. So it's been a process of trying to- The first four months, I didn't have 100 subscribers for the first four months. You're obsessed with the subscriber number and the views and all that shit. It was a goal because I'm like, all right. So I did a complete 180 in my life. And I went from this path that was more that's say normal and all the check boxes. And I'm like, well, if I'm going to do this, I want to be successful at it. Right. But I want to give back in the process. And by give back, I mean like, teach someone something like, I don't want to go do silly, dumbass videos, even if it would make me more money. I'd rather be proud of something I'm doing, if that makes sense. Right. Yeah. So the Atlantis one. Yeah. The wrist shot structure. Yeah. I was wondering if you saw this video. Yeah. No, that was a big one that I saw. Because I've been fascinated by the concept of Atlantis. Ever since I had these conversations with Randall Carlson and Graham Hancock about the younger drive impact theory and this concept that somewhere in roughly around 11,000, 12,000 years ago, we were hit by a series of comments. And it's pretty evident that that's a fact. If you do the core samples of the Earth, they find this nuclear glass all over the Earth that exists in that time period. And it seems like something happened that reset civilization. And there's very little evidence of advanced civilizations before that up until recently, up until the last couple of decades. They started uncovering things like go backlight, tap A, and all these other structures that are clearly from more than 12,000 years ago. And they're really complex and really large with enormous stones. And it's sort of caused people to rethink the history of the Earth and the history of human civilizations. And Atlantis has always been the big one. That has been the one that everybody talked about was this incredibly advanced civilization. And no one can figure out where it is. Right. Or if it was real. I think that Atlantis, because surely that went to be necessarily the name just through the change of language over, let's say, 12, 13,000 years ago, which would be the time frame. So surely there would be several different changes of language. But I think it represented a civilization that was doing great things. They were more global than what many people think would be possible. Atlantis was said to be a kingdom made up of, or an empire excuse me, made up of 10 kingdoms. And then there was the lost city of Atlantis, which was the capital, which was said to be made up of concentric circles, two of water, three of land. And essentially that they were obliterated by a cataclysm as passed down by Plato, although it's worth mentioning that Plato got the story of Atlantis from Solon, who is his uncle separated by six generations. But what most people don't realize is that Solon had traveled to Egypt. And so it's the ancient Egyptians is where that tale comes from, which makes it even more bizarre because I would argue that the most spectacular ancient civilization is the Egyptians. I mean, no disrespect to the Romans. Hard to deny. Right? I mean, let me just say, because I want to on this podcast encourage people to travel to Egypt. It's all you got to go. I really want to a friend of mine just went and she got back and she was telling me incredible things about it. Jamie, we pull up the photos of these concentric circles. Tell him. Yeah. The wrist shot. R-I-C-H-A-T. It's worth mentioning that in the first couple, I just want to say it's wrist shot. I used to call it Rick Hott. I was mispronouncing it. But then he asked you this, Joe, real quick. When you saw my video, was that the very first time you had ever seen this thing before? Yeah. That's the thing. So when I first saw this, I was like, what the fuck is that? By the way, you see that white? All those white blemishes? That's salt. This was under the ocean. And people, let me just say, you mentioned Randall Carlson and Graham Hancock. I love them. And I know for sure that they don't particularly think this is the site for a few different reasons. So let me say there's absolute doubt. Even I am not 100% certain. I'm not even number of certain lenses existed. What I am certain is that humans were doing spectacular things in a cataclysmic event happened called the Younger Dryas and reset something for somebody. Is there a natural explanation for this formation? Yes. So let me say that it is considered to be mysterious. They're not 100% certain of it. However, the consensus is that it was a volcanic dome that had risen in collapse multiple times, like 100 million years ago, allegedly. I say allegedly, I'm not necessarily disagreeing with that. I'm just saying, I would like to know where sometimes they get these figures from. Explain to me why it was 100 million years ago and not 99 or 98. Because here we are talking about how crazy things changed just the last 12, 13,000 years. So when they throw around these numbers, one million years in itself is an incredibly long period of time. But getting back to your question, some had originally thought that maybe it was an impact site from an asteroid, or perhaps, but there's no evidence for it. There's none of the nanobrombismus. There's these concentric circles. I've never seen anything. Obviously, I'm not an archeologist, but I've never seen anything like this. And if you've studied structures, that are like man-made structures. I've never seen anything like this. That humans have made, but I've definitely never seen like, go to that one when it curses on Jamie. Please. So is this, you want to see? All right. What is this? OK. One step at a time, because we also have to take into consideration that people are just listening. So come and describe what we're looking at here. OK. So what you're looking at is approximately 250 miles inland in the total barren desert of Mauritania Africa. But what's in there? Looks like why isn't blue? That's just showing you the... What it used to look like? No, this is what it looks like right now through. I forgot what you call this type of animation. But it's essentially a satellite imagery that they enhanced in order for you to see the difference in elevation and the actual structure to itself. OK. So if there was water in this area, you would see it this way that it would be these concentric circles that are raised above the water. And then the water would be inside of it like that. Well, just to clarify, this particular image, no, this is not trying to represent water. So that blue is actually picking up on salt. So it's just... It's salt. All that was salt. But it used to be underwater, right? It's well, because it was underwater. That's what I believe. And that's what makes the most sense to me. Others will disagree. And then we tell you why. It is currently 1,200 feet above sea level. It's 250 miles inland. And so some people say this was never under the ocean, at least not for the last 10s of millions of years is what the scientists claim. I argue that since the salt is still there, and not only that, Jamie, if you go to the other images that show you more of the white, that you were previously on, the one to the middle to the left right there. So those areas with the most white blemishes happen to be the areas that are the lowest in elevation, which to me tells me that salt water had settled there. But not only that, Joe. Atlantis was said to be, like we said, multiple rings of water and land. However, it was said to open to the sea, to the south. And what you're looking at here, the south, so this is oriented north, south, east, and west. What do you see to the south? And especially if you could get another. This is very flat area that looks like it's the lowest elevation. Around it looks like it's higher. I mean, it's hard to tell from this image, Jamie. Will you Google map it, just type in, even if you went to Mortenia. So you could see this from space. Astronauts use it as a locator. And they don't really familiar or aware of it until the Gemini missions in the early 1960s. So if you go to Google Earth, you'll be able to find this quite quickly. It stands out. And it's why they call it the eye of Africa or the eye of the Sahara. All right, so just pan out a little bit. And it'll provide us with a much, keep going. All that white is salt. In fact, I had a friend, Johnson Grins, and everyone out there and tasted that shit off the fucking ground. That's salt. Because I'll be able to say this was never under the ocean. And I'm like, all right, you see all that? Even Randall Carlson himself, which let me just say, he for a few reasons doesn't, he favors the azure. He doesn't think this is likely to be location for a few reasons. He favors what? The azores, the island chain, which would be, it's, it's, and he thinks that that was Atlanta's. He to him, he's partial towards that. But so he analyzed this site. And you see all the striations. It looks like the ocean or, so that's all water erosion show. And if you scroll in, so remember when Randall was on your show and he showed you the Vizuva, Missoula flood plains, and all those giant ripples from the huge current that it went through, this, this is here. So scroll in right there where your cursor is Jamie. Yeah, scroll right in. You're going to see those same water ripples. Keep going. Because this is what you're looking at here is, Panda, this is many miles. Like keep mine, this structure is 30 miles across. That looks like the bottom of the ocean. Like if you see where the water breaks on the sand. Yep. And I have a better picture. And that, just to clarify, that salt, or excuse me, that white is salt. And that is the, because it's a lot of people don't know Joe that the Sahara Desert wasn't a thing until approximately 5,000 years ago. It's only in the last several years in, by the way, I'm quoting MIT research here, that the Sahara goes back and forth from green to desert approximately every 20,000 years. They believe it has something to do with the earth's tilt. And that's what they're discussing. But so this whole area, because people like, well, that's not Atlantis. I'm like, well, first of all, if this whole, if the Western, or excuse me, the Sahara Desert was a lush green tropical paradise, which had the largest known freshwater lakes ever known to have existed. For example, Megalake Chad, which is, it's like three times more water surface than all of the North American Great Lakes combined. Big sucker. Oh shit, how's it not a notion? I know, it's a freshwater. It was when it existed. And that was at the time when the Sahara was green. And it also had some of the largest known rivers exist that were known to have existed throughout the world. I think that it's still the ranked tenth today or something like that. But so you have to, when you see this, people have to imagine that this area was once green. And that if that, because one of the arguments I make is that the fact that that salt is on top of that dirt, to me is indicative that the ocean flowed over here far more recently than what people think. How wide is this structure? OK, so... It's concentric circles. I meant to bring, I brought all these, do you have a laser pointer in here? No, it's OK. So the circles themselves is about 14 and a half miles across. However, if you go, they complete Shabang, the whole circle itself is just shy of 30 miles. So the whole thing is 30 miles, which would be like the size of a city. Right? Well, we'll keep in mind, the outer ring would have been water. So that went to necessarily count it. But some people will say that this is too big according to Plato's description. And then we just say that I'm like, well, hold on a second. I don't think that we should consider that, because of loss of translation, that we should consider the measurements a key detail. The question becomes, is it big enough to be a city with possibly millions of people? Because the way it was described is that it was a city that was said to be busy all day, all night, rich and trade with languages spoken from all over. So I'm like, OK, that would imply millions of people. I mean, if a city's busy all day and all night, I think of large metropolitan areas like New York, Chicago, London, whatever. And so if this was indeed an ancient or a site of an ancient civilization, well, then it would have, I mean, they're obviously not going to have skyscrapers. So it would have to be an area big enough to sustain that many people in the rich hot structure certainly does. And so the idea would be that this would lead out to the ocean and that these circles would be where the water is and the ridges would be where the structures are, where the houses and the buildings are. And people will say, well, where is that stuff? Now I'm like, well, look at it. It got, that was obliterated. Yeah, those people should shut the fuck down. Well, let's just look at what's going on with the sand and those clear water erosion marks on the sand. But that also could be wind, right? Couldn't the way that the ripples in that, that sand couldn't that be wind? Both. However, just to justify that. Is that sand that is where the curse is at right there? Yeah, that's all sand. However, the, it's also actually go to the right where it says layers, Jamie, can you scroll in right there? Cause that was, we'll show you the ripples more. So it's a combination of sand and rock. You mean to the left, right? Right there, that's what I'm talking about. Those are giant ripples. And I'm quoting, let me just say, I'm quoting Randall Carlson who I consider to be an expert on these ungeological formations. And so, yeah. Right, but isn't that what wind driven sand looks like? If you go to dunes, dunes look like that. Yeah, and undo- But hold on, this is sand, right? Yes, well, it's combination rock and sand in between. Right, but this is like what it would look like if wind driven sand and rock underneath it. Right. So what the implication is that it was blasted by water and then after that, the wind has done its thing and moved the sand all over it in between. So 20,000 years ago, this was all green lush from the rest. No, no, 5,000. 5,000. So how many? I guess, yes. So I could show you. When do they think Atlantis was? Is it 11,600? Is it 11,600? Is it 11,600? Is it 11,600? Is it 11,600? Oh, it was destroyed, which was the younger driest climate catastrophe. Because so Plato had to, so this is 600 BC and Plato said that it happened 9,000 years earlier. So that would be 11,600 years ago, which coincides with the younger driest climate catastrophe, which makes it so compelling to me. That is actual scientific evidence that indicates that Atlantis actually existed. Because it's very specific. It is very specific, it's not scientific, right? It's like there's no real evidence. Okay, let me just trace that is civilization. Yes, let me rephrase. A civilization got fucked 11,600. So never mind Atlantis. Let me rephrase. A civilization was around the stories of it were passed down and they got a bullet. A civilization got fucked. Yeah. 11,600. So never mind that land. Let me rephrase. A civilization was around the stories of it were passed down and they got obliterated. So that's what I'm implying. Well, we all definitely know that the younger driest impact theory is extremely plausible. There are, without a doubt, like many, many impact parts points on Earth where they find this trite night, this nuclear glass, which they you can get either from a nuclear explosion, or you get it from some sort of a meteor impact, large scale, all over the continent. And we know that all of the planet, I should say, we know that that happened. This is like real hardcore geological evidence. So if we know that there were structures before that, which we do now, because of go back to tap in a few other places, that they're reasonably sure were pre-11,000 years ago, 12,000 years ago, then we know that something was around back then that was very sophisticated. How sophisticated we don't know. But then the other thing is how much would be left? If you've ever seen those photographs of Detroit, the way you see houses that are being consumed by trees, and there's some great ones in Russia as well, or they have these photographers have taken to going into these abandoned cities and watching the nature, like watching trees and the greenery, consume these houses. But in Detroit, we're only talking about a couple decades. You've got trees growing through the center of houses. So the houses had holes in them. Rain came in through the holes. There's holes in the floor. Something, whether it's a tree or something, grew up through the floorboards, burst through the floorboards, saving a fine some of those images, Jamie, because they're really fascinating. And so for people to just get an understanding of time scale, where we're looking at in these images. Quick one, my phone real fast. Yeah, so that's one. Yeah, so it's one from 2009. And then you see it from 2013. It's basically consuming that house. So in 2009, you just have a house in between two houses. In 2013, the house is abandoned. And it's being consumed by trees. It looks like it's been condemned. It looks like it's going to fall in on itself pretty soon. Yeah, but it's four years. It's wild. And so that's what's crazy. In four years, I mean, if you came back four years later and you saw the house is abandoned, like right now at 2009, it looks like a normal house. Like you drive by or there's a house. In 2013, you go, oh, the house getting eaten by trees. But there's some other ones from Detroit, Jamie, where you can see houses where the trees are actually growing up through the center of the house. I'll find why this is going to be crazy. No worries. But my point is, this is just a few years. Right. If you go a few hundred years, everything's gone. Look at the Titanic granted it's under the ocean, but in just over a little more than 100 years, look at that one. It's more than 50% gone already. Look at that one right there. Oh, that's that's good. That's crazy. I like that. Yeah, that's a good 60 years. Like this house has been absolutely consumed by trees. You know, Joe, people ask, we'll say, well, where's the rest of the evidence? I'm like, all right, so first of all, metal rust away. Some people say, what about the plastic? I'm like, who said they did plastic? And by the way, if they were to, what makes you think that they would choose petroleum for it? Because the hemp plant grew, used to grew naturally throughout the world before it was eradicated. And you can make completely biodegradable, hard plastic out of hemp plant. Yeah, you can. And this was something we absolutely should be doing right now. And how dare you, Joe, that big oil, come on now. Isn't it fascinating, though, when you think about the idea that these civilizations were super advanced, but did it in an incredibly different way than the way we're doing it? Like we think that the only way to be super advanced is to have heavy machinery, to have electronics, to have, you know, 5G wireless internet access and all these different things. But what they did somehow was figure out a way how to cut these immense stones and move them from hundreds of miles away. And they figured out to do this where they left behind no evidence of the construction. It's wild. And this is one reason Joe, I want you to get to Egypt so bad because when you see these stones. So I had a really, in my own mind, I remember thinking what it would, picturing what it would look like before I went to Egypt, what it would look like in person. Joe, it's bigger and far more, everything's bigger and far more impressive in person. And the pictures never do it justice. I went over there with an ultra wide camera lens. And like, you know, that's the only way to get the full capture of many of these stones. But yet it distorts, it doesn't show you just how big they are. So one of the things I like to do is have somebody stand next to it and then take the photo because then you can actually, I have three pictures of you next to it. And you're about five, 10. I would, yeah, I try to say it all the time. Five, 10. So people could be like just, you know, average size guy just, yeah, there you go. Yeah, look at this. That is a 125 ton stone. That is, oh, shout out to my Instagram bright insight. Let me just say real quick. Bright underscore insight on the screen. Yeah, but just to clarify, there's another channel called Bright Inside. Oh, I think they're up to be honest because I, but that's another story. But I just want to clarify that. And it has to actually kind of hilarious being on here right now because I never even shared my last name. The internet didn't know. Like if you type Bright Insight Core SETI. So I'm Jimmy Core SETI, to anyone listening. And I decided to keep my last name off the internet because when I first started this, I'm like, all right, I'm talking all kinds of crazy topics. I don't want the attention leave me alone. But coming on here, it's like why hold it back any more. And so anyways, it's funny. No, it gives a shit. Yeah, no, it gives a shit. Yeah, exactly. And in the funny thing is Joe, it's like, well, yeah, whatever. Well, look at these images, man. These stones, what's fascinating to me is how they're uneven, but yet they're perfectly fit into place. I mean, but what I mean by uneven is there are a bunch of different shapes. For the people that are just listening, and if you go to the bright underscore Insight Instagram page, there's plenty of images that Jimmy has up here, but these stones are much, much taller than him. They're immense. And they're these weird shapes, but yet they fit into each other perfectly. But what's crazy also is they're smooth in some places where they're like, it's almost like artistic, right? Like the way they jumbled them all together, but like perfectly fit them. So look at that. God, that's amazing. Scroll over again, Jimmy, because I'm gonna, I'm gonna wow, you go one more time, I think. All right, so that stone right there is 17 feet tall above ground, and another 12 below, or maybe it's the other way around. Maybe it's 12 and then 17. I can't remember, but it's a 29 foot long stone, at least 100 tons. So they dug under the ground, or did the ground consume it? Doug. Well, I believe that. That's what I was told. Right, it's hard to say, because like a lot of the structures in ancient Egypt, especially like the old kingdom, they found them underneath, where they were buried by sand, which is obviously very different than, this is just hard dirt. Yeah. And where in Egypt was this? Oh, I'm sorry, this is Peru. So this is Machapitu. No, this is, so this is a saksay woman, is what it's called, and it's these huge polygonal walls, these terraces. And, all right, because I can see it on there, I'm such a nerd joke. You got to say that doorway. It's huge. And that first picture we were showing you, I said this is 125 tons, just to put it into perspective for people. That's more than 3, 737, 800, which is like a common say Southwest jet. Have you, then three of those suckers? One stone. And it's like, how do they move it? Yeah, I put this in there. I'm into planes, Joe. So to frick it, Parisin, because I also made the comparison that it's 20,000 pounds heavier than a 767, 400, which is a wide body jet liner. Can you go back, Jamie? Go back one? It's as a matter, that's fine. These stones do they have an idea of where the quarry was? Not exactly. It's at least 20 miles here, but like, there's other places they Egypt, where you have like the 70 ton stone blocks that remove more than 500 miles. Yeah, and the only boats that they had that we know of were completely incapable of carrying something like that. That's correct. Now that doesn't necessarily mean they didn't have something that's gone away. But I have to say something because I know exactly because there's so many people out there that will cite, there was a discovery a handful of years ago of this papyrus that had, it was essentially a receipt for limestone blocks that were brought up the Nile and delivered to Giza. And many people have said, see, this is, there was such clickbait fraud headlines about it saying, you know, papyrus describing how they built the pyramids. That is the biggest clip clip bait nonsense because if you actually look at what was detailed on it, it doesn't say anything, it doesn't use the word pyramid. It doesn't say what they were used for. All it says is horizon of kufu. And so what some people interpret that to mean is that the alleged Pharaoh who built the great pyramid, his name was kufu and that horizon of kufu essentially could indicate, oh, his resting place as in horizon being to the west where you go when you die. That's all that thing says. And it was already known, Joe, that some of the blocks were bought to Giza. So I just want to point that out because I know that people are going to Google this stuff. I'm like, oh, no, no, we know exactly how they did it. I'm like, I like how you use this goofy voice to have your dissenters or your dissenters have kufu. As you're saying here, you got this papyrus that will explain everything. It doesn't. So this papyrus is some kind of a receipt. Is that the idea? It was, I forgot, yes, it was, I'm forgetting his name off the top, but it was a gentleman and he was moving blocks. And but the thing that people need to realize is that there are hundreds and hundreds of other structures right around the Great Pyramid that are unbelievably smaller and the blocks are unbelievably smaller than the ones in the pyramid. There's a lot of things that were built there over a few thousand years. So it's like that, it doesn't prove that I was for the pyramid and I don't think it is, but who knows? Because I know how the skeptics are. So I want to be open-minded, but like the reality is it does not say pyramid. It doesn't describe how anything was constructed. It's worth saying. Either way, it is a limestone receipt. So there was some sort of trade in these stones. And is there any depictions of transport of these blocks? Zero, except there is one that was, I don't know if it was the Tomb of Rancara, whatever, I might be getting the name wrong. But it shows a 58 ton statue that they dragged on sleds and it seems to depict them pouring water. But it's worth mentioning. What is that one? How does someone find that? I have to, I mean, I have it on my, I brought my computer, I just don't have it in here with me. I wish I could show it to you. Type in Egyptians sled statue. And that will Google bring that up under Google image. Is that it right there? Boom. So that's a recreation because this was destroyed and damaged, but someone had interpreted it. I was destroyed and damaged. How? I believe it was water flooding. There was different place. I could be wrong on that to get a lot. I'm not a chamois, so we could see it larger. But they're showing, that's what was allegedly depicted. I use allegedly just because we can't see it today, but I don't have any doubt, I'm just saying. But so that, hold slow down. Sorry. When we're talking about this, like when was this destroyed? Oh, not long in 1850 something like that. See the head of it? 100 something years ago. Down, down, Jamie. Yeah, so we get the full image. Look out. So the idea is that you got all these guys pulling, it's on a sled and they're pouring water. And how old they think this image was? I believe if I remember right, 3500 years. Well, that seems pretty reasonable if they moved it this way. Have you ever seen those videos from the 1930s of them moving entire buildings? Like huge buildings? I haven't seen that. See, see if you can find the time lapse videos of them moving buildings from the 1930s. Not only do they move these buildings like several inches a day, and they completely rotated, like 180 degrees where the foundation of the building way. But they also kept the power and electricity and the gas on. That's what I just wanted to ask you. This is it. People didn't quit working the entire time. Yeah, the people that were in the building kept working. So it's an eight story, 11,000 ton Indiana Bell building rotation in 1930. So in 1930, first of all, you have to take any consideration. The sophistication of the machinery was very different than we have today. I mean, most of these buildings were made with bricks. They, you know, they had steel beams and structures. Like I'm sure you've seen those construction photos of these guys that were eating lunch on a beam high above New York City, which is fucking wild. Never do that. That scares the shit out. I get sweaty hands just looking at those pictures. I'm not even afraid of heights back to that video, please. But that video of this building, I mean, you think about it. This is in 1930. And, you know, obviously we can do much more today than we could then. But what they did play it. Yeah, I know. But when you watch this happen, like this is fucking wild, man. They move this entire building. I am, let me just say I am less impressed by the moving of things. Because technically, like if you use wedges, you could lift a whole house. So just keep jamming them in there. It's kind of like, so although one random thought I'm having is that with that prior illustration of that 58 ton statue, there's other ones in Egypt called the Colossi of Memnon. And those are 720 tons of piece. And they were carved estimated from a one out of one's piece of stone, a thousand ton stone. And moved tremendous distances. So I'd like to see that done. But I would think that that same method could be done to scale. And so I don't disagree with it. What I am curious about Joe is how they got those 120 or 130 70 ton granite blocks more than 300 feet up into the Great Pyramid alleged King chamber. Yeah. Well, these images and that building, that's a good point is that this not made with enormous stones. This is even though the building itself is enormous, we know that piece by piece wasn't really that big, except for the beams and some of the structural elements of it. But if you look at some of those kings chamber stones, me and my god, and they're so perfectly cut. It's unreal. It's unreal, Joe. And that's the thing that impresses me more is the cuts themselves. Because the Egyptians are said to be a Bronze Age culture, which means that's supposed to be the most sophisticated type of tooling that they had. However, when modern tests have been done on testing it on granite and limestone, it's failed miserably. And what I mean by that is that you can technically cut these things in half, but it takes a tremendous amount of time. And if they were alleged because each pyramid in keep mine, there's more like something 118 pyramids in Egypt. A lot of people don't realize that. You just think of the three big ones in Giza. But all of these, if they were said to be tombs for the pharaohs, which I don't agree with, and for a variety of reasons, they were all said to be done in a chronological order and within a certain period of time. And like when you're talking tens of millions of stone blocks in aggregate, because like the Great Pyramid is 2.3 million, you have the other couple that are a couple million a pop. And then does include all the other tens of millions of blocks to make up statues, casing stones, other buildings, literally, I mean, I estimate, and this is just a ballpark, but it had to be at least 50 million stones cut throughout ancient Egypt. And I'm like, when you're doing it with methods that can barely get more than an inch an hour. And by that, I'm talking a copper saw and the poor sand in water, and essentially the quartzite particles are what's cutting it. But Joe, it's so slow and not to mention the precision is nowhere near it. And so it's like, it's a mystery. Because there's a few things people need to know is that nowhere, and all the tens of thousands of hieroglyphs found throughout ancient Egypt, not one single one of them shows anything about them cutting stone, nor does it show anything depicting the construction of a pyramid. No, we lost a lot during the Library of Alexandria burning, right? Well, yes, although I've swine me to video on that years ago saying that stupid Caesar burnt that thing down, but you know, I'm starting to think to I'm like, the Caesar's were highly intelligent and they were gathers of information and documented everything and like, you know, Joe, they kept that. I would have rated that thing, took all that information, and now it gets me thinking about like, you know, found a can archive and stuff. Yeah, but all of a sudden you weren't there, right? Like the Caesar probably wasn't there either. They said it was that people. Well, okay, right, but he invaded. Yeah, they invaded, but do you think like he was there? Like they probably had a bunch of barbarians at the helm, and these savages were bloodthirsty and they're increasing killing people and taking over Egypt and they lit shit on fire. You know, they're probably weren't even thinking like, that hey, the the actual construction methods that, you know, we could pass down from generation and generation are here. It's possible. I don't know. So you think they kept it in the Vatican? Well, well, no, no, that's, well, that is a fun topic. I don't, I don't, I'm not convinced of it. It just seems to me that throughout war, people gather intelligence whenever like they capture somebody and kill them. And it just seems to me that the Caesar's would have possibly, maybe they did, maybe they didn't, maybe they burnt it all down or maybe they kept that stuff because they've- Have you been to the Vatican? No. It's wild. Yeah. Vatican's confusing. Yeah, because there's so much shit there. I knew that there was an immense amount of artwork there, but when you actually go there and you see the billions and billions of dollars worth of art, that was accumulated over who knows how many hundreds, if not thousands of years. It's pretty shocking. Yeah. It's like a Raiders horde. I mean, that's really what it is. It's like, they- Well, yeah. They clearly stole the shit. Yeah. It's like the Romans, you got to think about, because that all originates from the Romans. Yeah. And I just want to remind everybody that like, when they took over like a quarter of the world's population all of Europe, they didn't like show up like, hey, you know, we'd like to just, can we have your land? Like everyone that didn't speak the language was a barbarian and they pillaged, raped, and took it and just stole it. Like it's ours now. Yeah. And they have it all in one spot. And that one spot is also its own country, which is weird. Its own country inside Italy. So it has its own extradition laws, which is great because it happens to be overrun with pedophile. Yes. This is true. It's pretty fucked. And meanwhile, they have 53 miles of shelf space within that archive. That's why I was getting my conspiracy ideas going because it's like, no one's allowed in there. You have to be a certain academic and you have to get permission and not only, so you can't just go browse it. You have to specifically request what you want to look at. And the issue with that is that if you don't know it exist, how do you know to ask for it? So it's like, who knows what type of information could be in there? I'm not suggesting that the shelves are lined with secret term Egypt or anything, but it does make me wonder, I mean, that's all 53 miles of shelf spaces is an astronomical amount of old ancient texts. Yeah, it really is. It's pretty fascinating that this one country, this one I would ever you want to call the Vatican, has accumulated such an immense stash of artwork and of knowledge and of information. And just to tapestries alone that they have, you just pass by the paintings and the sculptures. It's like, it's really mind-blowing. Look, I did it over the course of a couple of days, but I think you need months to go and really pay attention to it, to try to get a grasp of what the fuck they were doing. And also like, it's really weird. Like all the depictions of the men, they have tiny penises. And I asked the, we had this guy who was a professor who was the, our guide, we hired a private guide. He was really, really fun. Really intelligent guy, we said that they thought of large penises as being animalistic and barbaric. I've heard this. I have these men with these perfect bodies, like these Greek gods, these tiny, tiny little penises. You know what I think? Well, whoever carved that stone maybe had a small dick and wanted to be like, this is normal, this is what it looks like, because I'm sorry, if you were doing quite well and we're in doubt, I think it is a natural thing for women to like that, assuming that you're not too big. And so, I mean, this is reality. So I wouldn't have been any different, because people have always made fun of small dicks. Because like, you're not doing much for your lady potentially. And so maybe these guys recovered by there some arty guys and they had some more packing. If back then, if they, you know, the idea was that they were trying to get away from barbarism, they were trying to get away from these raiding hordes of beast like men who came, like maybe they really did think of like God like men is having like smaller penises. I mean, the weird thing about like aesthetics and what people like and don't like is that it changes over time, right? Like at one point in time, really overweight women were considered attractive, because really overweight women had access to food. Yeah. Whereas really thin women were considered like sad and poor, like a model of today, if she went back to like the Renaissance, they would look at her, they liked this poor girl. Right. You know? Yeah, it just seems to me because like when you see that beautiful statue or statues, that penis is so small, Joe, they couldn't make it a little bit bigger, all I'm saying, and still not been barbaric. I understand. But I mean, this is what this guy, I know you are, but this is what this guy was telling me, that this is what they were, I mean, you're talking about a time, you know, 1,000, 2,000 years ago, where you're dealing with the Roman Empire, you're dealing with the Germans and the barbarians and the Mongols and the cons and there's so much chaos and barbarism. There's so much slaughter just hardcore hand-to-hand combat and King of the Commonwealth's light and bodies on fire and launching them in catapults and like just wild times. So I think that maybe they were just like trying to express like a more delicate side of nature and mankind. Anyway, it's not that important. Yeah, but what is it? But it's important is that they did have in the center of one of their courtyards, they have an obelisk from Egypt that they had imported somehow or another, this fucking immense stone obelisk. I took a photo of it, I know it's on my phone somewhere, but I'm not gonna find it right now. But they brought it from Egypt and that's not close. No. And they figured out a way to get that thing there. Who knows how many fucking years ago? I forgot it, it was like 100 or so years ago. I could be wrong, but I know that these obelisk have been brought over everywhere. It's not just Rome, they're in France, they're in London, it's in New York. It's kind of weird. Do you wear cuz obelisks? They have one in Central Park. Really? I'm not even sure that's right. That's right, we talked about this. Yeah, that's right, that's right. Yeah, there's a good, yeah, go to that photo because that's fucking wild. We have an Egyptian obelisk in Central Park. What was the significance of the obelisk? Why were the Egyptians really interested in that particular shape? It's a good question, I don't think to be interested. Joe, I don't think anyone can say with certainty. Cleopatra's needle, go back to that, please. Yeah, look at that. With a description. Cleopatra's needle in New York, no go back right there, yeah. Cleopatra's needle in New York City is one of the three similarly named Egyptian obelisks, erect in Central Park, west of the metropolitan museum of art Manhattan in January 22nd, 1881. Wow. That's pretty cool. It is very cool. It's really interesting though, Joe. Egypt has been completely rat-fucked. It has been looted over millennia. You had the ancient Greeks invaded, the Romans invaded. I mean, Alexander the Great went through. Like it's, Egypt was, for whatever reason, a highly desirable spot where it has been completely numerous times over history has been just completely decimated and stolen and everything else. And I find that interesting, Joe, because I'm like, they were drawn to it for, for who knows how many different reasons. I mean, why would they feel over thousands of years people have been trying to take that place over and have, actually? Because even the British, like when you look at like their more modern history, Joe, that place has been completely screwed with for thousands of years. And it's worth mentioning that if you go back to the alleged pyramid builders, which was said to be the fourth dynasty of 4,500 or so years ago. Why do you say a lot? You don't think that they're the people that built it? That's pretty good evidence that it's done. Somebody's done. It's pretty good evidence that it's 2,500 BC. It was the construction data, the pyramids, right? Well, yes, and I don't necessarily disagree with that. But here's what my issue is that a lot of people don't realize that so that was said to be the old kingdom. And there's been three kingdoms, Joe, and three, what they call, inner, immediate periods. So for example, 4,500 or so years ago, great pyramid, the pyramids of Giza. Within a thousand years after that, there was two periods of time where there's 300 approximately 345 years of lost history. And it's called inner, they call them intermediate periods. So it went from old kingdom, intermediate period, which was like 120 something years to middle kingdom. And then another one of like 200 something years. So within less than 1,000 years after the alleged times that they were built, there's more than 300 almost 350 years of, because there was turmoil, by the way. The intermediate periods were, whether it was revolts, it was complete overthrow of the dynasty's silver war. So I'm like, what is it that the reoccurring theme that we see whenever there's a war? History is written by the victors, so to speak. I think it was Winston Churchill that said that. And it's like, in those periods of time, when whoever took over and took the power and claimed that kingdom for themselves, which may have been inner and may have been like, you know, a silver war revolt, whatever, revolution of some kind. That right there, to me, is indicative of lost history. So what my point that I'm getting at is that I don't know how much faith I put in that this alleged fourth dynasty was the ones that physically did it. I'm saying that maybe it was somebody else and those people claimed it for themselves, saying, I did this perhaps. Because it's like the implications of 340 plus years of lost history immediately after that. That I think there's something to be said for that. Because look at what ISIS did, Joe. Like they went through Iraq. And so I'm a Iraq war veteran. And I had the privilege of seeing these Assyrian bulls. I think they're so marion because they found them completely buried and mud and dirt. And so I'm thinking like it goes back pre-flood, so to speak, and that these, so ISIS went through and completely bulldozed them. They got Jack Hammers. And it's pretty wild. One of the, what do you mean, what do you mean when he's saying they got Jack Hammers? They destroyed them, is that what you're saying? Oh yeah. Jamie, will you please bring up the Gates and Regal or type in Mosul ISIS ancient? So what's so wild Joe is that I was at the right place at the right time in Mosul during my deployment in 2009 and 10 to be able to see and touch these things with my own hands. And this is at the Gate of Nagal at the ancient city of Nana-Vu. And what do these things supposedly? Wow. So they'll say like 4,000 years old or so I wonder if, so not Jack. It's Christ, they're destroying these things. Oh my God, this is horrible. I know Joe. Oh my God. Footage shows Islamic State militants and Iraq smashing statues of Sledgehammers and to build a crush, a bid to crush what they call non-Islamic ideas. Oh my God, this is fucking horrible. It gets worse than this. Oh my God. All right, so. Oh my God, this is fucking terrible. It's hard to see, man. Oh my God. Fucking humans. So they're destroying these thousands of year old artifacts and they're doing it with Sledgehammers. Oh, Jesus Christ. This is crazy. Yep. Oh my God, these fucking idiots. So yeah, see, this is Jack Hammers, but that's not even, these aren't even the images. All right, so there, that's where I was. That's the Gate of Nagal. The ancient city of Nana-Vu was said to be where Jonah had went after he escaped the whale from the biblical story. And so that's the same gate that allegedly he had went. And so Jamie, if you could just bring up, because there's a specific, a few articles that show that spot and these huge, are you familiar with the wing bulls? They're called Lamasu. They're like 15 feet tall. You gotta see him, Jamie. This is so worth it. And so these things were unbelievably impressive and they went through ISIS Joe. They got huge earth moving equipment like dozers. And they, all right, there it is. This is what I'm talking about. So that the picture on the upper left, that's exactly where I was. And there's a picture of ISIS. God, these fucking idiots. So that picture with the guy in the black, that. So I have a picture of me standing right in front of him. Oh my God, he's just destroying that face. Oh, Jesus Christ. Mm-hmm. And it's wild because I remember seeing this on the news and like holy shit, I stood. Oh my God, he's just destroying that face. Oh, Jesus Christ. And it's wild because I remember seeing this on the news and be like, holy shit, I stood right there. And these things were so impressive. And and the artwork themselves, the precision of them was unbelievable. Huge pieces of granted or maybe they're someone to the stepped in. I mean, we were fucking Christ. If there's ever a reason to step in and stop morons from doing something horrific, that is like a real priceless part of history, the history of the entire human race. Yep. We should have stepped in so much stepped in to stop that. That is fucking priceless stuff. Yeah. It's horrible. Oh my God. Look at that. So this is what gets my brain going, Joe. Unlike this is human since 2014, just destroying these things. Oh, they're done now. It's all gone. Yeah. Oh my God. They did their dirty work. Well, Joe. Fuckin morons. Yeah, Jesus Christ. Look at this. This is insane. So that's what stands out of my mind, Joe. Is that unlike, you know, that's horrific. Yeah. And it does something. Tell me this isn't the first time that. Oh my God. This can't be the first time humans have invaded a place and destroyed stuff from the past because they didn't want to exist. Maybe for religious reasons or for whatever. And so when I hear about this lost history in Egypt, immediately after the dynasty that was said to have built the pyramids, it makes me wonder what history was lost in that process by either claiming it for themselves like I did this. And then essentially that was passed down to something we are talking about today. God, this is hard. So hard to watch. You look at those images. It's so hard to watch. You know, because I've been obsessed with the ancient Middle East as well, like the ancient Sumerians and Mesopotamia. And the, you know, basically the cradle of civilization of what we know of civilization to see them just destroy those things like fucking Christ. Some of the oldest relics ever know. Yeah. God, it's so disturbing humans. Huh? It's not humans. It's morons. Yeah. Most humans would revere those things. Most humans would look at those things and say, my God, like what incredible structures. And like this is a window into the past and we could try to figure out like what, what these people were like and what life was like. Yeah. Fuckin God. Jesus. It's hard to say. It is. And there was no effort to stop that. Nangio. So this is, this is the hardest thing for me, Joe. Is that so I volunteered to go to Iraq. I was inspired by 911. Um, I, so I volunteered to go there because I thought I was liberating the Iraqi people. And coming home and seeing that in the way that, so the one of the worst things, you could say that happened when ISIS invaded is that they killed off the U ZD people, which were a completely peaceful people who lived in essentially in Northern Iraq, Kurdistan. And these people were absolutely harmless. Um, and they came through and they killed the men and they took the women. So along with killing the, or being up those statues, they were also completely decimating the people themselves. Yeah. But, and this is modern humans, which, uh, relatively speaking, are less vicious, a less barbaric. I mean, if you study like Stephen Pickers work, as you go back in history, people are more violent as you go forward in history. Life is safer. And you have less crime, less rape, less murder. So going back to your point when we were talking about the Romans and the savages and the, you know, the barbarians. So let's back up another twenty five hundred years before even them, which would be like great pyramid of Giza time. So isn't it fair to say that those people would have been capable of destroying and just doing their dirty work well, you know, despicable barbaric savagery, you know what I mean? So it makes me wonder like I think that there is, okay. So for example, when I was saying that there's no depictions of any kind of how they cut these stones. I think it's because someone destroyed that. Honestly, I don't think it's because they didn't record it somewhere. I think it's just somewhere along the line, somebody beat the shit out of it. Well, there's no dispute of that. That's what the concept of burning of the library of Valax Andru, that's what most people believe. Yeah. The theory is that they went in there and lit everything on fire. Right. That's where all the records were. Now, out of the, out of the construction that is depicted in the impairments, is there any construction of the flooring? Like because there's immense stones they used for just the floors. Yeah. So is there any of that? Zero Joe literally zero. The only depiction of any kind goes from the tomb of Rancari or something. If I it's hard to pronounce, but it just shows some guys dressing a stone and also a statue with some chisels. It doesn't show how they cut the blocks. What is the name of the R E N i E K E R E? I think, but I think I'm a spelling it to be honest. And it, but it doesn't show anything about cutting or anything. And one of the things, Joe, is that there is different clear technology in the works of the Egyptians. You have some that's incredibly crude and some of it truly megolithic and spectacular. And what I argue and others do as well is that simply you're looking at two different things done by different people in different periods of time that had different capabilities and somewhere more impressive than others. What's interesting is at least as far as carbon dating, some of the least impressive stuff is the later stuff. That's what's so interesting to is that the most spectacular stuff is the oldest. And that's why to me, I wonder, one if the pyramids could be older. And if not, I think that our understanding is because it's one or two ways, either they're older and we have since because of time and the sands of time have lost how they did it. Or our understanding of what the so called dynastic Egyptians were up to 45 hundred years ago is just significantly different than what we know today. But correct me if I'm wrong, but they have carbon dated some of the material that's inside of the cracks of some of the stones. And that's where they come up with this 2500 BC. I think even Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson and Robert Chock and all these other people that are arguing for an earlier date for some of the construction, they believe that like the great pyramid of Giza, that that one is 2500 BC. They certainly do. And I'm not disagreeing. It is possible though that the Egyptians had restored those casing stones because if you look at the great Sphinx, it's already known, so the great Sphinx is supposed to be 4200 years old. But something like 100 or 200 years after that is the evidence of the first restorations of adding more casing stones. And so it's like, well, maybe that happened to the pyramid as well. So technically it doesn't prove that that is the birth of the great pyramid, but that the earliest evidence of when humans said did something to it since. But let me just say, let me just clear. I'm not suggesting and I haven't said in a video that I think that the pyramids are 12,000 years old. I just what I think is that the reality is that it's a mystery. We don't know how they did it. Can I ask you this? Like, sure. What when they, when they, the thing about carbon dating is you don't really do that with rocks. Because you did everything would be billions of years old. Right. Because these rocks are. Can not date stone. Right. So what are they, they're using pieces of material that they find at the site under the ground, like next to it. And then they kind of get a rough idea. Anything that's organic, anything that, you know, anything that was whether it's wood or an ancient piece of leaf that's, you know, stuck to a rock or something. So yeah, to me, all it proves is that somebody had done something to it then. I don't think it 100% proves it was done. Built originally then. It's possibly really restored it because if we know that there's no discrepancy on the restoration of this thing. In fact, it shows that it's been restored several times, even the Romans restored it. But the earliest, the earliest restoration was something less than that. How did the Romans restore it? Was it the casing stones to it? It's actually pretty wild to see. You got to see it in person or a picture of it for me to show you. But like just adding stones over to make it look better, I guess. Like just another feeling that more recently with the pause. Significantly. It kind of sucks that they did it. I agree. I don't know why they would, it just seemed so dumb that they would fuck with that and try to make it smooth and pretty. Like part of what's beautiful about is the age of it. But the Robert Chaka have had on the podcast before. He was the first geologist to stick his neck out and say that the water erosion around the temple of the spinks indicates thousands of years of rainfall. And like you were saying when he terms to the Sahara, it's the same thing with the Nile Valley. The last time there was significant rainfall in the Nile Valley was 9,000 years ago. And then you have to look at the thousands of years of rainfall required to make these deep fissures in the stone where the softer areas are eroded. And you have these deep vertical fissures that indicate that water coming down from the top and leaking through have created all this stuff. And so his timeline is thousands of years before 9,000 BC because it's required that much time to create this erosion. That's very controversial around traditional like the Egyptologists that want to follow the conventional timeline. They come up with all sorts of alternative reasons for why these fissures exist. But one of the more fascinating things that Robert Chaka did was he put a masking tape over the areas that would clearly indicate where this was happening. And he brought it to a series of geologists and he said, does this, this image represent in your opinion, wind and sand erosion or does it indicate water? All of them set it indicated water. All of them set it indicated rainfall. And then and then when he pulled it aside and showed that this was actually the, this finks, they're like, I'm not putting my fucking name on that. Like very few of them wanted to stick their net more have since since he's come forward. There's been many geologists that have agreed with him. But initially people were very hesitant to stick their neck out because in academia, which is really fascinating, challenging conventional ideas gets you in deep shit because even though we would like to believe that these archaeologists and scientists and historians only base their opinions on data, only based their opinions on what's in front of us. Not true. A lot of them have a long history of teaching things that eventually turn out to be incorrect. And they are deeply embarrassed and they fight it tooth and claw. They do everything they can to discredit any idea that they could be incorrect. And it's fascinating to watch. And one of them that was fascinating to watch was John Anthony West and Robert Shaw had had this conversation about the spinks and about the erosion of the spinks with this conventional Egyptologist that was working with Zawi Hawas, who was the head of antiquities. And when they did have this conversation, the way this guy was mocking them, the way this guy was saying, where's the evidence of this civilization from 12,000 years ago capable of doing this? Like he was using your mocking voice, like using the voice that you use for your detractors. And it wasn't a scientific conversation. It wasn't a fact-based objective analysis of all the evidence that's in front of you. It was instead this guy trying to defend these decades of teaching. He's been writing books and papers and teaching lectures about this stuff. And it turns out he's probably really wrong. And he was fighting it with every ounce of his being. Now, since that then the construction or then the rather excavation of go back ly tapping took place where they realized that this is undeniably at least 12,000 years old because it was covered somewhat intentionally. They think that intentionally it was covered up that it was buried 12,000 years ago. So that means, well, how long was this fucking thing built? How long ago was this made? If someone intentionally covered it up 12,000 years ago, how long was it around before they did that? Right. So this is that evidence that that guy was talking about. The evidence of an advance of a division. Now we know for sure there's evidence of an advance civilization. We have the actual stone structures. We have the actual carbon dating and not just a little bit of it. We have massive amounts of it because the entire structure has been slowly excavated. And it reveals this enormous series of buildings and of stone columns and 3D carvings that are in it. It's really a wild, wild stuff. And the idea that this was all done by unsophisticated hunters and gatherers who had time to build this in between like eating berries and trying to kill squirrels. Like it's wild. It is. And, you know, there's a few things to say there, Joe. So going back to Dr. Robert Shock. So what I had heard is that when that was when he presented that water erosion evidence of the Sphinx, apparently he was at like a conference of nearly 200 geologists. And everyone in the room was like, uh-huh. Yeah, that's because he did a comparison essentially is like, would you agree that this limestone has water erosion and would you agree that this limestone has wind and sand erosion? Right. Resounding yes. And it turns out he was showing you two different parts of the Sphinx. The enclosure has the water erosion and the above the neck in the chest has the wind and sand. Yeah. And what's so wild about this, Joe, is that there's still so many people in the so-called I go on the mainstream that are denying this water erosion. Like this is a thing. So, Jay, I don't consider myself an expert on somebody that can look at, I mean, I know more than maybe some, but like I can look at information and think for myself on a variety of topics. Show me on here both sides and I can think. I can use discernment. And what's so interesting to some people who are trying to debunk Dr. Robert Shock's work, it's like, you know, because we have www.google.com, you can literally go and look for examples of limestone from around the world that have known water erosion and then go do the same for have wind and sand erosion. And then it's there for all who have eyes to see. The enclosure has significant water erosion. I mean, this is literally you don't have to go to school for a bunch of years to get a a doctorate in geology to at least wrap your head around that it is indeed water erosion. And the implications of it are astounding because it means that if the Sphinx is supposed to be 4200 years old and yet the last time the Nile Delta region had significant rainfall was nearly double the age of that. That in itself is, I mean, I would consider it to be scientific evidence that it is older. What's the hardest evidence we have really? Geological evidence is the most, it's the most tangible because you could actually see it. It's like it's right there. And everything else, they're slowly uncovering history. And as they're literally uncovering it, they're digging this stuff up. And particularly in Egypt, what's really fascinating is that they find these completely different building structures, like these construction methods. You go back to the older buildings that are deeper under the ground. They have a very different style to them. Like they use much larger stones and they use them like sitting on top of each other, like these structures and these hallways and columns. And it's like you clearly see the difference between the stones where they laid stones next to each other and this one where they're immense stones sitting on other immense stones. There's a very specific style to them. And it seems like the more sophisticated methods are the older methods because the stones are larger. It's true. And the reality is that what we know, the ancients were more advanced than what we give them credit for. And one thing I've seen is I've gone down this path about talking about potential lost technology is people need to realize like the word advanced is relative. When you say that they were advanced, some people will jump to the gooslec, all of you're suggesting they had internet and let's go back to that voice again. And why find other things like advanced is relative. It means that they had more capabilities than what we give them credit for. And yeah, it's another thing I was about to say is that, I'm losing my turn of thought on that, the, oh, yeah, technology. Technology can be anything. A saddle on a horse is technology. Yeah. When people think technology, some people jump in like, what does that mean? They have lasers, machinery and stuff like no. It just means they had a capability that has since gone or we're just not aware of. Well, let's some talk about the sarcophagus and the kings chamber in the way that they somehow are another carved it out because there's real evidence that there was some sort of a circular drilling tool that they used to carve out the inside of the sarcophagus and something that had an incredibly hard cutting surface. They don't know what it was, but if you go to, there's images of the inside of the sarcophagus. And they showed that they were trying to figure out how this thing was carved. See if the like carving methods, circular drill. So right type in circular, circular drill carving, there was this whole debate about how they dug it out. And they think that what, because it correct me if I'm wrong, but isn't it made out of one large piece of granite? Correct. Gross granite. Yeah. And they think that what they did was use some sort of, does it show it there? All I remember seeing on it was rake marks. Well, they were some crude. There was some sort of a documentary that was pointing to some aspect of it that said, it seemed like they used some sort of a circular drilling tool to hollow out the center of this thing. What is that right there? Lower left hand corner. Conrecording drills. Copper coring drills. Look at that. Look at it right there. The middle one. Yep. What is that? What the fuck is that? So that's them carving out a, using that same drilling technique that you're referring to and just doing over and over again to carve out. So there's a core grille, grant it. So you see it right there in the lower right hand, right. Yeah, that's it right there. Like look at that. Yeah. What is that? Like how do they drill that? Yeah. So it says core grille, core drilled granite in ancient Egypt. And what we're looking at is something that looks like it was a circular drill that was pulling out the cylinders from the granite and how they did that and how long it took to see. See, this is an incomplete drilling, which is really fascinating because you can actually see that it probably took a long-ass time for them to do this. And you see like a partially done version of it. But we see these circular cuts like that right there like what the fuck did they use? Some argue that they, that the repetition of these drill holes was done at a speed you couldn't possibly do with your own hand. I mean, I'm not, how did they, why did they say that? Well, so if you measure from each striation to the next, that would indicate one revolution of the drill. And so some are saying that it's far quicker and then let me give a shout out real quick to my buddy Ben who I went to Egypt and Peru with. He is an awesome YouTube channel called Uncharted X and he does. I'm sorry, X is a great channel. He's wonderful. Yeah. You would love to talk to him. He's from Australia. Yes. He is here in the States with his wife who are wonderful people. And I got to tell you, look at this. He gets deep into this stuff, Joe. I'm sure he does. His, his YouTube channel is incredible. So if you look at this, this is a modern tool that they're using to do the same or similar work. And what it is is a tool that's on this like tread or track and it rolls in and drills as it rolls in and they have a circle. These are diamond tip machines that are hydraulic pressure. And the Egyptologist claim, it says right here, the Egyptologist claim that ancient Egyptians cut granite using copper saws, copper saws water and sand. It says fine cutting granite separating a stone block into two pieces. We do not doubt this. It's doable. But to reach the level of precision found and how do you say that word, a booster, a booster? I was here. I was here. Should be two words. Manual work is not enough. Not enough in terms of pressure and regularity in order to cut granite today. We try to reach a pressure on the drilling head of 18 to 30 pounds per square inch, which is 226 to 380 pounds of pressure for a four inch diameter drill hole. How can you apply such pressure by hand while keeping a mobile tool in order for it to actually perform the drilling? This is a question. So they're trying to figure out what the fuck these people use, but they use something. Because if you look at that, so that's a good example, William Matthew Flinders Petrie during the late 19th century research. He wrote that the level reached is astonishing in terms of the drilled holes. You can see the grooves. The grooves helped determine the power of the machines. Here you were just talking about the space between the two grooves indicates how further the machine goes after each drilling revolution. The space between grooves and Abosseer are between one one, one, twenty fifth of an inch and one tenth of an inch. Wow. We'll get that fucking crazy. In 1983, Chris Dunn interviewed Dr. Ronald Ron from the, is that my saying his name right? That looks right. Ron from the Ron Granite surface plate company in Dayton, Ohio. Ron indicated that in order to drill granite, they were using heads drilling at a revolution speed of 9,000 revolutions per minute or 900. Excuse me, 900 revolutions per minute going one inch into the block every five minutes, every 300 seconds. In other words, two, one, two, 10,000ths of an inch for every revolution. The tools used by the Egyptians were therefore a hundred and eighty for one tenth of an inch between the grooves to 450 for one twenty fifth of an inch in between the grooves, times better performing than our 1983 modern technology. Fuck. That's crazy. But look at these, these, we're looking at these images folks of these holes that they cut into the, the granite and you see these perfect grooves where whatever they were using, whatever kind of drill they were using, it left behind. And the fact that these drills were far better than what we had in the 1980s when they wrote this. It's worth mentioning that see this is another example where there's two different examples because I have seen examples where there's some that is primitive and you can do it with like a piece of wood and you just spend it over time and you keep grinding away and hold on, don't change, don't change, stay right there, keep going. And, and then there's a difference between you these, these ones with the striations and I'm like, because some people, you know, immediately like, no, they were capable of doing some drilling with primitive methods and like, I agree. But then you have these ones that are spectacular and I would like to see these methods demonstrated. So that's a thing, Joe. There's going to be some people listening to this and be like, wow, I'm sure that there's got to be an explanation. But Joe, I can show you videos of them demonstrating saw cutting techniques that are said to have been done by the Egyptians or alleged, these primitive methods and you see how slow it is, Joe. Yeah, Jamie, stop, stop scrolling and go up a little bit. Look at this, what it says right here. They're showing a video and the, it says in this video, we see a 10 inch hole being drilled in only three minutes. This is a modern video. A real feat says, let's do the same calculation by this time it'll take a 12,000, 1200 rather RPM revolution speed 33% faster than in 1983. So what they had in 1983. So all these calculations, blah, blah, blah. We're still right now in 1983, there were 14 times less effective than the Egyptians with grooves separated by one 25th of an inch. This is, but what does 14 times less efficient really mean? It means that while our modern diamond tips machinery completed one revolution and drilled one 360th of an inch, the Egyptian tool had already drilled one 25th of an inch 14 times more. Wow. The evidence is in front of us, Joe. This wild shit, man. People say, you know, what's the evidence that ancients were advanced? I'm like, it's right there. Like that. Oh, God, here we go. This is the video they're talking about. So this is the video of them using modern equipment to drill into it and saying that this stuff that they had in 1983 that the Egyptians had something that was 14 times better. And keep in mind, again, diamond tips. That's what you'll remember like, so are we suggesting the ancients had that? Because that's what we're using. water over it the whole time too. Because otherwise the thing will melt. Right. So we have zero idea how they did it. Correct. We do know they did it. Someone did it absolutely. Absolutely. Amazing is seeing that actual physical evidence, again, the geological evidence. I guess it's sort of geological and archaeological at the same time, right? Because they're carving into stone, but seeing these carvings, the marks and the fact that it's a perfect tube that they pulled the cylinder out. Yep. Jamie, will you real quick? up my YouTube page. There's my second to most recent video. There's a short clip in it where I show you these mainstream Egyptologists, Zaiwa, Mark Lainer, the top dogs, like their names are cited in every textbook on these subjects. And you will see these methods where they try these primitive methods and the demonstrate. And it's at all. Well, it's so unbelievably slow. It's not feasible to be the explanation. And then we just say the only reason why these are the suggested methods, Joe, is because like, well, the Egyptians were a Bronze Age culture. So they had to use bronze. And that's the end of the story. Yet there's not one single depiction, Joe. All right. That one this where it says this is how you know, ancients, all right, that one. And just skip forward perhaps. Look at that handsome bastard. So here's an amazing photo of how close the cuts were and about how precision cut these stone slabs that were used for the flooring are. Compare that to my hotel room key. That's a flooring tile. Casing or stones, excuse me, that's right next to the great pyramid. Yeah. All right. So Jamie, if you go back, I believe it's the first between the first minute and two minutes, actually, the clip is. Were they trying to recreate it? Go forward a little bit more. Oh, look at that by the way. That sucker 30 ton. So there's Ben on chart of X. Love you. There he is right there. I've been. Did you just the ponytail buddy? No, no, no, no, no, don't tell him to. No, he's got to actually start bring that back. He's got to keep growing his hair and he's laid out. You got a little bit for Jamie Stone with you standing in front of it. That's incredible. All right. So that one right there is at least 50 tons and was brought from more than 500 miles away. And look at the polygonal nature of it. Yeah. Unbelievable. That's gross. That's gross. That's gross. That's neat to me is that they chose to cut it perfectly flat with no gap, but yet uneven. This is it. They make these like interesting jigsaw puzzle like shapes. They're interlocked. Totally earthquake proof and so Jamie, just go back. You think that's why they carved it like that? Yeah. That's my best guess. And that's just showing off because how awesome it looks. But this picture. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So this is them. Okay. So right there, that's the alleged method. All right. Go back a few more seconds right there right there. I know it's because it's 18 minute videos right there. Press pause if you could. So this is a recreation of a glyph of a painting that once existed. It was destroyed. So this is Joe quite literally the only example of them even doing anything with stone depicted is one other stone or picture that's right next to doing a statue. But this just to clarify is not showing them cut a block. And those are I mean, this is the measuring methods. Yeah. Well, you think they're using terms of like the when those guys are on their knees and they have those things that are showing a line. What do you think that is? I think the level. I think that they're they're doing measurements in order to put in higher glyphs because we know they did. There's actual evidence of them doing glyphs over prior work. It's on some of the statues. And so it quite literally could just be showing them carve stuff into it because I saw examples where you have this wonderful stone and then these crude glyphs carved into it and unlike one of the it's like sesame street. One of these things is not like the other. Why would the glyphs look like shit and. You have this wonderful stone and then these crude glyphs carved into it and unlike one of the it's like sesame street one of these things is not like the other why would the glyphs look like shit and comparison to a wonderful block and that's not to say all the glyphs are like shit some are spectacular and were done by the Egyptians They are the dynastic Egyptians. Let me just clarify to anyone listening. dynastic Egyptians are the so called ancient Egyptians. We're all learned about in school by argument and other's argument is that there was people before them doing work and in something to worth mentioning Joe is that the people in Egypt They believed in what's called chemet the people k h e m i t the people that existed before the Egyptians and You know when we'd hear these stories about the great pyramid being for a tomb for the pharaoh It's worth mentioning that even the locals didn't believe that and those theories weren't developed until the latter part of the 1800s early 1900s by people that explorers that came in from Germany, France and England and they are the ones so just to clarify The the saying that the pyramids were built to be tombs for the pharaohs that that was their purpose wasn't even developed until 150 years ago that's it They were learning they were taught kenet and So you've seen the pyramid code right? Have I heard you say that a long time ago? Yes So that's on Netflix So the tribal elder a chem abdell a wian that's in it and he's the one teaching kenet So he's talking about the people before the Egyptians and so when I went to Egypt I went and did a tour with his one of his sons named yosuf aoyan and they live across the street from the Sphinx They it's been passed down in the family. They're on like the fifth floor and it literally their patio overlooks the great or excuse me The Sphinx and he's also a master stone mason, but that's that's how I learned this stuff like they were taught like these theories It like all the pyramids were tombs. That's recent and it was by invaders so to speak Like that's not something that was that was thought before that and the locals and how they become doctrine How to become what what everybody teaches so Egypt became Britain Like this is what I'm saying like they got they have quite literally been invaded and their entire government has been Over thrown and redone so many times that we're even aware of so it was already I'm gonna use the word corrupted You know in the 1800s this the the British were going in and out of there and so it's like this all this I call it the mainstream the stuff you read about in the textbooks which most of the documentaries and all this stuff Which is bear mids built to be tombs this was all developed in modern times There's absolutely nothing From the ancient Egyptians in any type of glyph that depicts Well, there's only a couple examples of pyramids, but it's a burial sites right next home It's very excuse me very primitive and it's like that's it There's nothing else showing anything about it. There's nothing depicting that pharaohs or this would place where they were burying kings And it's worth mentioning that when you go through inside these pyramids of giza That say which are the most impressive although the red pyramid and that pyramid are unbelievably impressive There's not one single glyph in any of them whatsoever There was a never a mummy found in any Egyptian pyramid ever now that doesn't mean they weren't stolen and looted That's possible But quite literally the only reason why we are told this stuff is because that was the theory developed by these men That went in there, you know in the late 1800s and said I believe these must have been for the pharaohs that make sense so there's no hieroglyphs that depict it as the The 0 0 so it's all just one group of people had one theory and that theory Just stuck around 100% and this is the stuff like they didn't teach me that in school Joe I didn't ever heard any of this I was told these were built to be tombs for the pharaohs How much did you learn about Egypt in school not much because it's like hardly six grade right yeah, it's not something they teach Well, right. I never really study it. We really have to get mean it's but in college to Compocated subject right, but all right So people that go to school for this learn history and learn archaeology and the ones that are taught about Egyptology Yeah, that's what they're taught and not only that there was a violent reaction to the the Robert shock podcast that I had by some Egyptologists You know mock Tim and reached out and said they wanted to come on and refute what he was saying and It was interesting to watch Their reaction to a geologist talking about erosion I mean so These that all right So one thing I explained to people is that there's something happening and has been happening in the scientific and academic community It's the same thing we see in politics Joe. It's a tribalism people it's no different than religion You were taught something you believe it not your teaching it. Oh, yeah, yeah The big one is the teaching it. It's not you were taught because I think when people have been taught things They're willing to adjust but when they've spent Decades as the expert explaining very carefully how it happened and what we know and celebrating all these people that have done this great work and Showing us you know how these inches did these things then it turns out that they're completely wrong Well, you've been fucking kids over with shitty education with decades you don't want to admit it being wrong sucks Nobody likes being wrong But the thing about history is like of course you're gonna be wrong I mean what it what they should do is they should say this is what we thought so for years We're teaching this because that's what as far as we knew that was correct now We know differently and this is what's amazing about archaeology. This is what's amazing about history But they don't want to do that well because then they would have to get rid of those books Well, it's not just that show all right So they'd have to get rid of the books, but there's other implications too, which is money Scientists and all these people are making big bucks writing textbooks handing out degrees Doing documentary opportunities all kinds of stuff so they've made a complete livelihood on something that is Let's say partially incorrect. I'm not saying they're wrong about everything But like so the implications that like there's big money around some of these people are making they've done very well for themselves So to be wrong. It's like oh shit People don't be like being wrong about anything back now. Yeah, it's uh It's a weird part about being a person is that we connect our ideas with our value as a person Yeah, you know this goes back I like to make the comparison to to Galileo They were gonna torture him to death Well, he had actual definitive evidence that we were rotating around the sun and not the other way around and they were like No, no, and they're gonna show they were gonna they put them on house arrest. He had to recant everything Or else and I'm like that's a religious thing though That's the same reason why these morons broke down those ancient structures in Iraq when you look at the overall abundance of evidence and it comes to Egypt and you you factor in these people like Graham Hancock and Bovall and all these people that have looked at the the history of the structures It seems like there's multiple kingdoms and multiple errors and that they had existed for a substantial amount of time and Why was it all in that one place? That's what's amazing and when you say that these multiple kingdoms So that's the story of Egypt. They call it the old kingdom Which was followed by the intermediate period so intermediate period is essentially lost history That was an uprising. It was complete overthrow of the government And you're talking the first immunity it was like I said earlier 126 years Then they go by a few more hundred years and then there was another 200 something year Gap in that transition. So you were talking old kingdom intermediate period middle kingdom Intermediate period and then new kingdom So that's that's my point that I'm going back to is that how can we possibly Say definitively or they talk so definitively about say the old kingdom And I'm like when two other kingdoms came after who could have wiped out that history or simply because it's thousands of years later passed out incorrect information Yeah, there's a mindblower for people the The amount of time between Cleopatra and The iPhone is shorter than the amount of time between Cleopatra and the construction the established construction date of 2500 BC of the Great Pyramids Wild it's wild like Cleopatra live closer to the iPhone than she did to the construction of the pyramids I wish I could go back in time and date Cleopatra You go out with her? Is that what you're saying? No, she probably gross I didn't shave the legends or that she was That she was for then her looks were just okay, but her personality is what seduce Great personality. Yeah, well, she seduced jeweled Caesar and then Mark Antony like she was going for the top dogs And they you should look like some of the the history behind it is wild in that they like she she seduce these men and threw them off their path and everything Like they she she knew what she was doing. Well, maybe she was awesome My point is the last thing I'd be interested is going back there and having sex with somebody I would want to go back and see what the fuck they were doing like what was life like back then like what What what was ancient Egypt like like what was it really truly like? There's only speculation we really don't have any idea We don't have any idea what there If you want want to go back to as far as Robert shock and Graham Hancock's want to indicate They they seem to point to a time where at least The construction of the temple this finks. We're talking 10 11 12,000 years ago. What the fuck was that like and when it was green Because I guess he showed you other sources that say 4500 years for on time with the Sahara being yeah Green Jamie if you wouldn't mind could you just Google Sierra green Sahara. Yes, a hair. Sorry. Where was I saying Sierra Sierra Sahara Being green and you'll see these articles like so the point is that like okay So when you say it'd be completely different well if this if this finks is say at least Double the age and I'm sure it's older Well, that's me it was when it was green because it's not forget Egypt is in the Sahara desert Right So I when I see dates like 5,000 years and they do say some of these estimates that the Entire Sahara went from green to desert and possibly within 100 years So and this is around 5,000 years ago that it went over the shift Yes, and I'm like that is so close Joe to this This these dates of the of the geese appearance. Right. That makes me think that because of cataclysm and and let's say Real climate change on a level that we don't even can rapper minds around. I mean think about it North Africa or the Sahara is much larger than the Continuous or the 50 states the United States So it's like you know It's such a huge area and to think that something could have changed so dramatically And what would have been erased with it, you know If you find out this is looking for an article just to show viewers like I know there's live science as a number and the Smithsonian and National Geographic and Oh, I was just yeah, so this is there you go Trying to find visuals. Oh right on there's yeah, so the Sahara was green at Somewhere around 5,000 years ago, which is roughly around the same time as the proposed construction data the Great Pyramid Which is 4500 years ago. Yeah 4600 say yes right around there the each one is supposed to yeah And carbon dating is a plus or minus of a few hundred years You're way right? So it could have been around that. There's a margin of error And I'm like it's not like they have an abundance I mean don't quote me here But they don't have an overwhelming substantial amount of evidence that they repeatedly Tested those dates on all this organic matter book. Do you know how much they did? I thought it was one little thing if I remember I thought was a little piece of wood or whatever was like aha, ah Here it is. Let's google that. Yeah. Let's find out. How what did they test? Yeah, I was getting into that. Yeah. What did they test to to date the construction of the pyramids? I started finding something about a piece of a boat. I think they thought they found. Oh, that's an Well, you know, it's it's just it's just amazing really is amazing and it's hard for us to imagine I think it's hard for us to imagine a thousand years. I think we kind of get it Oh 1,000 is 10 hundreds. I think we kind of get it But I think it's one of those things that gets lost in the mind of how app actually how long that is in terms of like if you are alive for a thousand years like fucking what a dreary amount of time that is and then you think of 4,500 years ago Whatever it was when they were actually building that thing and maybe it's much much longer I mean, maybe maybe you're right and maybe the construction Maybe rather though the measurement is of a very small piece of material and maybe they don't have the evidence that could show It really was interview on Nova on PBS and I don't know the exact date of this interview, but this is where He talks about okay right here studies says when it comes to carbon dating do you need organic material and larynxes? Right there has been radiocarbon dating or carbon 14 dating done in Egypt obviously before we did our studies and It's been done on some material from Giza for example The great boat that was found just south of the Great Pyramid which you think belongs to kufu and that was radiocarbon dated coming in in about 2,600 BC See this is what I mean that doesn't prove jack shit for the age of the Great Pyramid being built So let's keep going because it says Nova says but how do you carbon date the pyramids themselves and they're made out of stone and in Organic material and learner says we had the idea some years back to radiocarbon date the pyramids directly as You say you need organic material in order to do carbon 14 dating because all living creatures Every living thing takes in carbon 14 during its lifetime and stops taking in carbon 14 when it dies And then the carbon 14 starts breaking down at a regular rate so in effect you're counting the carbon 14 in an organic specimen And by virtue of the rate of the disintegration of the carbon 14 atoms in the amount of carbon 14 in a sample You can show how old it is so how do you date the pyramids because they're made out of stone and mortar well in the 1980s When I was crawling around on the pyramids as I used to do and I still do I noticed the contrary that contrary to what many guides tell people even the stones of the Great Pyramid of kufu are put together with great quantities of mortar We're looking you see at the core a pyramid is basically Most basically two separate constructions. It's an outer shell of very fine polished limestone with great accuracy in its joints, but most of that's missing and some And the other construction is in the inner core Which is filled in this shell? Since most of the outer casing is missing what you see now is the step-like structure of the core The core was made with a substantial slap factor as my friends who's a mechanic likes to say about certain automobiles That is they didn't join the stones very accurately You see the great spaces between the stones and you can actually see where the men were up there and They didn't you know They may have like four or five even six inches between two stones and they jammed down pebbles and cobbles And some broken stones and slot big quantities of gypsum mortar in there I noticed that in the interstices They said a weird word Between the stones and this mortar was embedded Organic material like charcoal Probably from the fire they used to heat the gypsum in order to make the mortar You have to heat raw gypsum or dehydrate it and then you rehydrate it in order to make the mortar Like with modern cement so it occurred to me that we could take the small samples We could radiocarbon date them Not with conventional radiocarbon dating But recently there's been a development in carbon 14 dating where they use atomic accelerators to count The disintegration rate of the carbon 14 atoms Adam by atom so you can date extraordinarily small samples So we set up a program to do that and it involved Us climbing all over the old kingdom pyramids including the ones at Giza Taking as much in the way of organic samples as we could Weren't damaging the pyramids because there's tiny flecks It's a very strange experience to be crawling over a monument as big as kufu is looking for a bit of charcoal That might be as big as a fingernail on your small finger We noted not only the samples of charcoal sometimes there was read And now and then in some of the pyramids we found little bits of wood But we saw in many places even on the giant pyramids of Giza the first pyramids in the second pyramid And the third one fragments of tools bits of pottery That are clearly characteristic of the old kingdom and it occurred to us you know that These are not just objects These the pyramids themselves were archaeological sites during the time they were being built If it took 20 years to build them, I don't know if they built that in 20 years And now begin to think that kufu may have rained during double the length of the time that we traditionally assigned them People were building the great pyramid over three decades It was an occupied site as long as some campsites that hunters and gatherers occupied That archaeologists dig out in the desert Okay, we're getting really long now Yeah, what is your impression right now when you're reading this? Well, I'm thinking they're basing this on what was in the cracks of these pyramids they could find It doesn't necessarily mean that that's how it was initially built Right, so it could really mean the first of all the reason why There is these these great gaps and then they could see these great gaps in the outer in the core Is because they stole the structure on the outside of it the limestone the smooth paws limestone was stolen They've raided these motherfuckers throughout history You know like these people that destroy the stuff in Iraq They the pyramids used to be covered in smooth limestone But they jacked all that stuff they stole it and they used it to build Cairo It's wild that there's there's buildings throughout Cairo that are made out of the pyramids It's crazy. Hey, here's something else worth bringing up though Jamie if you wouldn't mind if you could like find it in the news articles This is just a year old where they found so there was pieces of wood They were taken out of behind a block inside the great pyramid and this thing stayed in some Lost in a England museum for the last more than a century But they just recently found it and dated that wood and it's more than 500 years older than the alleged date of that great pyramid So now that doesn't prove that the pyramid is older And this is assuming that it was indeed I mean this is documented. So all right, so here we go Yep great pyramid lost Egyptian artifact found in an Aberdeen cigar box So a long lost Egyptian artifact has been found in a cigar box in Aberdeen And it's hoped it could shed new light on the great pyramid. So a small fragment of the 5,000 year old wood Which is now in several pieces. It's said to be highly significant So here's something else. It's pretty crazy to think about when it comes to dating What I had read I don't know if it was this article another one But they had a a margin of error within closer to 800 years for this wood So I'm like wait a second so you're saying it could be closer to 6,000 years old Yeah, they don't even know like and that's okay. It was not 800 forward as well So it could be for sure. Yeah, yeah So it it it doesn't prove anything and there's some other explanations I read like they said like well Maybe because wood was more scarce out there that maybe this wood was already 500 years old when it was used for the construction of the pyramid Which I I have doubts on that Joe 500 year old piece of wood being used to construct the pyramid. I don't know about that But you know who knows All I know is that it could possibly be indicative of that it was older maybe maybe not picture with it that shows the outside of the Pyramid like you're just yeah, that's what it used to look like and so they they fucked all that up When they were stealing the outside stones so the outside limestone So who knows what they did in terms of patching it up Right and and it's worth mentioning that some of the theories It's believed that maybe there was a large earthquake that originally knocked them all down and then they were looted from there And this but I don't know you were talking about Rome Joe. I I've never heard you mentioned the pyramid there Have you did you see it when you were there? No, there was one there because when you're talking about restoration of a pyramid I stumbled across this pyramid in Rome They restored within the last couple of years that didn't look this clean Try to find out there's an older picture of it. Leave it alone. You fucking apes. I know people will say like we need to Reserve it and rebuild it to preserve it like no show me as it is. Yeah. Why would they preserve that? I think you know it is an Italian some people just want to put their hands on stuff Joe. Yeah, they definitely do we're gonna clean it Wow, well, it looked it actually looked nice. It looked kind of They just cleaned it. Yeah, but I mean leave it dirty man. She's nice That dirt is part of the charm. Yeah. It's part of what makes it look a fucking amazing. Yeah, so this pyramid is how old 2000 years it says whoa Pretty interesting that so not only did they raid Egypt they went home and wanted to build a pyramid themselves Oh, shitty one. Yeah It's time you to miss that's why I fight. Yeah, I don't think I saw it You know the great pyramid. It's fucking beautiful though the great pyramid at its height Was equivalent to a 47 story building today and I compared that to in fiance I'm from Phoenix in the chase towers the tallest building in Arizona And it's almost it's within a couple feet of the same height like 481 feet original Hide for the great pyramid almost the same as chase tower And when so when you're in a skyline and different, you know places throughout the world Look at you know a 50 story building stands out and this thing is 755 feet wide at its base It's a freaking behemoth. I used to have a bit about the construction of the pyramids And it was basically that what what would happen was the dumb people outfucked the smart people and That's why like the people that were left behind had no idea how was built And they just said oh we built this yep, but if you but one of the things that I pointed out I'm pretty sure my math is wonky, but it's close That the great pyramid would be as 2,000,000 300,000 stones The precision cod again some of them like the king's chamber ones from 500 miles away If you cut and place 10 stones a day it would take you 664 years to make that pyramid and they think this guy made it in 20 years Yeah, and they would have to do something then because estimates vary because it depends on how many hours they they're working But it's literally one stone you'd have to do one stone approximately every four minutes To make that happen and so do you hear what they just said in that prior article where like kufu Maybe his rain was double what we thought so each other They're 40 year rain. They don't even know and it validates the point I'm making which is that because of all the lists Lost history since then like how they don't eat what's that based off of like yeah, and it's okay to not know something But the rallies that they just don't know so much guesswork. It's so fascinating. It's fun. That's why I like these topics I do I love these topics I but I really love is that there was this one place That was so much more advanced than everywhere else this one part of Africa Where civilization had reached this incredible level like the construction methods the Sophistication in as far as the alignment to constellations. I mean in some of it is It's speculative You know when they talk about like the equinoxes and you know Graham Hancock points to where the Sphinx is facing the constellation Leo That that wasn't it was like 10,500 BC that that was happening that they they think that this Sphinx was facing the constellation Leo well This procession of the equinoxes which is a wobble of the earth that is a I think it's a 25,000 year wobble yeah closer to it is like 25,000 nine hundred twenty year. I call it the great year Okay, great. Thank you. So this wobble if you take that to when Those the Sphinx would be looking at Leo previously now you're talking About 35,000 years ago Which is a lot. It's the the mind fuck of mind fucks like if that is the like if you look at the distinct Fissures that if they really were if Robert chalk is correct and these geologists are correct and that really is the result of Thousands and thousands of years of water erosion like okay How many thousand is it five is it ten is it 20? Are you talking are you looking at 25,000 years of water erosion like would it is that a 35,000 year old structure? Is it possible and people will scoff at this But we were scoffing at 15,000 years ago just a little while ago just a few decades ago until go backly Tappy came around and you have clear Definitive evidence of something that's at least 12,000 years old That was nonsense just a few years ago What it's in the 90s. It was nonsense, but now we know 100% that's a fact What the fuck were they doing 20 years prior to that? right And if this is really 35,000 years old or whatever it is like my god like how long is civilization been around and How many times has it been reset when you talk about this younger driest impact theory especially when you talk about it with Randall? Carlson it opens up a whole world of speculation because Randall Carlson's evidence is Spectacular well researched and he has a deep deep knowledge of both the timeline and The erosion to the landscape that occurred in spectacular fashion because of massive floods When then you look at these legends like Noah's Ark or the epic of Gilgamesh and you you hear about these stories of floods and of cataclysm's it's it's something that is it's a core part of almost every ancient Civilizations lore when they talk about the history of their culture you you talk they talk about these cataclysmic events That reshaped the society and that people emerged from the darkness and restarted the world You know like Noah and his children Do you want to hear something that's crazy that goes along with that? Yes, I do you bet all right, so the CIA In the this is decades ago in the 50s discuss something called the Adam and Eve story So anyone can go to CIA dot go to freedom of information library and you can look up what's called the Adam and Eve story written by a Doctor named Chan Thomas back in the 50s and This details the destruction repeated destruction of mankind and it even has the year 11,500 in it and it's worth or 11,050 and keep mine This was written more than 50 years ago So it it coincides with the 11,600 time frame decades before we were talking about a younger driest possibility Where is this what's this based on? So well, that's a great that's part of the mystery Joe now this and let me also say this What's the declassified this is like a handful of years ago? declassified that so we have no understanding though What's not declassified is why the CIA was discussing this book in some top secret meeting about every meeting in the CIA is technically top secret They everything they do a top secret, but so it details that destruction's So basically says that there's a micronova that goes off in the earth routinely and what it does is micronova essentially that there's a quite literal Fusion explosion that the earth essentially it's like a hiccup and it causes continental displacement It causes rapid movement of continents as well as continental sized tidal waves that just wash everything away And that's that says why there's no evidence for any of it left over because it quite literally wiped a vast portion of the earth Clean now this was a theory from 50 years ago. Correct. Did the CIA was putting around? Yes, was there any scientific backing of this? Yes, so what's it all right? So the you know what they cite in there is those wooly mammoths that were died off in mass quantities Still had food in their mouths. Yeah, that's so that's in there. I remember hearing I don't know if it was you or Randall Carlson. Yes. Yeah, so this book was written in I think 1957 it was classified in 1963 not the class of long let me rephrase the book was not classified the CIA Disgusted and that was classified so this book was pretty much little known But if you literally Google or you can bring it well You just come up at the top of Google, but now you got to go duck. Go or you go to CIA Dog's not crazy. Yeah, it's unfortunate when you see how Google curates information when you go to Google things type bright inside Jimmy no longer comes up on there in there in the few pages in I'm offended. Why do you think they're hiding you? Are they scared? I'm not gonna tell the truth. It's probably related. What's up for When I'm looking up this book There's also a claim that Jesus was a genius from India and was abducted by this new two angels No, I don't know if that's written in there, but what it does say is that Jesus Osiris and Vichnu We're all the same person and says these stories passed down yet. No, no, no, we you I'll just another section of the book Thomas also claims that Jesus was abducted by aliens That's not in there. That's not in there. That's no. I've read the entire document And we just go hold on where is this coming from is this a daily star? Disinformation it's not true. No, listen. I'm not I'm at it. You Jamie. You know, I know This section of the book Thomas also coming from. This is a daily star. Disinformation. It's not true. No, listen, I'm not. I'm not a mad at you, Jamie. You know, I know. The section of the book, Thomas also claims that Jesus was abducted by aliens on Easter Sunday. Oh, God, that's so silly. Does it? The two angels came to earth in their space vehicle to take care of the aftermath of Jesus's crucifixion. And that goes on to say, this sounds like someone's just having fun releasing a daily star. Daily star is was correct me from wrong. It's like a tablet. Yeah. It's like the inquirer. It could be me running that site's Bob's website. It's no different. They just call it the daily star. It could be like the daily whatever and then just make my own thing. But if you go to the document itself, that's not a narrow red, the damn thing. I made a whole video on it. It's it's pretty interesting, Joe, because it lists a lot of other cataclysmic events. And it's saying that this is the reason why we don't have understanding. And it even cites the great pyramid of Giza as being, quote, in anigma. And I like that because it is anigma. Let's pause right here because I got a peek. Okay, let's talk about this when we come back. We'll talk about this. This I'm going to use the right class. I'll be able to break back. Thank you. And we're back. I had a pee. I was holding it as much like Canada. Trying a lot of water today, unfortunately. I was holding it as well. So that was lovely. Yeah, it's a weird thing. Like you're trying to concentrate, but you also have to pee. It's not good. Sometimes better just pee. So this CIA thing about Adam and Eve, what was the purpose behind this? Like why did they publish this? So just to clarify, they did not publish it. Some doctor named Chan Thomas, who's a mysterious figure in itself, because it's hard to find a lot of info. They'll keep mine. This is back in the 50s. So it's hard to find him. So he published it. He published it. And then for unknown reasons, the central intelligence agency disgusted in a meeting and classified that meeting, although let me just clarify everything the CIA does technically classified. A lunch meeting is got nothing's available to the public. But then it wasn't it was kept secret for decades up until I want to say it was 2012 or 2013. It was desanitized and released. And so the big question for me is, why were they discussing it? And the fact that there's certain details in it that are corroborated by scientific evidence that we've gathered in the last couple decades, say, for example, that 11,600 year younger dryest. And essentially, I mean, so to me, I'm like, this is it's highly fascinating. What's that about? I'd like to know why they were chatting about it. I'd like to know what their conclusions were. None of that's available to the public. They declassified their this with absolutely no context, whatsoever. Same thing with the rishot structure. They studied that as well. They did covert surveillance back in the 60s. They flew over it in a million different directions. And you could find that on CIA dot gov. I made a very good about this earlier this year. I was like a follow up to the rishot Atlantis theory where I gave a more compelling argument. And what was so interesting about this, Joe, is that there's a huge part of it, a page and a half that's redacted. And if the the entire context, it says, although the information from the scientific study will be available to worldwide scientific community, totally blank after that, I could show you a screenshot of it. What did they have a premise like why they were going studying it for they were looking for geo magnetic or excuse me, geo electric or geo anomalies. And so it was one of like 12 or 13 sites or 15 that were from around the world. They studied. So it wasn't just that one. But Joe, what's so interesting about it is that Atlantis was said to have had special properties. I got head to you know springs of water of that were warm and cold. And it was said to be special according to the post site in who had created it. And but what's interesting about this, Joe, is not just the fact they studied it, but the fact that there's the entire context of it is still classified to this day. Now, let me be clear, nothing in that document says anything about ancient history or Atlantis, nothing like that. But this site was studied. You we already discussed how unusual it is. Neither one of us had heard about it till recently. And if there's one comment that stuck out that had thousands of comments on these videos like how have I never heard of this rich hot structure before. And if you were to Jamie, if you were to bring up my video for May of this year and there's a certain part of it that shows a screenshot of this part that's redacted. I want you to see this, Joe, because it's it's the entire context of the scientific study itself is classified today. And this is from what year? I want to say 1963. I got a double check I sometimes mix on my dates, but but it was yeah, that's why we killed county. Probably it's in there. Oh, I'm looking on the CIA's website as I was trying to find your thing, but this is kind of interesting. I feel like it does talk about how to declassify it in part, but a sanitized copy has been approved for release. Yeah. And that's that's the Adam and he's story. Just to clarify, he's referring to Adam and he's story, not the rich hot structure. Two different things. Whoa, just is on the website for the CIA sanitized copy. Yeah, do you want to click on that PDF just to I was already trying it's hard to look through. I mean, right. But I meant just to see what it looks like just for weird is that that the CIA had a fuck what? Whoa, back up. What the fuck is that cross section of earth? Yeah, they're saying that the internal the part the whole premise of this thing is that the earth that something happens inside the earth routinely periodically, right? They say it's the were the legends of Noah's flood comes from the they they. Oh, so this was what they were throwing around before the younger dryass impact theory. Yes. Now scroll down to skip these pages real quick, because these are these are unrelated. Yeah, now right there. Oh, it's good. A couple of four. Yeah, right there. Like Noah's flood, like Adam and he's story this two will come to pass them. This is just like the opening to it. So they thought that this was going to happen again. Well, look at this in California, the mountain shake like ferns and a breeze, the mighty Pacific rears back and piles up into the mountain of water more than two miles high. Then starts its race eastward with the force of a thousand armies, the wind attacks, ripping, shredding, everything and its supersonic bombardment, the unbelievable mountain of the Pacific sea water follows the wind eastward, burying Los Angeles and San Francisco as if they were but grains of sand. So this is written as a story and something else worth mentioning is that it says that that happened because because of this event, the earth essentially stands still for a moment, which causes the wind and the forces of momentum to continue to go at a at an unbroken. We're theory. It's crazy. And I'm not saying it's necessarily true. No, but what's interesting is that it's talking about destruction of mankind. And it's very specifically says this is the reason why we don't know our ancient past. And I'm find it interesting that the central intelligence agency was discussing this. Well, it probably had some sort of inkling that some of the stories from ancient civilizations about cataclysmic cataclysmic disasters probably had some merit to them. Right. And they're probably trying to protect us or at least protect the president, put him in a bunker. Yeah, you want to hear something fun. I'm going to do I was going to keep it to myself, but I keep pushing it off. So maybe the internet will help us do it. I want to fight. Well, I've already looked into it briefly and was really complicated because it's hard. It doesn't fall into any of their categories, but I want to do a freedom of information act requests on the Great Pyramid of Visa. I want to see if the CIA has ever or any of the intelligence communities or have ever even just looked into it. They got to me. I'm like, if that thing was more than just a tune for the Pharaohs, it seems to me that the true powers that be that have unlimited resources would study and have a theory of it in themselves. And so I want to see if they've ever looked into it at all. Isn't that a good idea? Yeah, it's a good idea. Internet, let's do it. Because I went on to submit it and it's like, you there's a bunch of categories you could submit and nothing applied. So I'm like, I need to talk to somebody to figure out because if you don't have information that request or free, anyone can do it. We have a right to do it. The only thing you pay for is if you want them to print out pages and it's like, that's cheap as hell. It's not even a factor. So this, there, if you have a story about this idea that the earth has some sort of nova effect and things explode and the earth stands, if they were thinking that they had to, and if they were looking at the re-shard structure, they had to be looking at the pyramids too. They had to try to figure what the hell is going on there? I would think so if I put this way, if I was running the CIA, I'd be looking at all kinds of crazy stuff too and that would be one of them. No doubt. No doubt. I'm really interested in this whole Adam and Eve thing. So they think that this happened and that civilization got brought down to its knees and brought to a small amount of people. But they were kind of right. If you think about Supervolcanos, those do happen. If they really did think that that was some sort of a volcano, that the re-shard structure was some sort of a volcano that had erupted and cooled and erupted and cooled. And if there was some sort of volcanic activity that was still going on under the surface, that would account for the idea that Atlantis was saying there was water that was cool and also water that was hot in the same area, much like you get in Yellowstone, right? Like you get these cool lakes, but then you also get like old faithful, these geysers of hot water and these, I mean, there's these ponds that people fall into and never seen again because they get melted. Yeah. I think it makes it even more compelling. Now, some people will say like, well, it's a natural formation. So it can't be because as Plato describes it is that it was created by Poseidon. I'm like Poseidon can mean Earth. They was created by God or just universe. So to me, I'm like, in the fact of its very size that Atlantis was described at, I'm like, it would make far more sense that it was a geological formation because that's what we do today. We build on geological formations all the time. Have you been to Yellowstone? I actually haven't, which is a real shame because I lived in Boise, Idaho. Pretty close. Yeah. Yeah. It's wild. It's, it's really interesting. It's, first of all, it's kind of, it's kind of bizarre because the animals are, they're like, there have no fear of people because they've been sort of habitualized. So like you go by, especially because they've released wolves into Yellowstone years ago. So the elk have decided it's a smart thing to go around where the people are all the time. So if you go near like this visitor center, there's like, there's a photo that I took. I think I put it on Instagram. It's me taking a selfie next to a sodium machine. And behind me is a whole herd of elk just hanging out and like, huh, I might not have put it on this. I'm not sure if I did. But these elk are like basically like town deer. You ever been around town like Colorado? If you go to like Evergreen, Colorado, there's a mule deer that just wander through the town. And some of them are fucking these massive like trophy mule deer. Like if you were in the mountains and you were hunting, that would be a deer that you would be like stoked, a deer of a lifetime. And then there's just wandering down Main Street, nevergreen because they know that people are not dangerous there. That people basically, oh, look at you and they give them food and they take pictures of them. So all the animals in Yellowstone have been habitualized. So when you walk around there, I mean, that's why people always get launched in the air by Buffalo. These fucking knuckleheads, they think that it's okay to get close to the bisons and they, I love those videos, Joe, these people get knocked. I don't want to see anyone get killed, but these people are so dumb. And it's always a recurring theme where they're so un-ephmatic. I'm like, you can even run away from this you're done. Nobody can. You can't. You ain't running away from a bison. But there's the saddest one. Little nine year old girl got launched into the air. I'm like, oh my god, like you let your nine year old get that close to a bison you fucking idiot. But my point is, the rest of Yellowstone is absolutely fascinating because there's this weird smell that comes out of these, all these geological formations because they're basically what you're looking at is a caldera volcano. It's an immense volcano that's happening right now. It's underneath the surface as all this volcanic activity in every six to eight hundred thousand years. It erupts. And when it does, it's a continent killer. I mean, if it does erupt, we are fucked. This whole country is fucked. Everybody on this country is essentially dead. If you want to live, you better get to New Zealand and pronto because everybody live in here is a goner. It blows. And when it blows, it kills everything. And it happens every six to eight hundred thousand years. And the last time it happened was six hundred thousand years ago. And even if you just if you survive the initial, you know, eruption, the ash that's going to cover thousands of miles away feet deep, like that's going to that your car, everything you're going to be, it's going to destroy the water. It's going to get turned into acid. It's going to, it, even if you survive the initial eruption, you're still fucked. Yeah. And then you live in nuclear winter because the sky is going to be covered in ash and no sunlight will get through. No food will grow. Well, they believe that, oh, God, I keep forgetting where this happened. But somewhere around 70,000 years ago, they believe that civilization got brought down to just a few thousand people by a super volcano that happened in some island somewhere. Toba, the Toba super eruption of 72,000 years, I believe. What's that near? What's that near that we call it today? I thought that was some island like, isn't it east of Africa in my thinking? Or is there's a Polynesia down there in the, um, once it's down there. Yeah. It says self Pacific. I don't remember. I'm trying to remember. It's on the tip of my tongue, but I can't, I can't recall it. But wherever this was, they're really pretty sure. And I think this is based on genetic evidence that at some point in time, civilization got brought down to like six or seven thousand people. I've heard this. It's just wild. It is. And it's pretty scary. Um, and you know, the thing is Joe, so here we are at time, a cataclysmic events. And it's like so like there's plenty of people are into this topic. It's fun. But a vast majority of people walking down don't want to hear about it. I think it scares people, even like the scientific community because these islands, Mender, Indonesia, Indonesia, there it is. Yeah. Yeah. So this super volcano, massive volcanic crater, like a mid tranquil mountain scenery nearby amenities like restaurants, liver, is there any all in classes there? Bring it up, Gary. Yeah, you can go there and stay in a nice resort and get a massage. And that's right. We're civilization almost died. And we would almost kill off everybody. And I mean, seven thousand people is not much. Especially when you think about how many predators around that could have been the end of us, especially 60, 70,000 years ago, when you're basically hunting with these things like this arrowhead. How is that? Is that a legit that's legit? It's a legit one from Texas. I don't know how old it is. I would have matched it. It's hundreds of years old. Yeah, it's real. Yeah, it's a real arrowhead. That was on a real arrow that hopefully somebody got their dinner with. That's beautiful. Yeah, it's pretty wild. I mean, really elegantly constructed. I'm doing some real little bit of research on that book, the Adam and you story. Apparently a lot of people do have a copy of it. Yes. The me clarify, it was not the book itself was not classified. Correct. Yes. And they do have the missing version of it. And I don't know that I can see that they've found anything strange. Oh, and the redacted pages. They had redacted pages of it. Yeah. Actually, that reminds me of one of my friends, Jayana James has a YouTube channel. She explores these topics. And I believe she had made a video update sharing those details. And it's all interesting. But the most interesting of everything was in that book anyway. There was nothing that stood out to me from that the missing stuff actually that was to me suggested something dirty. But it's funny that the CIA redacted, they probably just figured, you know, people are dopes. Let's keep this from them. Like whatever it was. What did they think was interesting about the redacted stuff? I just even like they I'm trying to find digging through like comments of people that I've been looking into this from a couple years ago. They said this could have just been like a dump and they could have scanned everything in the CIA because they were talking about the handwritten notes on certain pages and like why why does this have a handwritten note on? Right. Because someone just wrote it. The guy in the book wrote down his grocery list or something like that. Lots of weird reasons. But that doesn't it doesn't really mean a whole lot. It's just they're trying to discover how much time did you spend when you were in Egypt? So I've been there twice in the last year. I'm very blessed to say that. So I was there for 17 nights from November December of 2020, which was awesome, traveling at that period of time during the midst of all the lockdowns and everything else. And then I was there for just under a week in September, October this year. And then I, yeah, pretty recent. Yeah. And then I went to Peru in August with a lovely man, Brian Forster, who's been giving tours. He's been to, because he lives in Peru. He's been a Machu Picchu more than 70 times. The Egyptian tours, did you go with a guy? Did you, you know, that Yusuf Aweyan, so it's called the chemit school. And his, well, I should say ex-wife, runs it. And so it's all based on the teaching of his father, which is again, a game of Del Aweyan, who was in the pyramid code. So it's based on the tribal knowledge that was passed down. And by the way, it's worth mentioning that he had a game when he was a kid, he had went in a tunnel from Sakhar, Egypt to Giza, which is eight miles as the bird flies. That's like, that doesn't, that's not supposed to exist. That accord, like there's no evidence of this, but like he did it. I mean, I have no reason to doubt him. I mean, but there's, it's already been known that there's like a labyrinth with an Egypt that there's subterranean. What do you mean that's not supposed to exist? Did he document it? Did he have photos of this thing? No, we were talking to a poor Egyptian kid if it did it in like the 1950s or something like that. And we don't know where this is? No. However, there's, so this is the weird thing about Giza, my friend, is that there's something called the Osiris shaft, which is located directly under the causeway between the Sphinx and the second pyramid. And it goes about a hundred feet underground. It's carved out of the limestone bedrock. It's the creepiest place I've ever been in my life. It's disturbing. Why is it disturbing? I don't know. Well, there's human bones in there. I stepped on it. Even no. What? Yeah. How old are the bones? Well, I, not sure, but I was someone had told me like not super ancient, like something like people in more modern times, maybe a hundred years ago, filled down there or something. But um, and I got to go in there, but you asked the shaft right there. No, that's not it. Oh, though, that yes, that's the entrance into it. And you go straight down from there. God, look at a line of people. Yeah, you got to pay you $2,000 to get in there. They're fucking floating around everywhere. It's a pit of chip bags really? So that's the first shaft. So it's three different shafts. And you go down and here's where it gets, this is the crazy part of when you get to the third level, which is completely dark and freaky, there was a side tunnel. Zahiya was himself. There was a documentary. It was the 96 or 99. He went down there with like, it was a fox documentary. And he showed he's standing in front of this tunnel that went sideways. And he says, it's yet to be explored. And we, I don't know what's down there. The hell you don't know what's down there. Like you never walked down there, but you'll leave since sealed it up. It's like cinder blocks. He sealed it up. What? Yes. So there is, so there's swear to God, why would they seal it up? That's a really, I, hey Joe, I really want to know that that they answered that question. That doesn't make any sense. All right. So here, this ties into like the same thing about the this eight mile tunnel connecting from from Sakara to Giza, which is couldn't find to tell you where that is today. But we already know that they were doing shit underground. When you look at the Osiris shaft and you can look at Zahiya was by the way, let me just say, I love you, Zahi. I would love to work with the Egyptian integrity and go do some tours and bring light and bring tourism to Egypt. Maybe clear because like this is a sensitive topic. These people, you know what I mean? I'm not dissing Egypt in their knowledge or the people running the show. I would love to work with them. I have my own little ideas and fun. But but like it's the same thing like they excavated the Sphinx and there was always said to be tunnels under there and and they're there. I made it as my most recent video and there was no pictures ever released to the public and some dude snuck down in there and took some photos. You can't see much. But what you know is that there are things that have gone underground Egypt that for whatever reason Joe is just off limits to the public completely off. Is there any speculation as to why it would be off limits? It's all conspiratorial. Like I'll, I'll wait. Okay. Only my best guess is anything else is best guesses. But but some suggest that the Egyptians is one underground cataclysm and that people were doing things underground in the same way that we saw in capidoshi of Turkey where there's those many underground cities. For example, during QU, they go like 15 levels underground. Have you heard of this? No, that's the one underground during the cataclysm. This is the idea that like somewhere around 12,000 years ago, like whenever this younger driest impact theory. That's what makes the most sense to me. Now, if you look at Darren QU and those underground cities, they claim like modern academics say, oh, they probably built these two defend themselves against invaders. And I'm like, hang on a second. If you're being vaded, you don't have time. Let me, oh, I forgot to say this, some of these cities can support 50,000 people this. What, what is that? See, and the fact you haven't even heard of this, Joe is, is this is what I'm talking about. So that's just a depiction, but they went down their ground city of Turkey. That's only one of them. And so they have houses on the surface. They look all normal, but then it's much larger as you go underground hundreds of feet. And they were made to hold livestock and everything. And some of them, so there's several of these that they know about. And some of them connect by miles and miles of tunnel Joe underground, some of them go hundreds of feet and they go down to underground rivers. And it's carved out of limestone rivers. Yeah. How old do they think these things are? Well, if you read about it, let's say a couple of thousand incredible. This is this. They say a couple thousand years. However, something tells me that this was involved in the, maybe the ancients knew about the cataclysm of, you know, and that it was coming. And so they prepped because I'm sorry, Joe, I know a little bit about war. And you don't, if someone's invading you, you don't have time to carve out miles and miles of bedrock tunnel. That would take, you know, many years, that would take, look at that. There's many more like there's several of these cities, by the way, Darren Q. You is just one of the more known ones. And you get to tours of it. Did you hear about that one guy? There was a guy, oh God, I want to say it was an Italy. And he had a house. And in the house, he had dug down through the ground and developed this incredible chapel, built this immense structure. And they came to his house. And the authorities essentially said, listen, what are you doing? Like we know you're doing something. Let us in and we're going to arrest you and he said, I'll show you. It's not, nothing nefarious. This is what I did. And he built this and had this incredible art project that he had essentially had a very modest home. And then as you go into this modest home and then you go down through this passageway, he had developed what was essentially this immense super intricate art project. And by himself, he had done this over the course of decades and made this incredible place. And it had become something that was like a point of focus for the authorities where they're like, what is this guy? Have guns down there? Like what is he doing? He's got a bomb with meth labs. See if you can find that. I found a couple. Oh, here's the Italy one from this year. Yeah, I believe it's Italy. I found one in California too. So the California one. I know about the California one. You want to see that one too. But this this the Italy one is amazing because it's really, really beautiful. I think. Oh, maybe this is it. So this took him years with modern equipment. Yeah. Is this it? Yeah. This is it. Yeah. I don't think this is it because it didn't. I don't think it looked like that. It looked real under my tunnel system. Oh, that's a tunnel system under his house that he bought. That was a guy who found a tunnel system under his house. So he had a house and then like he's like, what's going on this floorboard? You want to hear something really fascinating? Sure. So in Egypt, people, they're finding things all the time. People are when they're doing like renovations or on their house. So people are digging under their homes in the Cairo area. And literally finding artifacts under their homes. Yes. So listen to this. You want to guess. So there is a black market for antiquities. Now, that's just talk mummies alone. And this you can find mainstream articles on this. How much is the mummy? Well, the the estimated yearly black market revenue from mummies alone is between estimated two to six billion dollars a year. So let's go with this. By and mummies? Yeah, these rich people are probably buying mummies. And because I mean, who is the money for that? And let me tell you something else. It's real interesting because it kind of show like first of all, wasn't it just a couple years ago, the UFC's total valuation was like four billion. Yeah. So this is a, all right, if they're saying estimated between two and six billion, that's just go with four. Right. That that's a year. Right. And just mummies. So here's something else. And I got to be careful because I'm convinced big farmer is running the whole earth at this point. So the Purdue family and the Sackler family, you've heard of them. They were the ones that did the OxyContin. Why don't you look just how much money they've put into Egyptian antiquities and museums around the world, including starting this is recently a few months ago. And this goes back years. But recently they're starting a program at, at per, I forgot which it may be Purdue University because that's by John Sackler or Purdue John Purdue. And anyways, so these people have an incredible interest in Egyptian antiquities. And that doesn't necessarily mean anything. But I find that quite interesting that some of the richest powerful people on earth are really into this stuff. And then I look at some crazy chamber in their fucking OxyContin ball houses. Oh, yeah. They can show you mummies and shit. I mean, come on. What do they think about these guys drinking their brandy? Oh, they go back to my voice. They're going down here and they go to my purchase for $100 million. This is King Tut's brother and looking at him here. That kind of cheddar. Yeah. Bring your buddies over. Cause dude, I looked at a house in Beverly Hills. I never actually looked at it. But I looked at it online. And you know, we're thinking about moving to this one area, Beverly Hills. And they had this house that was for sale. And it had a dinosaur in it. The house had a dinosaur. There was a, a raptor. Yeah. And you could buy the dinosaur. It was a million dollars more than the house or the house. And then a million dollars more, you could get the dinosaurs well. I'm not going to lie. I think that's pretty cool. Pretty dope. Yeah. That doesn't make me feel bad. It's like, yeah, it makes me feel bad to own a mummy. Like, I'm not in no owner to mommy to he I am. I am into over the fucking dinosaur bomb. Joe, we got it. You got like a man cave with with your situation like here. No, this is my man. Okay. My house is a fucking run by chicks. Joe, what? Okay. My house is run by my wife and my daughter. How are you? How are you doing with that? That's right. I was hearing that this as long as I have this, this studio and place where I can hang out and I just bought a comedy club. Oh, congrats. So this is all my stuff. So I can do with a, which is a perfect balance. You know, because I, you know, I'm a moron. I like stupid shit. I like UFOs and chimp heads that are made out of symbols. That's wonderful. The one thing this place is missing out is a darner farm bone. We need to get something in there. That's what I'm saying, bro. How do we need a fucking dinosaur? Something those are so expensive. Yeah. Like that, that raptor, which was a full, full raptor. See if you can find it, Jamie. Beverly Hills home for sale with dinosaur. It was fucking dope because it was like a six foot tall like velociraptor. I love it. Yeah. It's pretty dope. And it, you know, most of those things, you only get like part of the skeleton is real and a lot of it's just recreations like they recreate femurs and stuff that's missing. Yeah, that's it. That's the house. She's a $38 million Beverly Hills mansion with 150 million year old dinosaur fossil. Look at that. That's what I need. Look at that thing. I imagine that motherfucker chasing you. Fuck. I'm gonna get eaten by a goddamn lizard. I, uh, I'd like to bring people over to show them that. Like, you want to come back to, you know, to do people that come back to my place again, show you my dinosaur. I would probably spend most of my day getting high staring at that. That's it. It would be a problem. I would have, I would lose a lot of my productivity because I would be spending so much time staring at that fucking dinosaur. I'd want to wear one of its teeth around like a necklace. No, no, no, you gotta keep them ahead. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's why you buy a second head. That's how like a magic key you got to make where like you put the tooth in and it opens up the vault. Right. Right. I think slides aside. There's an underground tunnel I'm the temple speaker. Yes. Oh, you did. Oh, let me check it out. Yes. Yes. This is it. So this guy, yeah, temples of the human kind. This is exactly it. This guy made this man in his fucking house. So his house on the outside again, a very humble modest home. But then you go inside of it. It is absolutely spectacular, beautiful artwork. And again, all done by this guy. I mean, I don't know how many people he had help him. It shows the house right. Yeah. So that's the house. And again, all done by this guy. I mean, I don't know how many people he had help him. It shows the house right there. Yeah. So that's the house. So look at that normal house. You look at that house. You're like, oh, you know, normal guy, normal house. Yeah, you would have no idea. But this guy built it. It took him forever. Okay. So over 15 years, and that's of course using modern equipment. Yeah. So that's something that's worth mentioning because when you look at these underground cities that are absolutely massive Joe that can support some of them are 20,000 people, 30,000 people, 50,000 people. Hold on. Scroll up, Jamie, for where it says it's the 15 year part. It says over the next 15 years, more volunteers flocked around the globe to join the growing community of temple builders, working in four, so as many people, working in four hour shifts and funding their projects with small businesses to serve the local community. But since no planning permission had been granted by the government, what is that word? Damon, Hearians had to keep the growing temples under wraps. That's what it is. It was important to build them in secret and we would never be able to build them. Italian law does not foresee this sort of underground building. So in 1991, they had completed most of the nine chambers, murals, stained glass windows, ornate statues, vibrant mosaics and secret doors spread throughout the secret excavation. So look at what it looks like on the surface versus what it looks like underneath. It's a lot of people working in incredible man. I thought this guy did it by himself, but apparently he had a lot of people working on it. But God, it's beautiful. It's spectacular. And when you go down deeper and deeper, it is absolutely amazing. And I think it's available to the public. And I think you could like go on a tour of it, which is really wild. Imagine like going through that house, you could pull up a wee in the right place. Don't let Epstein, 155 haters. Oh, 150 volunteers over 15 year period less than 40 years ago directed by one now 57 year old, former insurance broker. That's a guide like you were working at Target, right? This guy really wanted to do this. He experienced visions at age 10 of doing this. He dedicated his life to building the temples after experience visions at age 10. Wow. And his visions, the temples were home to a highly evolved community who enjoyed an idyllic existence in which all people work towards a common good. Look how beautiful that work is. Like the artwork is incredible. That's spectacular. God, it's so gorgeous. You know, to people listening, I just want to point out like, you know, you have the ability to look into things yourselves and think for yourselves. And when you look at these Darren Q.U.C.V.s, and there's, I'm talking like 50,000 people huge hundreds and hundreds of people who are just listening. Now I might have D.R.I.N. Yeah. And there's a few. It's in the capadocia region of Turkey. And just type in Turkey underground cities and you'll see that there's several known and the, and again, so if this took a whole team, a decade and a half to do, I want people to go and look at these caves and think for yourself if you believe that it's feasible to consider that these were done to thwart invaders. So in short notice, and I'm like, and how big in advance they actually are, I'm like, the Evans is quite literally in front of us that humans were doing something special a long time ago. And do the estimate is just that this was done thousands of years ago, right? All right. So they say 3000 year old city, but I'm like, you can't prove that like you could prove that if he found some stuff in his 3000, but they don't necessarily know that it's not older because in the reason I say that Joe is because my gut instinct on this throwing trash if you want. But that was, that was to survive a cataclysm of some kind. It was too big. It was meant to have farm animals and sustain them. There was air shafts. We're talking 15, 18 levels down Joe. And I'm like, you know, something tells me that was an arc of some kind. It was a, it was a shit hit the fan cave. Well, they have those bunkers today. These crazy preppers use my buddy Duncan and I did this television show a few years back and Duncan went to visit these super preppers that had used these, I think they were like, I want to say it was like some sort of a military base this guy had purchased. God, I wish I could remember what the fuck it was. Is it a silo? They had these, something along those lines, but it had these like enormous garage doors where you pull the cars in. They had like trailers, you know, you pull your trailer in. And then inside they were essentially planning on having a sustainable environment that could keep people alive in case of like a nuclear disaster or some sort of bio weapon or some shit. Smart, I, yeah, I think people's day bunkers. Look at these. Oh, that's fine. Yeah, but here's my position. I don't want to live. If the fucking world gets nuked and there's like just cannibals out there. Okay. I hope the new kids me right in the face. You know what I think is more likely to happen? What? So the last, this is outdated info, but this is before Trump had taken office and at that time the last five department of Homeland Security heads, all five of them said that the greatest threat facing the United States is a grid down scenario because there's a few things that could do it. It could be a hacking. It could be a solar event. And that would be absolutely catastrophic because if the power goes down for months on and you got to keep in mind that the United States is connected by only three grids east, west, and Texas. And they're, and so if it went down, like they don't just have these, these, these, the, what do you call them? The, uh, the electrical, whatever the hell you call them, but they're huge. They're not made to, they're made to order. They're not just like lined up in shelves, what they call it? The big, the transformers. Right. So like if there was something like that that happened, it's potential or possible that you could have a grid down scenario for, in some areas or the whole thing from months on end. And you have to think about that if, if that happens, the city water pumps will go down once the generators run out of their fuel, this, fuel tanks won't work. Like we're talking, it, that would be so apocalyptic in itself. And if that was to happen, it would be the haves and the have nots, those who have guns and those that don't or those that prepped, those that didn't. Yeah. And that's possible. And I wouldn't even be surprised. I want to get too crazy. But like, I mean, in our lifetimes, it's, whether it's a solar flare, like another carrying team event or, or some terrible entity that wants to bring our shit down. And if they were successful, it would in a short period of time days. There's this saying that humanity or society is only three, or excuse me, nine meals away from chaos, which means, you know, three days. And so if you have a situation where the wind grid went down for even a couple weeks show, it would be, it would be shit, especially if the shore. Well, the chances almost went down last winter. Yeah. Came real close. Came within four minutes. The wake up call. Yeah. It was for a lot of folks. And I think that solar flares are a huge threat and not just a huge threat to the grid but huge set to life on earth. Any kind of supernova that's anywhere reasonably close to us and we're a, we're a rap. Yeah. Yeah. Hypernovas in particular watch this documentary where they first started observing hypernovas in the cosmos. And they thought that it was wars going on with, with civilizations in space because they were happening so frequently. Like they were observed because, you know, obviously there's hundreds of billions of galaxies. And so they were looking out in these hundreds of billions of galaxies and they were detecting these gamma radiation bursts and they were like, Oh my God, they're going to war, they're going to war out there in space. And then they realized, no, these are hypernovas and that these, these novas essentially just wipe out entire solar systems and more. I heard, well, I don't know what the last one was, but they had, it was described as being bright. Even during the day you could see it was like essentially a flash, it was sustained for, I don't know if it was months, something like that. And then you just see in the sky, I'm like, and they said it even lit up the sky even when there was like a new moon who was dark. Yeah. I'm like, that would be so crazy to see that. What was really crazy is it happened millions and millions of years ago and you're just seeing it now. It's like a time to see. Yeah. Like every star that you see when you go on a crazy clear night and you're looking at the Milky Way, you're looking at things from millions of years ago. That's nuts. Yeah. That's really nuts. Yeah. That's the one thing. Yeah. I find that just fascinating to think about. Yeah. When they're observing the cosmos, like we were talking about the Big Bang earlier, when they're observing 13 plus billion years ago, they're essentially looking into the past at what happened 13 plus billions of years ago when they see these like stellar nurseries and they're, you know, they're using like these spectacular telescopes to look deep, deep, deep into space. They're looking at the past. Yeah. So that's like an idea for a time machine is that if there was some way to travel vastly far distances, let's say like a warm hole of some kind. Yeah. And then you stopped and turned around and looked at Earth and say you had the abilities for enhanced magnification of some kind. Wouldn't you technically be watching the past then? If you could get ahead of it, I'm saying if you get ahead of the speed of light somehow and then turn around and look and then you'd be seeing Earth from say a thousand years ago or something. You would have to, yeah, you would have to figure out a way to get instantaneously so far away that the light that comes from Earth. But if you could see that good, wouldn't be the light anymore, right? With it. Well, I mean, I don't know. It's not my world. But if I could go back in time and see any era, I think Egypt during its prime would be the era that I would look into. Because if you look at all of what we know about ancient civilization, whatever's left, whatever's intriguing, all the amazing sites that archaeologists have explored, that's the one that's the most what the fuck. It is. I would do any. Yeah, if there was one thing I go back in time and look at, I want to see what was going on then. I want to see the construction because then it would answer many, many other questions. Yeah. That one thing alone would answer so many other things. Have you been in any of the mind structures? No, I went, I mean, just inka stuff in Peru. But I do want to go down to Central Mexico. I want to do that next. I want to go to Chichin, Ita. I've been there. Yeah. It's pretty amazing. They don't let you walk up on the things anymore. I think one of the Jake Paul or someone fucked it up. Didn't they fuck that up? Didn't someone like, I don't know if I think did. Was it some, maybe someone filmed a music video up there or something? You want to hear something pop star or something? Well, you can't climb the Great Pyramid of Giza anymore. You want to know why? There's this French couple that went up there and they fucked on top of the Great Pyramid. Nice. And they uploaded the video. Oh, yeah. And there's been some other instances too. Like someone went up there and like, broad, titless or whatever. And like that really upset them. But you could see a picture. I haven't seen the porno. But like there's, you see this couple. It's got a snapshot of literally these two naked people on top of the Great Pyramid in the night sky. Yeah. Good for the night. But they fucked it up for everybody else. But the Chichanica is really amazing. And you know, when I went to Chichanica, they really had no idea what happened to the Mayans. This was 20 years ago. But now they're reasonably sure they were wiped out by disease. Yeah. They think that European settlers came and the depictions that the Europeans had of how spectacular the Mayans civilization was back then and how these guys had these gold head dresses and these incredibly sophisticated cities. And they brought in smallpox and just killed everybody. What a shame. Yeah. Well, they did that to the Native Americans. They did that to everybody. But what was really amazing about the sophistication of the settlements in Mexico was that they had these immense stone structures. By the way, they did it to the Amazonians too, the people that lived in the Amazon. That was another really interesting conversation that I had with Graham Hancock where he was talking about how through the use of lidar they've detected all these grids. That was the basis of that movie, the Law City of Z. That these European explorers had gone through the Amazon and come back with these amazing stories of these incredibly sophisticated civilizations. And then when people returned 50 years later, there was no such civilization. There was no evidence whatsoever because the jungle had swallowed up all these buildings. And until recently, they thought it was just folklore and bullshit until they started using lidar. And this light emitting radar thing that lidar is, I'm not exactly sure how it works, but through use of lidar, which is non-invasive, so it doesn't destroy anything, but it gives them a graph or an image of what is going on and through that they saw all these grids that indicated streets and irrigation and all this. So European travelers literally were genocidal by accident. They fucking killed everybody. I mean, as much as we like to talk about the genocide that European explorers enacted on Native Americans, which they absolutely did, they slaughtered a lot of Native Americans. There's no, it's not forgiving that. What they really killed them with is disease. 90% of Native Americans were killed by disease. It's sad. It's heartbreaking to think about that. It's fucking crazy. It's crazy that a country where they're getting along with this disease, I mean, they existed with it, they survived and they came over on boats and gave it to people that didn't have an immunity to it and it just burned right through the entire population. Yeah. Terrific. Yeah. And that's what happened to the Mayans. The Mayans, you know, and that's the Mayans, not that long ago. They know that the Mayans civilization, you know, they were around hundreds of years ago. You know, five, six hundred years ago, they were around like during a cabassa, davaca, he details in his journeys across North America. He details all of his trips through the like all these various Spanish explorers detail the Mayans civilizations. Going back to that light earth study. So one of this is something that I just thought of is that it's so interesting that so that area that people had already that they found on with through the use of lidar had already been previously surveyed on foot and one of the and they didn't see anything, including a seven story tall building that was consumed by trees and lush vegetation. And it had like I said, it had already been surveyed on foot. So that's how much the earth consumes things. Yeah. And so now they're using lidar from space and they're finding shit, shit, ancient stuff, all over the Sahara desert. Wow. That's what I'm saying. I'm like, if this place was green 5,000 plus years ago and had the largest freshwater lakes and a huge network of rivers, people of course would have been living there. And so now they're finding random stuff all over. I'm like, I've said it before. I think it's the hairdo desert is the ancient jackpot. Like under that sand, they're going to find things and discoveries in our lifetime that I think are going to be probably amazing. Because I know these people would have been there. It makes sense. It makes sense if 5,000 years ago, if there was an advanced civilization in that area and 5,000 years ago, it was all lush and green. What a weird thing that happens where the earth just continually shifts its climate and changes what's warm and green. That's why you look at houses in Malibu. You're like, what are you doing? You got to have, this is not going to last, bro. Yeah. It's a, yeah. You're on the edge of the ocean. What makes you think it's going to stay there? Yeah. Including these things in the topic of climate change and man-made climate change and all that. If the earth is going through these cycles that are, I mean, if we're, God, if we're looking at something like 50,000 years ago, the earth's temperature is some like 15 degrees Fahrenheit hotter. It's been identified through the core ice samples of Antarctica. It's like, well, if they want to say that two, three degrees Fahrenheit would be enough to screw over our civilization. Well, if we're talking 15 plus degrees naturally, I want to know more about that and why it's not being included in the conversation. Well, you know, when Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson in particular, when he discusses this, one of the things that he says says, global warming is certainly a threat. He goes, but you know what a real threat is? Global cooling. He was like, global cooling is way worse. He's like, global warming essentially makes more plant life. You have like, that's the thing that's going on where we talk about like increased CO2 in the environment. There's more green on this earth today than has ever been. It's weird. Like you think of, well, we must be decimating the rainforest and we're killing all the, we're definitely fucking up the rainforest for sure. However, there's a lot of green and it's more of it because green lives on carbon dioxide, which is kind of crazy. Yeah. And most people don't seem, I mean, plenty of people know that, but I don't know if a lot of people do. Right. We're looking at in terms of like pollution and particulates in the atmosphere and he was saying that that's the real issue. Like pollution in particulates, that stuff's terrible and it causes cancer and it's making people have much shorter lives. If you look at people that live like in a highly dense urban environments, they generally live less long than people who live in a clear air, country, like it's just, it's just by virtue of the shit you're breathing in, the environmental factor. But he said global cooling is fucking terrifying. You can't grow any changes. Yeah, I say just are fucking terrifying. Yeah. That's what we really need to be worried about. Well, I think we scared people now. Yep. Hold on. One last thing. I cannot possibly leave this podcast without telling you my DMT story. Oh, yeah. One. I do. So this is a few years ago. I made it myself, which was someone alchemist and I've only done this twice. I bought this is no big. This is in different state. No one you can't come after me. I don't have anything. But so the first thing I experienced is the loud ping in the side of my head, inside of my head that was unbelievably loud and the whole room, my bedroom was vibrating. It was like one, one, one, one. And then I started seeing these little blobs that had like these faces and they didn't, I got like a bad vibe from them. And then what I saw is it was all the beautiful colors and it was essentially a being with big old eyes. I interpreted it as feminine and it kept going like this with its arms and in the middle of its body was a pyramid. Now, let me say a couple of things because somebody like, oh, you know, he's an ancient history guy. Of course, you can see pyramids. No, I did this at the time because I was desperate for answers. It was a spiritual thing. And I think about all kinds of things throughout the day. I was the pyramids and ancient stuff was the furthest thing from my mind. And the only reason why I did DMT is because I couldn't figure out how to do ayahuasca and figured that was a dangerous thing to do, make myself, I got to go to Peru somewhere. Or was this 2018? So you weren't into Egypt back then? No, I was. But I mean, no, so now time. Right. And this was, I mean, this is, I was literally depressed and looking for answers in my life and guidance and I was doing it from a spiritual standpoint because I felt like at that time I could benefit from my ayahuasca journey. But I wasn't available to do it. So fast forward a couple years later to last December 2020, I'm in Egypt with Yosifawiyon, the son of a king of bell. And I was asking him because I was saying earlier that I think that pyramids were not built to be tombs. I think there was something functional, but I'm not exactly sure what could it be. Something for generating power. Could it be something else? I don't know. But when I've walked through the internal structural layout is so bizarre, Joe, nothing about it makes sense for a tomb. It's not meant for people to be through. It is utterly weird. So getting to the point is Yosifawiyon, I'm like, well, what do you think the, because he doesn't think it was built to be a tomb for the fair for anyone? And I said, what do you think it is? And he said his father told him, it's us. And I instantly, the first thing I thought of is like, because I can never explain, I didn't understand why I was seeing in my little DMT trip that it was a pyramid in a body and it was going like this. It was like this. It's like this. It's like this. It's like this. It's like this. It's like this. Two arms in front of me palms up. Like it was showing me something. Over and over again. Was doing that? Yes. And the pyramid of all the colors was just in the middle of the body. And then when I go to Egypt, he says it's us and I have, what does he mean by us? I don't know, Joe. That's what his father told him and I have no idea. So it makes me wonder. I'm like, is the pyramid some sort of code in itself that it, the construction of it and the math and everything behind it equates to something that explains something about humanity or, and this is a wild idea and it's nothing more than just an idea. But I look at the fact that across multiple continents around the world, there are different ancient civilizations that talk about us living to be hundreds and even thousands of years old. It's not just the Bible. It's the Sumerians. It's even Native Americans. It's that there's different cultures around the world that had said the same thing. Now that doesn't mean that that's true. But like what if, because some people think that, well, you got to keep in mind that the Nile River was once eight miles closer to the pyramids and went right up to the steps. So for example, when you brought up earlier with that boat that was found literally right next to the Great Pyramid, the water went up to the steps virtually. It was right there. So some people argue that water was moved through the pyramid and it's something to do with oxygen and this is why these are just wild ideas, by the way. But like what if it was something for DNA restoration? Because if it was possible for people to live to have been thousands of years old, which I have no idea. But if that happened, let's say, could, because it's like if these pyramids were not tombs, then what were they? If the water went right up next to them, that makes me think maybe it's something to do with generating power. And I know that sounds crazy to some people if we're talking about a stack of bricks and stones. Like what are you talking about? But encourage people to look at the internal structure and lay out of the pyramid. You can just Google image it and look at the map. And when you walk through it, Joe, it's utterly bizarre. It's not made to be walked through. You got to keep in mind you're seeing it as it is today with these boards, these planks, so you can walk through it. Like you go through this 300 foot long shaft that's like three by three. And then when you get to the Grand Gallery or so called Grand Gallery, it's the same thing. It was like smooth like a slide. But generating power how? Is there a speculation? So there's a gentleman in Christopher Dunn that we saw he was in one of the articles that was brought up earlier. He's the one that developed a wrote a book about it and it's called The Giza Power Plant. And he some people have theorized it had to do with separating hydrogen from the water or something. And the wild idea is I don't, I'm not, I can't speak to it much because it's kind of a, it's hard for me, my brain to wrap around. I'm like, I don't know what they're talking about other than that. But I can look at and think that this thing is unbelievably different than any type of Egyptian burial site. For example, the, the valley of the kings is obviously a known place of burial and it's wall to ceiling at covered all over in glyphs, paintings, beautiful stuff. All the mestabas around the, the pyramids, same thing. Every known burial site for anything, the Egyptians is covered in all, wall art. And it looks like a burial site, whereas there's not one single glyph in any of the pyramids. What so ever other than the pyramid, unis, which has some beautiful paintings, but it's, it was done. This is a thing people don't mention. It's over plaster. It wasn't on the stone. It's, you see the stone, which is spectacular and there's plaster over it. And then, and it looks honestly, and I mean any disrespect, it just doesn't look good at all compared to the structure itself. So somebody probably did that later on. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, it's worth mentioning and I want people more people need to explore this. Like there's almost zero evidence to even suggest that it was a pyramid. The reason why people think it is today is because we were taught it in school at a young impressionable age. And we weren't even explained any of the details. Never mind that there was no mummy's found that could be explainable by looting. You know, but if you bring up and you see the structure itself, it is so bizarre. And to me, I think it's just above us. So, so bizarre in the way the tunnels were created and these shafts that go up and down and it doesn't look like something that was designed for people to move through. What so ever? It's so strange, Joe. And so this guy's book, does he speculate? Does he have a good explanation? He thinks he posits that it is a power plant. Right. But for what? That's a great question. Like how did it generate power through water? For when I gathered it was the running water through it and you were able to separate the hydrogen out of the water or something to that effect and do with it, I don't know. But that it was something. Well, you know, it's all that who knows shit is like it goes out the window and you look at what they did do. like you can make all you're like, wow, who knows what they did. What do, look what they did do though. Look what they did do. Look at this 2,300,000 pound or 2,300,000 stone structure. That is just pointed to perfect do north, south, east and west. What do they do? Who are these people? What do they do? How the fuck do they do this? It's one of the funnest mysteries and this is the one thing I've seen like because when I was talking earlier at the beginning of this podcast, what topics do I want to talk about? I'm not doing those happy and I'm ever thinking like it's positive. I'm not debating abortion here. I'm debating the pyramids and it's so funny Joe because it's quite a sensitive topic. Whether it's a land dis or the pyramids, even suggesting something alternative comes with so much backlash. It's quite interesting but it's supposed to be fun. It's interesting and I just can't help but think about that DMT experience that was showing me that because I'm like when he said it's us and I don't know what that means. I'm like, I think there's something there because what I saw, I don't know. It makes me really, really wonder because I didn't think much about it for a couple of years after that. I told my brother about it and he's like, well that's interesting and I kind of like it's not that I forgot about it but I was like I don't know. I guess it's just my brain that develops some, it was just imagination. Who knows? Who knows? Yeah. Thanks for being here man. Joe wrapped this up. Tell everybody one more time it's bright underscore insight on Instagram. Bright insight on YouTube. Bright insight, two words, my name's Jimmy and it's all kinds of fun topics. Follow me on there and Joe I have to say thank you very much. I couldn't have been more flattered that you invited me on and I got it. I pleasure dude. Thanks for being here and thanks for putting out such interesting content. You've got a lot of really cool shit on your YouTube page. One last thing we're wrapping up. I just want to tell to anyone out there. Get off the couch. Like it's surreal to me that a handful of years ago, Joe, I was on the couch unhappy in life and watching Joe Rogan podcast and now here I am sitting across from you and all I did was decide and it wasn't easy but I made choices and changes in my life and next thing you know I find myself traveling to these sites, being on your podcast and other things and I just want to tell people if there's only one message is that because in the short term people are going to have to get creative to make money in the near future I suspect. People more than ever are unhappy with the direction of their lives, corporate work and and now everything else you can make changes you can do it to get off the fucking couch. Thank you Joe. Get after people. Bye everybody. Bye now.