The Jerogean experience. One of that's a real guy in there. Like a skeleton. Did you know there was a, they found, there was a Buddha statue once, and they found out that it was actually a mummified Buddha that they had covered with a statue. They did an X-ray on this thing. And inside of it is like an actual Buddha guy, like an actual yogi, who was in a lotus position, that they did the statue around him. Was that not that weird? Well, it's weird that they didn't know it. People had the statue. They didn't know it was a dead one. How old was the statue? That's a good question. Because if it was, you know, I mean, there's tombs and mummies and everything, or whatever the place. But look at the statue. I think that's unreal. That's what I want. That's crazy, right? See like that thing. He ain't clicking that thing. A little thing in the corner. He has to sign up to the history channel. He's like, yeah, crap. He's right in every time. Go, could you pull back up to the images again? Like, so is a monk, a mummified monk inside an ancient Buddhist statue, which is wild, man. Because I don't know what the statue is made of, but it looks like is it a very pottery? What does that look like? Medical examination of a thousand year old Buddhist statue revealed a shocking surprise hidden inside an actual person's body. So, um, meander medical center in the Dutch town of Amserfoot. Amserfoot. Of course. Has plenty of experience treating senior citizens, but none as old as the 1000 year old patient came, blah, blah, blah, blah. Um, researchers brought a millennium old statue of Buddha, of the Buddha, which had been on loan from the Drense Museum in the Netherlands to the state of the art hospital. In the hopes that the modern medical technology should shed light on an ancient mystery. For hidden inside, the gold painted figure was, uh, was a secret. The mummy of a Buddhist monk in the lotus position shown outside of China for the first time last year. So how do they know though? That's what's confusing. Did they, did they ruin the whole thing and I pin it up? I don't think they did, man. Just leave it in though. They sampled the material for DNA. It said, uh, the Huggerman slid an ancient artifact slowly into a high tech imaging machine for a full body CT scan and sampled bone material for DNA testing, gastrointestinal entrol, entrologist say that we're gastrointestinal entrologist and say, say his name now. Try that. Roy now, the women flannel vermaged in the vermaged it, vermaged it, uh, used a specialty, especially designed endoscope to extract samples from the mummy's chest and abdominal cavities. Uh, now it's known the test of revealed surprise. The monks organs had been removed and replaced with scraps of paper printed with ancient Chinese characters and other rotted material since has not been identified. How the organs had been taken from the mummy remains a mystery. Wow. That's cool. I wonder why they knew there was something in there though. Like this is not normal that you throw a fucking thing. Yeah, you go and do a CT scan of you. So look, scroll up there. No, you're right there. The body inside the statue is thought to be that of the Buddhist master, you quan, a member of the Chinese meditation school who died around AD 1,100, how did Luquan's body end up inside? I hope I'm saying that right. End up inside ancient Chinese statue, one possibility explored by the Drense museum is the gruesome process of self-mummification and which monks hope to transform themselves into revered living Buddhas. Oh, whoa. He put himself in there. The practice of self-mummification amongst Buddhist monks was most common in Japan but occurred elsewhere in Asia, including China as described in Ken Jeremiah's book Living Buddhas. Monks interested in self-mummification spent upwards of a decade following a special diet that gradually starved their bodies and enhanced their chances of preservation. Holy shit. They eschewed any food. I never know how to say that work because I only read it. How do you say that word? A shoot? A shoot. That's a word that I've never said. Eshude. I'm 54. I've never seen that word. I've seen that word but I've only read it. I've never actually said it all out. Any food made from rice, wheat, and soybeans and instead ate nuts, berries, tree bark, and pine needles and slowly diminishing quantities to reduce body fat and moisture which can cause corpse decay. Whoa. They also ate herbs. Was that word? Sysad. Kysad. Sysad nuts. Sysad's to inhibit bacterial growth. Holy fuck. They drank a poisonous tree sap that was used to make lacquer so that the toxicity would repel insects and pervade the body as an embalming fluid. pervade? Wow. Shit, they went on a 10-year diet to kill themselves. What the fuck? And turn themselves in... But you know, that was a thing with the Buddha. There's images of the Buddha, like the original Buddha that was like... He was starved to death. Have you ever seen those? No. They made statues of the Buddha where he was basically a skeleton. They're weird statues. And that was, I guess, a part of that process. See if you can find any of those skeleton-like Buddha statues. How would you say it? Starve Buddha statues. But that was like a thing that they would make these images of the Buddha in this state where he was apparently probably going through that thing. Like, yeah, those. Oh, shit. What the fuck? That's like something out of Indiana Jones. Scary. Go to that core thing. What is the emaciated body of the Buddha state statue represent? They're not really good. Not good answers? Sometimes. Sometimes. But let's see. That's a pretty intense. It's a pretty intense. The six-year period of renunciation, that the Buddha practiced from age 20 to 36, approximately 40, 40, 40, 40 BC based on traditional Indian, especially, uh, Saramana belief in self-mortification before he realized the futility of extreme asceticism and renounced it as when as well when he was on the verge of dying. So he whised up. So the Buddha did the same thing those monks did and he was like, what the fuck am I doing? He stopped. He stopped. I'm going to announce this. But look, he had gotten to the point of basically almost death. So that practice since, okay, so that's 446 BC. So this, that statue was older than that. So the statue was 1,000 years old, right? It was 1,000 BC, wasn't it? No. No, I was 1,000 years from that. That was 1,000 AD, right. So this was pre that. So that guy was probably, he didn't get the full wire that the Buddha bailed on. He didn't get the facts. Yeah, he didn't get the full deal to details. But he decided, well, the Buddha was a pussy. Yeah. And he quit. And to do what the Buddha couldn't do. I'm not a fucking quitter. I want to be a statue, bitch. He bet him the Buddha. But that's the whole Buddhist monk thing is an odd practice anyway, right? Because I'm a dumb ass. Can you just explain? Is there's more than one Buddha, right? Oh, it has been. Well, there's the Buddha. It was like thought to be the root. Look at that image of him. Whoa. Look at his guts. Well, so I was wondering if he was like holding something or what that is. I think that just represents his hands, man. That's his hips, buddy. Oh, that's no stomach at all. This is organs that shrunk up. Yeah. I think he's got too many ribs. Oh, it's bitches need to take you in an enemy lesson. Does he have too many ribs? How many ribs do you have? Do you even know how many ribs? 26. I made that up completely. Because there's muscle out there. But they look different than the other one to the left. That one looks more realistic. Like that one there, the tan look. Yeah, that looks more realistic. See, that looks like real ribs. Look at these sunken eyes. Look at the ribs on that one. And then look at the ribs on that gray one right there. That gray one looks fake as fuck. It's too many ribs. How many ribs do you think you have? I don't know how many ribs you have. I'm going 26. 26. You mean both sides? No, all up. 26. I might be thinking of teeth. I might be confused. I don't know how many teeth you have either. But if you think of how many ribs you have on each side, let me guess without touching my own ribs. One, two, three, four. I might have gone a bit too many. I'm going to stick with it. I'm going to say 22. I'm going to say 11 on each side, 12 on each side. Is it 12? Oh, 12 pairs. It's not cool. You're pretty close. We were right in the middle. You said 22. Yeah. So but look at his though. Look at that one, that one weird one that we just saw. That fucking guy had like 50. How many see you got? He's got shit toned. So I like, but that nice muscle he's got going. You like that? See that nice muscle he's got going on there. Bro, that's skin. Yeah. That guy is tendon. That probably that guy can't curl a fucking jar of white out. I got in lift. You don't know. You lift bro. You lift bro. How many has he got there? He's got too many. That's the count. He looks like predator. He's got too many. He's got to put nipples on him not to. It's like the Batman suit. How many has he got? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 14, 15, 16, 17. Yeah, he's got too many ribs. They didn't know what the fuck they were doing. It's all fake. Fake news. This is a bullshit fake news, bro. But that whole Buddhist monk thing, the suffering thing is a strange thing. I have a friend who became a monk. Yeah. He became a monk while I knew him. He was a friend of mine from Tackwondo. His name is Joe. And we used to train together. And he just decided at one point in time that he wanted to go to this Buddhism, this Buddhist temple to learn Buddhism and to, he wanted to get control over his mind because he got very nervous during sparring and got very nervous when it was came time for training and competing. He competed a few times too. He was just like losing shit. And he was like maybe meditation would help me get through this. So he started meditating and taking these, like Buddhist practices and doing this time at the temple. And then switched to a strict vegetarian diet and then completely quit doing Tackwondo and just became a monk. And we used to go visit him. And we used to go visit Joe the monk. Where did he live at a monastery? Yeah, he lived in a monastery. He swept up at a temple. It was very odd because I knew him before that and he was a guy that we would train with. And then over time, he became a monk. And you know, he silent? No, no, he would talk and he would laugh and joke around with you and stuff. But like, he would only eat vegetables and he would never speak badly about anyone or anything. It was really interesting. Do you seem happy? Happy is a weird thing. Like what is happy? Like he didn't have a... He didn't have a mate. He didn't have a wife or a boyfriend or he didn't have... There was no one in his life that, you know, he seemed like it was just him and meditation and silence. And he would like... He had a colon. You know, like there's a thing you're supposed to meditate on. I think that's what a colon is. And like his was the sound of... Like it was like one of those, the sound of one hand clapping thing. Oh yeah, right. I don't think that was it, but it was that kind of thing. Where is he falling in the woods? Yeah, it's around. Well, you're supposed to think about it constantly. Even though it doesn't necessarily make sense. And the idea is like that through that, you somehow are another achievement, enlightenment by focusing on this one thing over and over and over and over again. I mean, maybe that's like some sort of a brain hack. But I remember I was a kid at the time when he did this. I was probably 16, something like that. It was 15 when I knew him. And then maybe like 16, 17 when he became a monk and we would go visit him. It was very strange. We go to eat with him. You have to eat vegetables. Would he come out and go into the wherever you were? Yeah, he was like... He was going to go in Francisco and go and have... Yeah. This was in Boston. No, he wouldn't have drinks, no way. He just drank water and tea. And he was different, man. Like he was all in. Like he had decided that that was his life. And he was subscribing to all of their belief systems and their practices. Did you and your friends ever at any stage think we got to get him out of there? Like maybe he's being dined us to something. No. I mean, he was older than us. Like we weren't in a position to tell him what to do. Because we were all... All of us were like around the same age. Maybe they... I was the youngest guy, but only by like a year or two. And I think Joe was like 30-ish. So we were like teens early 20s and this guy was in his 30s. And he was hanging around a bunch of teenagers. Well, he was training with us. Okay. He wasn't hanging out with us. We were all training at the same Taekwondo school. And you know, he just decided that was his life. And he seemed content. I'll say that. He did. Happy is like you're around someone that got a big smile on their face. They love what they do. Like happy's, he catch a big fish. That's right. Whoa. Yeah, yeah. He wasn't that. But he seemed like he was on this path. And this path provided him some sort of clarity or some piece in his life that he seemed was worth sacrificing all, like he didn't have sex. He was done. And we were joking around with him about that. Like that's it forever. No more sex. Did he jettock off? No, no masturbation. Oh, shit. I know. That's what I say. Oh, yeah. Maybe fuck the pillow. Maybe, you know, maybe he's in a trance. You know, my fuck pillows, you know, pretended. I don't know what he did. You know, but he was the first guy that I ever met that's sort of like left society. And he, I remember he stated this temple that we knew where the temple was. We go see him there. I've known people that have done that kind of left society, but not that deep. Like they've gone to a remote island in Indonesia and they just surf and, yeah, you know, I've heard of that before. Yeah, I know people that have sort of like dropped out and, you know, live in a small town, live in a log cabin and shit. I've thought about it. I think it'd be good. I get too frustrated. I think there's something to that. There's something to like being in the woods and there's something to just being alone with nature.