The Joe Rogan experience James, Chuck welcome. Thanks for being here. We'll explain what this is all about because on the new Spotify podcast We don't really have an intro the same way the old ones did James you produced a phenomenal documentary on the phenomenon on what's going on with UFOs, and I just sent you an article that my friend Sogger sent me today About a photograph of very clear photographs that they've taken of this Triangular UFO So there's something that we'll be talking about in a little bit. But Jacques Valet You have been studying this most of your life. Too long too long We discussed it last night at dinner that your interest in this came from an experience He actually had as a child you actually saw a UFO as a teenager with two other witnesses One of the witnesses was half a mile away with binoculars I'm pretty sure that That object was real and it was a classic disc middle of the afternoon clear sky absolutely clear at the time I became convinced that it might be a prototype of something that would be coming out later and You know we're here Many years later and we still don't have anything like that. It was just hovering and Was there and you've been studying this for so long And this was something you guys talked about on the film that you were actually the character that the French UFO Researcher in close encounters of the first kind or the third kind rather was modeled after The Steven Spielberg film Spielberg was intrigued with the idea of a of a character that was not quite as weird as You know the ETs But was a lot weirder than You know the the people on the ground in the US trying to make sense of this in the military and so on So he needed this intermediate character He thought you know Freshman was was the right thing to do and so did you talk to him about the film? Did you talk to him about when when he was putting it together and yeah I journalist put us together When about halfway through the You know the final Final shooting of the film and there were there were gaps in the movie at that point and we so we had launched twice Together and it was was a lot of fun He was at the time he was looking for a transition Between the time when they they know the you know the big thing is coming The mothership is coming and they don't know where and the mothership is sending signals But they can't decipher The signals and I he said you know he had spent the morning at The jet propulsion laboratory and he said he couldn't make any sense of all the mathematics they had and I said well, maybe you could have You know two screens that give you an angle and and the angle tells you where the thing is and he said now That's too complicated, you know and takes too long It always got to be just a few minutes in the film And then I thought of a A photograph that was on the desk of Dr. Hinek, you know, Dr. Jay Eileenk who was The Air Force consultant on UFOs at the time and I was working with him building databases and so on and On that photograph. They were three guys You know really well dressed on ladders around a huge um Sphere of the earth in the lobby of some building somewhere with pieces of string that they were they were putting the string over the earth and I told Dr. Hinek I said I don't you know What's the story behind this and and he said well the when the first picnic was launched, you know October 57 Nobody had a computer program to computer orbit But they knew where the the sputnik had been seen nobody expected The Russians to come up with this and they needed to know where it was going next so they The New York Times called the director of Harvard observatory Saying Can you give us a comment on the Russian satellite and the guy said hey, it's 3 o'clock in the morning You know what Russians satellite and so they got dressed in a hurry and they they were trying to Compute the orbit by putting a string around Around the model of the earth in the lobby of the of Harvard and I thought it was so funny And and Spielberg said that's it, you know that said the general says come on You know, you know the the geographer who is The interpreter of the French of the French guy Says well it looks like it's somewhere in Wyoming, you know, but where in Wyoming, you know, where should we go and The general says you mean we've got 10 billion dollars worth of radar and you know Cameras and everything else nobody's got a map of Wyoming and they break into the lobby of the building next door and they come back with this globe and you know They've got the globe and they they look at look at it and get the coordinates and Because they the it turns out the drug reference tells them, you know those signals They look like a longitude and the latitude so they They they Chris, you know, they get the point where it's going to be and that's that was a piece It was missing in in the movie So I was really proud of that, you know, it was it was really fun Well, so it's the one funny part in the movie. Yeah, it's a great movie And it's uh it is probably the movie that got me most excited about UFOs when I was a kid and I remember thinking If UFOs were coming here from another planet one thing that I remember thinking is why would they even bother talking to the government? Like what do they care who the government is? Like if if I was looking at an ant colony I'm not gonna ask the ant colony which ones the the elected official that's in charge of all the other ants You don't give a shit. You're just like trying to study the ants and I felt like if something was coming here from another planet That was so sophisticated it could either travel from another dimension or travel from another galaxy Why would it care like who the president is or who the generals are? You know not only that but the witnesses don't talk to the government either You know by now the witnesses are tired of being ridiculed by scientists and you know by And told that those things don't exist so they don't they don't talk so they'll talk to you know People like you people like me Because they trust you know they trust me and in city called valley You know you wouldn't believe the number of people who come to me You know including CEOs of companies that I've worked with Would tell me about sightings that people in their family have had or sightings? They had Including you know sightings and Vietnam for example and so on when they were in the military That have never been reported and and the government isn't getting that When you first started studying this James when you started studying this phenomenon When you were thinking that you're gonna put together this this movie What you've done other documentaries on UFOs? What what got you into this? So I had a really good friend of mine who was a high school buddy sky Renee We traveled around Europe together and we've got to be graduated from high school and in our early 20s he Told me about this UFO crash in Roswell in New Mexico and I literally thought at the time I'm gonna have to write this guy off. I've lost my best friend. He's lost his mind and And that was that and I sort of walked away thinking god of we've had such a great friendship I'm so sorry this guy's gone and I brought it up with a guy that I was mentoring He was my mentor at a production facility. Excuse me production facility in California It's got Richard and he goes. Oh, yeah Roswell. Yeah, that was an alien spaceship. It crashed I mean the government admitted it. I mean they they put the story out themselves is guys with a The only bomb unit in the world the 509th Exclusively responsible for the deployment of atomic weapons these guys would not mistake in every day weather balloon for a flying saucer He goes that actually happened and I went Really so then I started looking into it before I knew it I started making a movie Wow, so But Like when you heard about Roswell and you you've investigated it now and you've got into what do you think that was? well, I can only go by the people that were there and Major Jesse Marcel was one of the first military officers on the scene. He's part of the 509th and Major Marcel said the debris was strewn over an extremely large area and it was material that was not of this earth and he described the The material was one one chunk in particular was three to four feet long Three feet wide Light is a feather you could barely feel it in your hands when you carried it But they couldn't destroy it with a blowtorch. They couldn't destroy it with This photo you're showing us right now Jamie is the debris that they threw on the floor That was clearly just aluminum foil and sticks and that stuff from a weather balloon. That's the fake debris. Yeah Well, there's two stories right there was a story that came out the first day that said we've recovered a crash to a Fo and then there's a story that came out the second day whoops it was a weather balloon and This was after they had taken the wreckage and they flew it to right Patterson Air Force base and it wasn't what you would do With wreckage from a weather balloon what they'd done is they'd flown it in two separate jets or Planes, I don't know if they were in jets back then two separate planes to make sure that they had at least some of it like if one of them crashed they at least had some of this stuff and To this day there's people that were there that swear That this was something that was from an alien world and then you've got all the debunkers and all the other people That's where that it's nonsense and that people are just making things up and they get a lot of attention from this and so they're You know they've been telling these stories for decades and they might even believe it themselves, but it's all bullshit Well my approach to that is you know no single case and I think the the scientists are not completely to blame there No single case can can prove Either that we're being visited or even that there is a phenomenon here on earth that we still need to be discovering you You need to have been trained to look for patterns, you know my my background is in artificial intelligence and computer science and you look for patterns whether it's in medicine in business, you know in in other fields in physics and One case even as good as waswell is you know that doesn't do it so I've been looking for other cases that can Rainfalls with pattern and reveal You know what is what is really behind it? Because the idea that it's just ET coming here that doesn't really answer all the questions we have Well, it seems like there's been so many reports over time and it's so difficult to find out who's telling the truth And who's not because many of these are just anecdotal stories. They're just eyewitness accounts and we know people are occasionally or quite often Full of shit. It's just it's just a part of people. They lie and they make things up I wanted to put the cap on Roswell because what people don't realize is that they announced to the world that they recovered a flying saucer There had been a whole massive wave in the 40s and late 40s And this is following the detonation of the first atomic bombs. Yeah, the tests, you know the And then the atomic bombs that were dropped on Japan. Yeah, so we had the Trinity site 1945 and then there were two bombs dropped and that was from the Enola Gay which was stationed at Roswell, New Mexico in 47 when this incident occurred They announced and told the truth to the world. That's a fact They were flying the debris to right Paris and Air Force Base There was no cover up. It was all out in the open with a quick stop in Fort Worth When they got to Fort Worth, they had a debris filled in their B-29 bomber General Major Marcel Gizdoffi airplane in general Roger Amy. There's a flurry of press activity and he says Keep your mouth shut. Let me handle this Grab some debris from an everyday weather balloon throws it on the floor He says you keep your mouth shut and they pose with debos Colonel debos and with Major General Major Marcel and General Raimi Two out of the three people came clean on camera before they died and said that was a fake press conference that was fake debris What we recovered was the initial story that came out was true. It was not of this world Now what is the current understanding of what happened to that debris? You know in back in city conveyor we're sort of There's a group of people who are getting really interested in this because we've got new technology to analyze materials And we've got materials from a number of similar incidents Again, what we're looking for and it's it's hard to do Okay, and it's only now that we've really got equipment scientific equipment that can can really look at this The The characteristics of Mean materials are the same throughout the universe. I mean iron from mouse Is just like iron from you know from the earth The isotopes would be the same ones the isotopes are that you know the the components that define the the orbits of you know Of the atom and that what goes into the nucleus of the atom They would be the same ones in outer space when they are on the earth What could change would be if somebody was altering Artificially the ratio of the isotopes within the elements so it gets pretty complicated We are doing we're doing a survey of all the samples that we have from a number of crashes likewise Well, as well was not unique. It was not unique in New Mexico and now we have We have samples from Europe. We have samples from South America There are a number of people who have started to look at that there were publications by Professor from Stanford Professor Stirak 30 years ago about material recovered from Brazil Where again the isotopes were measured. I'm the guy who He the French volunteer to measure the isotope ratios and I carried that You know that precious little sample to to Paris to get it to the people who were were doing the experiments The jury is still out Obviously somebody could take You know common elements Refine the isotopes and put them back together The of course that was done for the atom bomb, you know it would between different isotopes of uranium you know and you have to Deferential between you know which What goes into? Really making the bomb and now you can buy For medicine for example, you can buy radio isotopes in small quantities But they cost you know an enormous amount for a few grams So if we find that some of those samples have been altered That's a revolution because it means that there is somebody Somewhere either on earth or off planet who has a technology to do that For a particular purpose if we find that that's a revolution But did they find that with Roswell? Is there any record of what happened with the wreckage? What was studied what they discovered so You have to go into the erections first you don't need something You know three feet by five feet to do that you can do it on a few grams We've got instruments now new instruments that that Were created by some of the people that I work with That can just do it at the biological level, you know like almost the level of a You know a few grams or a few milligrams so In fact the book that I'm preparing is going to talk about that The other thing is you know where would The the big thing go, you know, we don't have the big thing Well, you know after a few years people talk and again both in Silicon Valley and other places scientists Need to talk to each other and I've had Discussions with people who handle that material one of them I can tell you about was a very high level Engineering manager in a large company that has research labs in in Silicon Valley He was asked 30 years ago to look at some material and he described to me What that was and actually he showed it to me The he said it was a matrix of awful silicates and he could not understand the Structure I mean he could analyze it in his lab He was a man who developed the Magnetic coating for desks and tapes So I don't need to tell you how many billions of dollars of business those companies that he worked with you know Made based on his patterns So he he had a good lab and he he was able to do the analysis He could not understand the deep structure of that material Now the problem that the people who Have those vehicles have is they will Because it stopped secret they have to compartmentalize everything so one company would get the material Another company might get some Descriptions of maybe the beings another company might get some Something that looks like Fibro-optics or electronics so they wouldn't Put only a few people would be able to put all the information together That's not a good way to do research not a good way to do science. We've got to get That stuff to the scientific community and open it up Well, this this is what Bob Lazard said about working in areas for that that was the problem They had having one group was working on propulsion the other group was working on metallurgy But this material that this gentleman had seen where he couldn't identify the structure What was that and where was it from? It was from a crash from a crash where he didn't tell me he didn't tell you no, but they had and he had gotten it through what method He had been asked on the secret project To do the analysis So this had been some government abroad that was unique in the United States and You know that was he was the appropriate guy Is it possible that this could have been some Material that was created by a foreign government that has an extremely advanced Understanding of these materials if it had been that pachallio would have been used by now and we've never seen that But you know again and what year was this when he did the study? I don't know when he did the study He's that now, so he's not going to be right. Yeah, and because this is all time this you know Look in in Silicon Valley people from different companies and so on get together and they you know They they look at things together if they trust you, you know because then You need to get different minds on the same on the same page and so That conversation was over 20 years ago. I have never forgotten it Another conversation with a military man who is you know retired now who told me that he was brought in To a large hangar Where they were pieces of things that Looked like a vehicle and there was a wing That would have been you know the size of this table And he could he could lift it with one hand was again very light You know like what James was saying about wasrael extremely light material that was very very strong Well still today. We don't have anything like that. We've got fancy titanium things and so on but He was he knew what technology went into you know our advanced aircraft He was with the Air Force And he couldn't believe that he could lift that that entire Metal little surface with one hit so what is the current speculation on where the wreckage from Roswell went Like as far as people know what people do talk Like it clearly if there was some material that was recovered that was from an alien spacecraft Must be somewhere it would Typically the the way You know a secret project works If you look at other projects that we we know now how they were handled Like the submarine or the Russian submarine that was recovered and It would go to different places because you you'd send Different parts to the best experts absolutely the best world experts in those people you already have under contract And you might not tell them, you know where it comes from you might tell them this is something You know one of our guys got this out of Czechoslovakia, you know, and we think it's Russian Stuff from a MiG, you know, and why don't you analyze it? They would they wouldn't necessarily tell you that it comes from A UFO whatever a UFO is our Ask Jacques where the bodies are okay, but hold on this this Does anybody is anybody speculating as to where the material from Roswell is like is there is there a legend is there rumor Not something that would pass You know that the scientists would really really look at um You know In in the forties There there was you know there were people working on advanced materials for ultra light aircraft for rockets uh You know the transistor people say look at the transistor We must have gotten this from the aliens Well the packing for the transistor is a German packing from 1934 You know the German scientist Discovered the transistor effect and he described it and but nobody nobody had any need for that There was no electronics in So nobody really had any need for it and then the electronics was in glass tubes and so on and so so that That was rediscovered You know by At their labs by the people who patented the transistor You know that was one of the big UFO conspiracy theories was that some of the technology that was recovered from Roswell was used and back-engineered to Create transistors and they did this at Bell Labs and there's a company called the American computer company that had a whole website dedicated to Explaining where some of the technology that we we currently use came from and they had the they were all in on this Conspiracy that it came from Roswell I don't I don't think you would find too many people in Silicon Valley who would believe that because very you know some of the people from Bell Labs you know Came west and some of them are still alive and they would tell you how it happened and if you when you look at the old films They all movies from Bell Labs You know you can you can see what they were doing it. It's it's kind of laughable I mean it's you know high school physics, you know Hooking up the thing with big wires and so on and this was not really advanced stuff But they they understood the transistor effect Which was known since the 30s. It was not and it was not new science It was just something that had never Been you know required. There was no application for it to develop because you know the MP MP fires worked fine, you know and there was no real need for it when there was a need Then they started working on that. That's one of the big rumors. All right is the transistor Well, that was one of the fibers You know Counter-calls so who was someone I you know respect and admire Revealed that he was in charge for the army of Getting he got a lot of them and somebody gave him a you know cardboard box literally full of stuff that came from places like Roswell, and they were fibers and When you put a light at one end, you know the light would go to the end of the fibers Well That effect has been known, you know in physics for a long time so again, that's not that does prove anything I had that conversation with also spent two days with him Thanks to mr. Bigger old, you know He we brought him to Las Vegas to you know talk to the the science ball Of a big role space and and then I had some private conversations with him About some other things that were not in his book but the fiber, you know, I told him frankly, you know Fibers glass fibers were known before well-well-too People used them for Lab work and so on so that's not really no Really, he said look, you know, I'm not a scientist, you know, I'm a military guy that I was asked by You know the head of the lab to preserve this and to and what he did is to give it to different labs You know give it to MIT give it to I don't know But tell give it to a few others and what happened when he did that I don't know what happened I interviewed cornocorso do you believe him? Yes, okay So I interviewed cornocorso on camera in 1997 and Roswell It was right at the 50th anniversary of the Roswell event There was a lot of who claw around around what had happened And he told me on camera a that he saw these bodies that he assumed were childlike with these big heads and eyes You know in a warehouse somewhere But he described the materials what he said to me and I'm not saying this is true or not to what he said to me Was that they were shocked at the lack of provisions on the craft That the bodies had no reproductive organs slits from alves no vocal cords There were these little pen-like things that laser turned out to be later turned out to be lasers There was this filament stringy stuff that was later to be determined to be fiber optics And that the material had this You could crumple it up with light as a feather and then it would regain its original form That's what he told me on camera and I think he died later a year later It all that also to Paola Harris who traveled with him in Europe and on camera and I think he died a year later. It's also to Paul Harris, who traveled with him in Europe and published his book in Italy and other languages. His English book was censored by the publisher. And he died really, I mean, he was given the proof. He had 24 hours to check the proof. He didn't check everything. He didn't have time. And there were pals that were missing. And pals that he had told me, fortunately, I can testify to what he told me. But a lot of what he knew wasn't in the book that was published in the US. It's in books that were published in other languages, thanks to Paul Harris, who preserved all that. But there was still at that stage. There was some tricks being played, not to get all the information. This is something Clinton looked into. And he was a president. President wouldn't necessarily be cleared. That's hilarious. Two. I mean, number one, obviously, I don't know the facts. But you would think that the top office of the United States that you would get access to that. But I guess because it's transient, because they're in it now. It's not the matter of curiosity. It's a matter of need to know. And you also want to protect the president. Also, the president changes every four years. And also, there are three different classes of secrets. There are secrets that are under the control of the president. There are secrets that are under the control of the state department that have to do with foreign intelligence that don't go through the same channels. And then there are the atomic secrets. And the clearances for over the years I've occasionally been cleared. I was cleared for the best project under Mr. Regunal, Mr. Bigerl. But the clearances for atomic secrets, or the P clearances, the Q clearances, the R clearances, they are completely segregated from the kind of clearances that we had as part of the best project or the AITIP project. So those people would not have been cleared for some of the scientific information. And I think we're getting to the point where we need to, somebody needs to open up those in the windows and get the scientific community involved. Well, it does seem like there's more openness now from the penthouse, right? There was the one person who worked at the pentagon that was saying that they've recovered crafts that are off-world vehicles, not from this earth. Like that was a direct quote. And then these photos that supposedly exist now from this new article that's out that are top secret, but people are trying to get these photographs released to the general public that show this triangular UFO. But just these kind of statements and just the release of the Go Fast video and the other videos from the gimbal video that show these vehicles that are being observed by these fighter jet pilots that are watching these things in real time going, holy shit, what is that? And you get to hear their words, you get to see the video, you see the actual object jettin' across the surface of the ocean, and they don't know what it is. And they're trying to figure out why they're watching it. That's never existed before. There's never been this much openness. So there's a new level of at least admitting that there's an issue, that there's a phenomenon that didn't exist before. You're talking about the US. Yes. In other countries, people have been a lot more open, including Russia. And certainly including France. I mean, there was one incident in 1978. A mirage, a guy flying a mirage, a full-counter French Air Force. The mirage doesn't have any weapons. It's just coming in to digital. Where the mustard comes from. Well, they happen to have a base, an atomic base there. And the mirages are fighter bombers. They can take nuclear ammunition. He was unarmed. He's flying at late afternoon, early evening. No problem. Caesar liked that his two o'clock position. Bright light, doesn't know what it is. Gets bigger. He thinks he sees a structure behind the light, but he was never really sure. There seems to be an object, a solid object. But the light goes around him and stops up on his tail, which is a kill position for a fighter jet. He doesn't like that. It takes evasive action, which he wasn't prepared to do. I mean, he didn't have special suits on anything. The dives, the object starts moving again, goes around him, makes a 360-degree circle at high speed. And he can't believe it. I mean, number one, there couldn't be a pilot, because a pilot could be crushed. But there is nothing that can move that fast. And the thing is back on his tail, he has to dive a second time. He lands in Dijon, writes a report. The report would probably not have come out, except that there were a number of people on the ground who saw this app, saw the whole thing. And there was a showdown, who was French police, and a branch of a parallel to the French police, who wrote a report, and that report was public. So they interviewed, they found the pilot, the interview at him. I mean, there is no question that happened. And this was 1978. So I mean, what else is new? That we've got those things. What's new is we have footage. And some of the footage that James had in his movie that actually proves it. But actually, footage doesn't prove anything. Well, you can fake the camera. But when you have the pilots themselves and the footage and the instrumentation and the radar, I mean, that thing was tracked on radar, that saw the whole thing. You don't really do that to a nuclear bomber. But you have something? Yeah, so this is a breaking story. And former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, Christopher Mellon, literally sent this to me about 15 minutes ago. And he wanted me to read it verbatim. So I was going to read this pretty startling stuff. So I'll read it. In the last 48 hours, the public has learned of two stunning incidents captured on film. By US Navy carrier pilots earlier this year, one of the cases features a photo of a bizarre flying sphere and a black cube inside that is identical to dozens of other reports by Navy pilots. These strange objects have been shadowing East Coast Naval Ops since 2015. Sometimes maneuver information and avocagially been reported achieving supersonic speeds. The other incident produced a stunning detailed photograph of a massive triangular-shaped vehicle that emerged from the ocean and flew vertically straight up and out of sight just past a Navy F-18 operating off the US aircraft carrier. These iPhone photos taken by the pilots should be released to the public as there are no sources and methods to protect and the national security benefits of raising awareness regarding this issue vastly outweigh any conceivable benefit from concealing the information. It is hard to believe that in the face of such radical and incredible technology within our vast defense department, we only have a so-called task force consisting of two individuals with no budget who are still being off or stiff armed for access to relevant and timely information by the Air Force and other security organizations. By comparison, 60 years ago in response to Sputnik, America entered the space race which led to landing on the moon. Our government needs to wake up and address the far greater technology gap that these and many other incidents are revealing. There is obviously a glaring strategic mismatch between the current task force and the technology that has been identified. Why did he send you this? Because he felt the developing story and he wants people to be aware that there's really compelling evidence right now, photographically, that needs to be released. And so you told him you were coming on here and that's when he sent it to you? Yes, and he said that these people need to feel some pressure. They need to know that we are requesting not demanding but requesting further government transparency on this issue. And he's very passionate about it. He knows of these photographs. The government, we got the story, I think it was yesterday. And the government is refusing to release these photographs. The pilots want these photographs released. The people that revolve with the incident want the photographs released. And so he wants the public to know that these photographs exist and that they should be released. And they're currently in the possession of. He wouldn't reveal that. He knows the person, but he said that the government is not wanting to release any fields that we have a right to these photographs. And there's video that came with this story as well. Well, remember, this comes from the very guy who was strategic, Christopher Mellon, and getting those videotaped evidence from the cockpits of those F-18 fighter jets on the east coast as well as off the west coast in 2004, 2015, and ended up with that big story on the front page of the New York Times in 2017. Yes, that's a new thing because if you went to 2004, when this all happened, no one was really talking about UFOs in a serious manner. It was still something that would be mocked and ridiculed. But to have it on the front page of the New York Times and to have this spokesperson for the Pentagon say that they've recovered off-world vehicles, not from this earth, not made on this earth. This is a change. Even though it doesn't receive that much public attention, because it's all happening during a pandemic, and also the news cycle today is so bizarre. Something gets into the news cycle and then it's gone tomorrow because of news scandal or people find out Ellen's meaning or whatever it is. There's always something new that's coming out. And these things, though, it seems to be there's more of them and more of them coming out. And with each news story that comes out, people feel more emboldened to tell their story. You know, I think personally everything changed in December of 2017 when that page of front page of the New York Times revealed that secret A-tip program. And I know personally because I've gotten ridiculed for decades for the work I do, a lot less so recently. People are suddenly raising the eyebrow going, wow, there's clearly something more to this than just radar weather balloons and misidentified aircraft. Jamie, pull up the video that's in that article. There's an actual YouTube video. It's two. One from 94, one from 2013. Let's go with the 2013 one. But these videos are very strange. You see this object. What's interesting, too, is that, OK, this is the one that I didn't see. But this thing, the way it moves and behaves, the one from, I guess it was from the 94 one. This is the 2013 one. This is the one from Puerto Rico. So it's just kind of cruising across the sky. It's hard to track here in this block and what. There it is. Does it estimate how fast this thing's supposedly going? Looks like they were near some sort of military base or something on an oddwood deal, which is like the West Coast. But it's so weird to see. It's not clear what this thing is. So one of the things that I think it's really good to establish. Go, I'm sorry, but go further ahead in this video to see if maybe there's a better version of it or a better. Sort of check. The other one has a little clear video. Yeah, there you go. That's much clearer. Like what is that? Well, that's not a bird. You're moving through the clouds. One of the things I wanted to make a distinction of is the technology, the observed technology that these guys are talking about. So you've got objects with no wings, no visible means of propulsion, the ability to hover, accelerate from a stand still to add a site in the blink of an eye. Right angle turns at high speed. Fly rings around our fastest jets. That is the technology that cannot be confused or explained away as something conventional. So anytime you see an object like we're looking at here, if it performs or exhibits that technology, maybe it shoots off at high rate of speed, does the right angle turn at high speeds? No wings, no tail, no propulsion, no sonic boom, almost no sound. That's, and they're trying to get a close up on this thing to see get a better idea of what the shape is. It's very hard to tell. But these objects, also one of the weird things is it moves around the same way Commander Freaver described that thing moving around that was hovering over the ocean, that it kind of darts around left and right and left. Almost like it's just not connected to whatever our atmosphere is. It's like it's moving in this weird zigzag sort of a way. This is an infrared image, right? It's not a normal camera. I don't know what it is. Is that what it looks like to you? It's the same type of camera that has the one from the limits. So you're looking at the heat signature. Not really looking at the visual picture. Right. So that's why it's not, you cannot get a clear definition of it. Well, they need better cameras. So did you go further along in the video? It does, they do get a better view of it. There you go. Like what the hell is that? You know, that was one of the more startling moments of producing the film, the phenomenon for me was when I met with Senator Harry Reid, who spearheaded the ATIP program, the Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification Program that wound up on the front page of the New York Times. I wasn't quite sure when I met with him how where his comfort zone was. And so I was really kind of cautious for the first half an hour of the interview. But then I started to relax and get more comfortable with each other. And I decided to kind of push it a little bit. And I said, hey, Senator, I met with Gordon Cooper, who later became Mercury astronaut, who told me on camera that there was a landing incident that took place. It Edwards Air Force Base circa 1957, where they happen to have a camera crew up near the dry lake bed, capturing the installation of a new landing facility for F-86 fighter jets. And it was broad daylight and all of a sudden, this disc appears out of nowhere. And the camera crew turned their cameras on it and they filmed the landing of this flying saucer on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base. And I'm telling the story to Senator Reid thinking, I don't know how he's going to react when I, but this is what I have him on camera. And I said he has the film footage developed. It was good footage, he held it up, he looked at it, it was a disc, blah, blah, blah. And eventually he gets a courier jet from Washington DC that flies in, pick up the footage. Senator Reid goes, and it was never seen her heard from again. And I said, yeah, exactly. And I said, did you guys uncover stuff like that? He goes, oh yeah, that's all there. It's, we have it, it's all there. And then he goes to change the topic and talk about something else. And I said, well, hold on, Senator, are you saying that there's evidence that hasn't seen the light of day? And he looked at me and he kind of pauses and he picks up his water bottle and drinks and sip of water and that moment seemed like an hour. But it was probably just a second or two. And he puts his water bottle down and he says, I'm saying that most of the evidence hasn't seen the light of day. So that, that for me was such a powerful moment because I'm going, look at who this is coming from. This is the former head of, you know, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid saying that the vast majority of evidence hasn't seen the light of day. And if the president of the United States can't get access to it, as I found out, when I interviewed all the people around President Clinton, who can, who has the authority to have this stuff released? And that's something that I would love to know. And I've been trying to find out. So someone does, someone in some position of government or some intelligence agency, someone in the Pentagon, someone or some group at the highest level of clearance has access to this information and knows about it. Absolutely. Senator Reid said they uncovered all this stuff when during the program. And he said the level of resistance that he got from the intelligence agencies was insane. Like I mean, they did not want this project going forward at the Pentagon, but they pushed and they pushed and they pushed and they got it through. Started in 2007, it went all the way up until it ended up on the front page of the New York Times in 2017. Of course, now we know that there's another project. But Jacques D. You know who has the authority to release this stuff to the general public? No, no, not in this particular case. Where are the bodies from Roswell? I don't know. I mean, all you have are rumors. You know, Walter Reid Hospital in the basement. You know, I can't get to the basement of Walter Reid Hospital. Have you ever talked to anybody that's reputable? Anybody that you believe that seems to know? Yes. Well, you know, there are physicians in the, who with clearances who have tried to get that information and to my knowledge, because they don't think to tell me everything. But if there was, you know, if there is material evidence, like the kind of thing I've got, okay, that witnesses have given to me, you know, that I went out and dug it up, okay? So I know where it comes from, okay? But if we found that it was really very strange, even beyond our ability to manipulate the isotopes, that still doesn't prove that there isn't somebody who is smarter than we are, somewhere on earth, making that stuff, okay? So I still couldn't stand, you know, the Academy of Sciences and say, look, this proves it. But if we have bodies, I would think that if they have a different structure from any organism that we know, you know, from biology on earth, I mean, I would have to think that would be a revolution. To strengthen? Yes, instantly. Yes, instantly. People would be confronted with it. The strange things that the iconic image of an alien seems consistent. That's one of the weird things, is that there's different versions of aliens that people claim to see, but the iconic close encounters of the third kind, large head, large eyes. Yes, very thin body with no musculature, no genitals. That all seems to be very consistent. Correct. You're like the African landing case in Lewis and Bob Boy in 1994. That is a crazy part of your documentary, because you see these children that are going to school in Africa, this thing lands, and then they draw pictures of it, the children are all consistent, and then 20 years later, they all meet, and talk about it again, and now when people lie, a lot of times when people lie, when they're making up a crazy story, like being abducted by a UFO, they want to be special, they want to be different. Like I was the one they chose, there's none of that from these kids. They all have the same story. They all have the same, they didn't have the best drawing skills, but they all drew something that's incredibly similar. It was all classic looking UFO, flying saucer type vehicle, and a classic look in iconic creature that is just like the close encounters to the third time. They all describe something that looked like it was wearing a black wetsuit. They all describe something that had large eyes and a large head for its body. I was doing my first documentary back in 1997 when I was just naive enough to think I can get an interview with Steven Spielberg. We had a mutual friend involved, this woman Janet, and she gets back to me and she's like, yeah, so Spielberg's definitely not going to meet with you, but he knows you're working on this UFO documentary. He thinks you should look into this landing case that happened in Africa at the school. And I said to myself at the time, and remind you guys that I was making a film on UFOs, and I dismissed it so quickly, because I thought there's no way that a mass landing with the sheer volume of eyewitness testimony at a school in broad daylight could happen in the whole world not know about it. So I just walked away from that story for about 10 years. 10 years later, I'm doing an event with the National Press Club with Leslie Kane, who was part of the article in New York Times, it came out in 2017. And she introduced me to this guy, Randall Nickerson, and she's like, oh, he's working on this landing case in Africa. Long story short, he's working on a film. Now I think it's coming out next year, specifically on just that case, Dan Ferris producing it. And he said, I'm working on the case, and if you wanna do something with me on it, a small piece I could, so I got back into it. I licensed some of the footage that Dr. John Mack, the Harvard psychiatrist that came and interviewed the school children on camera within a week of it happening. He unfortunately looked the wrong way in London, got run down by a car and died. So I contacted the Institute with the help of Randall Nickerson. I licensed the archival footage. We tracked down the witnesses today. We flew them in from all different corners of the world, brought them together. A lot of them were standing right next to each other. They came face to face, and one of the things I realized was that there were roughly 100 kids in the playground, broad daylight, aerial school, ruse and bobway, 1994, and they got within arms, arm thumb of them within arms length of these beings, and brought these witnesses together for the first time in 20 years. And a lot of them had to even told their, they're significant others, just because they said they were tired of having to defend this. And I myself didn't believe it when I first heard about it back in 1997. And that segment of the film is the most, in my opinion, is the most powerful segment. It's very compelling. You've got all these children saying what they saw on camera after it happened, and then you see them 20 years later, and then we go to Africa, and we meet with the head mistress. She was a teacher at the time. We went with other witnesses. We go to the landing site, we talked to people at the school. That case is absolutely. And it was witnessed by lots of other people in and around the area for several days before it chose a school to land. It's so compelling because the children are all clearly, they're not actors. So as their adults later, they're all talking about this moment, and it's like they had a religious experience together. They're all sharing it and talking about it, and you could tell it's a deeply moving experience. If they were actors, they wouldn't have been able to do such a good job because to convey the reality of that moment to them, to be able to have this interpretation of this event where they're all consistent in the story, and they're all clearly still shook by this moment. It's really interesting because if you had that scene in a movie, it would take like a really good actor to pull it off, and they'd probably need multiple takes. They'd probably want to get the best one. But those kids, the way they were talking about it, and the way they were drawing it, you're like, wow, it really does seem like something happened to them. I know how credible the testimony of the children is because my partner Rebecca, she's never had much of an interest in what I do making documentaries on UFOs. I do other things as well, but when I was reviewing in the studio, the archival interview of the children, she just dropped off a cup of coffee, and she stopped and went, oh my God, those children are not lying. This is the most amazing thing I've ever seen. Because look, I ask your audience to don't take it for me. Just suspend judgment for a moment and imagine, hypothetically, if a UFO or several UFOs landed at a school in broad daylight in Ruiz and Boboey Africa, an interacted telepathically with nearly 100 school children, not all of them had telepathic, but it seemed the incident. How significant of a story would you give that? Well, not only that, they had the same message. Yes. But the telepathic message was that technology is a real problem. And there's things that people are doing with technology that are going to ruin the earth. And they were trying to relay this to children, which is very strange. I mean, maybe they just thought they were adults because they were the same size as the aliens. I mean, do you think they knew that they were children? Do you think they understood that it was a school? I mean, this is all speculation, right? But no, I definitely had to ask myself, look, during the production of the film, Paula Harris actually turned me on to another landing case that happened in Australia in 1966 at a school. And this time there were roughly 300 witnesses that saw a disk land right outside of playground in Australia. And we went to Australia and investigated that case, went to the landing site, talked to eyewitness testimony, people that jumped the fence at the school playground and ran over to where this thing landed. And then we even interviewed a guy who snapped a photograph of a desk, a Polaroid, back in 1966, two days prior to the incident. So it's very probably that we have a photograph, we have photographic evidence, I witnessed testimony and for the first time we've got testimony from a science teacher. So why do these things land at schools? It seems like, and I'm just totally speculating here, but it seems like if I were going to do that, it seems like a pretty benign environment. We've had testimony from military guys that we take a fairly hostile position towards things that penetrate sensitive military installations. And so maybe I'm just saying maybe maybe they say, maybe it's safe. Yeah, but we have to stop reacting to intrusions by UFOs as a threat. I mean, that's the whole thing behind this new task and as much as I respect the task force, my colleagues and I want to cooperate with them to the extent that we can bring information or resources to what they do. But there is more, this should not be looked at specifically as a threat. I mean, with the phenomena that we observe, I mean, if they wanted to blow up those F-18s, I could do it. Obviously, that's not what it's all about. And this idea of just labeling it all as a threat because it's unknown that that's a wrong idea. 90% of information comes from the public, comes from children, comes very, very little of it is made up in France. I mean, the data we get at the French space agency comes through channels where if people reported something that's found to be untrue, they're going to be called by the police. And they may have some penalties associated with that. Now you said that they can blow them up but there's never been any evidence of a UFO attacking anything, right? Like the thing that there has been. Really? Yes. What have been people killed? They can blow them up, but there's never been any evidence of a UFO attacking anything, right? Like the thing that there has been, really, yes. What have been people killed apparently for no reason. Very rare though. Where was the 10 12 cases? I went to Brazil four times and I got to no Brazil and the data there pretty well. And I spoke to people in the armed forces, people in the Brazilian Air Force and the police. There have been a number of cases where people died and where witnesses died. And also cases where witnesses were chased through the jungle by objects with beams. And I was really interested in those beams because those beams were extensible. Well, it's hard to make an extensible. If you turn on the light or a laser, it's going to keep growing. It doesn't go 10 feet and just stop in midair. Those beams stop, which means it's not just light, it's something else. And also they will pin you to a hammock, for example, or some of the people who are asleep. You know, hammock they wake up and they see this light and the light comes down and pins them to the bed or to the hammock. And I've published pictures of injuries with people sustained as a result of those beams. So this is at least a demonstration of the power that number one, we don't quite understand the technology. And number two, we don't understand why that is. In Europe, the opinion that these things might not be from another planet. That it could be their interdimensional. So yes, I'm amazed that in the 50s and 60s, there was all that science fiction about aliens or metal planets and so on, all these movies. So that was, frankly, when I started looking at the statistics, trying to make sense, trying to build those databases and do AI on top of it, I was looking for ET at right-right-right-right-right-right. Now we've got so much more data that contradicts that. Things coming through the wall of a bedroom, okay, as a light and the light turns into something else and it has information in it or it turns into something physical. You know, this is not this is way off. I mean, these are not just vehicles that come from somewhere else. So it could be a number of contradictions in there. It could be there's a number of different non-related phenomena. Well, you know, to some extent, I mean, we keep saying that the scientists are skeptical and so on, that if you look at physics today, I mean, people will tell you there's probably more than there must be more than four dimensions, you know, of space time. There must be to explain, you know, atomic phenomena, to explain quantum mechanics, to explain all those things. They could very well be there. There is an unpublished and physics journals about multiple universes, about universes, interpenetrating each other, maybe channels between those universes. There could be, you know, there could be another universe with a room like this, five minutes ahead of us. And we would never see them, we would never detect them. There could be another Earth, five minutes ahead of us, in another universe. And physics today authorizes us to think about those things. Now, they think about those things not because of UFOs, they consider it because it makes sense in the theories they have to build to explain what they see in the lab, okay? In the particle labs, in the accelerators, in detecting all these other layers of matter of nature. But it implies that this isn't just, you know, not only the other planet, but this isn't the only universe. I was going to say Jacques, one of the assets that Jacques brought to this film, the phenomenon, and he became involved through Lee Spiegel. And you could, you know, talk in a minute about your reluctance to get involved. Initially, Jacques was like, okay, well, participate just this one little section, and eventually I lured Jacques out to the studio and we were editing the film at the end of this dirt road. In a very remote area, we had a place that had no running water, no internet, no toilet, luxury, I was going to get a better space, but I just couldn't find one and we just got so much work done in this space. I decided to just edit the whole movie here. But I was a little cabin in the woods on the California coast. It was gorgeous, full of flowers and so on, but no facility. Just in electricity, some of the time, and there were times when you, yeah, it wasn't even in electricity. Oh, yeah. And Jacques would say, okay, I'm coming out for the weekend, and he would do these marathon edits with us and he'd say, I got my face paint, I got my compass coming out. And one of the first cases I think that you got involved with speaking of beings was Saccor, New Mexico, that involved a police officer in April of 1964. This is considered to be the most well-documented, close encounter of the third kind. That's when the witness described seeing beings associated with the craft in US history. Turns out when Jacques found out that I'd already spent five years investigating this case, I interviewed the wife, I interviewed his co-workers, I interviewed his son, his daughter, and I went to the National Archives and I got all these new documents. I revealed some of them in the movie. Jacques said to me, I showed him this stuff, he said, my gosh, I can't believe you're doing this case, he said I was at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in April of 1964 with Dr. Hynick, and you were telling Hynick, take it over about these close encounters cases. Well, about all the cases we had in France, but I had in my computer catalog. And that's when he wanted me to move to North Western, from Texas. My first year in this country was here in Austin, so it's always fun to come back to Austin. Austin has changed since 1962, I can tell you, I can tell you, I can tell you, to the change. Since 1999, when I first got here. Yes. And so I told Alan, let me, you know, look really carefully at the Air Force files and you've got to have close encounter cases. In those days we were calling them landing cases because there were traces on the ground, and that's where you could do some physics. You know, if there is more than a testing money, the guy says something landed in my backyard, it left these holes. You don't have to believe him, you can go see the holes, you can measure them, you can look at the temperature, you can look at radiation, you can look at all these things. So, and he said no, we don't have those kinds of cases. I convinced him, you know, to let me look at the files. And he said, look, I'm going to write that efson, you know, where Project Blue Book was headquartered at the foreign technology division, which is an intelligence branch of the Air Force. It looks at foreign materials, it was a logical place to put it. And what's funny is everybody assumes that that project was a stop secret. I mean, even in the, you know, the movie production, the series, now, the top secret Blue Book was never a top secret. There were a few cases individually that were secret because of that radar was classified at the time, but the observation itself wasn't classified. And in those days, I wasn't, I didn't have a clearance, and I wasn't even an American citizen. I had only been in the US for a couple of years. So, I said, that's no problem. You know, we'll get you just a clearance for two days, you know, to go to get to the base. But the archives themselves were, you know, any French scientists who wanted vaccines could have had access. Any American scientists, and then what frustrated the Air Force was that, you know, Carl Sagan never went there. All these scientists who said that, who poo-pooed the whole idea of UFOs, they never went to look at the archives. They never looked at the testimony, said the wires at the teddy types. You know, we talked about Carl Sagan last night, and you felt that Carl Sagan was pressured by ridicule and that was some of the things that he had speculated that actually turned out to be true, like water on the moon and possibly even some form of life that existed in the past or currently on Mars. Yes, he was willing to, they had interesting discussions between Heineken Sagan. Heineken, you know, was kept talking about the Air Force fires and Sagan said, you know, if we've got no ride, no ride looks at everything with radar covering the United States, completely. So if there are these things, no ride must be detecting them. So Heineken said, well, you know, go ask that. So Seguid went to no ride. And he went to, you know, mountain where the headquarters are and the control system, Cheyenne Mountain. And he's explained that, you know, I understand, you guys must have UFOs. They said no. And he said, but, you know, you're tracking everything. We've got these people, you know, Heineken tells me that it's got these reports about. And you must have UFO reports. You must be detecting something. They said, yeah, but we don't call them UFOs. So we have no UFOs. It doesn't show up in the somebody says keyword, you are from no ride doesn't have anything. So Carl Sagan said, what do you guys call them? And we said, they said, we call them UCTs. And he said, what's a UCT? And he said, doctor, it's an uncorrelated target. And he said, how many uncorrelated targets do you get a month? They said about 10,000. What does that mean now? Well, that means that that's what we're there. He said, look, we're here to look for incoming trajectories of ballistic missiles from Russia. So if there is one data point, system doesn't care. If there are two data points, system starts looking. If there is a third one, it computes a trajectory. If the trajectory looks like an incoming thing, for example, for Alaska, over towards Montana, we're going to alert the fighters. Otherwise, it could be a flock of birds. It could be a weather balloon. It could be anything else. When the, we're not paid to try 10,000 other things, we're here to defend the United States. Well, so who is looking at the other 10,000? Well, that's one thing I was going to say is that you said earlier that you felt that Project Blue Book was fairly transparent, but one of the things that I uncovered when I was investigating this landing case, which was a close encounter of the third kind, witnessed by a police officer in Secor, New Mexico, 1964, was that the military was on scene within less than an hour. It was Richard T. Holder from White Sands, a Hall of Honor Force base area. He documented the landing prints from the landing gear of the spaceship, the so-called craft. Do they're implemented with photographs? Yeah, they took photographs. That's photographs exist today. They're in the movie. Yeah. He, uh, he documents the footprints that corresponded to exactly where the eyewitness reported, the, the on duty police officer, where he saw these little childlike beans. They documented all this. And yet, they downplayed that aspect of the phenomenon. They of the encounter so much. And I know that because they, the lawn is the more the police officer said he was told not to talk about it because it's one thing to explain away and unidentified craft. It's another thing to have to explain away beans on the ground. And how did they describe these beings? He said they were small childlike, there's a kind of images. Yeah. So that's, that's officer Lonnie Zamora. That's, they placed rocks around the landing gear imprints to preserve the fresh ground traces. And then there were four of them. Those rocks are still here today. Like, you know, from 1964 today, you'll still see those rocks there more in the ground at this point. But they documented and I have the diagrams, the footprints of the creatures as well. So they knew it was a closing counter of the third kind. How do they describe the creatures? They were, there were these tiny little, they look like children and they had white fitting suits on white fitting or tight fitting white suits. Tight fitting white suits. And what, what I was going to say to you is what were their heads like? There were big, bigger heads. But the description of the beans was that there was only a couple of newspaper articles that came out regarding the beans because the Air Force wanted to really downplay the fact that it was a closing counter in the third kind. But that aspect of the encounter leaked out before the, it's what we're in the military got there to the local newspapers. The officer Lonnie Zamora had cut out those articles describing his description of the beans and he kept them in a black duffel bag, which I discovered at his home and I feature those as well in the film. But again, then you had congressional hearings two years later where you had people at Project Blue Book, Keatonilla denying the fact that there was any substantial evidence that would prove we're not alone. That was a lie. And Keatonilla lied. And Dr. Heineck told the party line during this entire time. But then afterwards he left in 1969 the Air Force and he founded the Kufos, which basically proves that he believed, he did a 180 and he had believed that we were not alone. Well, that was he was waiting for a case like that. You know, I kept telling him, I kept showing him reports from all over the world. Okay. And he still said, I can't, you know, I believe those reports. I believe we have the same same thing in the US. I convinced him that he was waiting for a case where he could convince Sagan and Mensil and Dr. Mensil at Harvard and his colleagues in science because he knew those guys and they would believe Kuntanilla rather than believing Heineck. And, you know, the problem at Socur was there was only one witness. One witness is all the beings, but there are a number of witnesses that saw the craft. So the craft, yes. And there were theories that this was an experimental thing from white sense. White sense is, you know, 30 minutes away. And it's full of things. And there was the other explanation was it's a test for lunar landing, you know, system and so on. It doesn't look anything like the lunar lander. And there was a lunar lander, but it wasn't California. It wasn't in New Mexico. Egg shaped craft. Okay. It was white. I remember favor describing a tick tack. I was investigating when that story broke. I was still working on Socur. So Coro, he describes the egg. I don't know. Do we have tick tacks back in 1964? Maybe we did. Maybe we did. Pretty close. But tick tack egg. Pretty close. Pretty close. Presented. He had no wings, no tail. It had a blue flame. But when it got to 20 feet off the ground, it went completely silent, no exhaust vents, no wings, no tail. Had a little insignia on it, which we actually show in the film. And this is supposedly, that's a fake, that's not the real symbol. That's a fake symbol that was that was Richard T. Holder got to the site told Lonnie to put a different symbol because they could quickly identify a hoax or if they were able to. We found the real symbol at the National Archives that was written in Dr. Heineck's own handwriting, which I shared with you, which is an inverted V that's an A, two lines here and one line across the top. It's an A. It's featured in the movie. But that was a fake symbol. So someone put a fake symbol on it just so to see if people were hoaxing it. Well, what he did was he said to the witness, they did rather. They did. It was a good idea. Actually, he said, look, let's change the symbol that way. If there's anybody else claims to have seen this thing and they say, yeah, that's the symbol we'll build a quickly identify a hoax. So that was that was the point behind this. That's pretty clever. Yeah, that's pretty clever. Did these things, the beings, the way he described did they have the archetypal alien appearance, very small bodies, large eyes, did they have all the characteristics that you're hearing from his other? He described them as being small childlike and then he's and then I interviewed the wife. Unfortunately, Lonnie had died before I got to him, but I got interviews with him that were done earlier on radio. But Lonnie's wife said, whatever my husband saw changed him forever. He was never the same and he went straight to the church right after it happened. I mean, the military was on the way to the scene when he was at the church talking to the pastor about this incident. But she said it changed my husband. He apparently got eye contact with one of the two beings that was standing at the base of the craft. He wouldn't talk to Heineck until he had gone to the church and spoken to him. Yeah. And it changed his life. It changed Heineck. I mean, at that point, Heineck came back and said, you know, you're right. We have those things and we have to take it into consideration. So that's really the case he was waiting for to start looking at. Then there was another landing case that happened in 66 in Michigan. So two years after the landing case in Zakora, and this one was witnessed by police officers and a whole bunch of people in the college and reporters. That was the infamous Michigan landing. And the Dr. Heineck had a huge press conference and explained it as swamp gas. He later said it was one of his biggest regrets. And then Congressman Gerald Ford who became president in the United States was like, so up in arms about this, that he was screaming from the hilltops. How could you, it was his constituents and they, they pushed for congressional hearings in the United States. A lot of people don't know that. He was up in arms in what way. He said he was so angry. He was so angry at the Air Force were dismissing it as swamp gas that he, he pushed for congressional hearings, which we had congressional hearings. And here's the crazy part. And this is up and we realize in the edit studio, right at the end of the hearings, the congressional hearings in 1966 in Washington, DC, as they were departing the building from those hearings. There are a, a UF, a flying saucer landed at a school in Australia and those are the world that was happening as they were walking out of the building. It's crazy. It was just one of those things we were at, wait a minute, at the time. Yeah, that was, does it appear that these things happen in clusters? Yeah. And you know, so, Carol happened. Yeah. The day after Hineken, I left the Air Force base in Dayton, okay, right, we were there for essentially three days, okay? But we went all day in the vault, you know, looking at the files and so on. And then, then, after that, we flew back, you know, both of us flew back to Chicago. And next day, from, from Quintanilla to Hineken, how soon can you be in New Mexico? And he said, why would I go to New Mexico? He said to something landed in Socorro and you were there. They landed when it happened just when we were leaving the Air Force base. And I mean, there's nothing you can do about that. I mean, those are coincidences, you know, the information coincidences that just happened. I would love to take this opportunity to any of your audience out there. I came across a memos when I was at the National Archives regarding Quintanilla talking to Hineken. And Quintanilla was very concerned about a film crew that arrived in Socorro, New Mexico shortly after the incident. They didn't really want him talking. But he participated with the film crew and he even said to Hineken in this memo. He goes, we'd be too obvious the vice show up there, but won't you be passing through to Hineken 1964 or 65 and just find out what the hell's going on. Why is this police officer? I saw we told him about it, participate in the film crew. The film is called Phenomenon 7.7. And it was done by a guy named Michael Musto. And I can't remember the other guys. I mean, it's called Phenomenon 7.7. Empire Studios. I spent four years trying to find this film. If anybody out there knows where they can get their hands on it. It's color film 16 millimeter of the entire, they interviewed Lonnie and all the people running in just months after that incident. It's the best case in America. Well, you found some incredible footage, like the UN, best- money footage. And I lived through that with them watching what James was doing to try to, by any means, you know, get to the real actual footage. That's incredible. We spent my citric jelly Fox worked as an archivist for several years digging up never before seeing archival footage. And one of them, the very man Lee Spiegel who put on the 1978 United Nations event with you and Heineck and coin and handful of others, the footage is never seen a light of day. It's just gone and called the Cooper and Gordon Cooper. And we found that my sister found that footage. And it was one of the pinnacle moments of production. This footage that had been missing for 40 years and it's in the movie. And it's kind of... And it's color and it's clear. Yes. Sound is clear is perfect. And once we found it, it took a year to get our hands on it. Remember all the stuff we had to go through. Oh my God. Your audience's eyes would glaze over. What is it show specifically? There was a... Well, you tell us about the event at United Nations. It's amazing. But this footage, what is this footage that you found show? Oh, well, you talk about the film? Yeah. It's a film crew that had a budget from Empire Studios in Los Angeles travel to Socorne, Mexico shortly after the most... Phenomenon 7.7, Michael Musto, Empire Film Studios. I cannot find this film. You have no idea how hard I found. I went and found the guy's wife. He's dead. She... I befriended her. I spent a year and a half getting to know her. She finally let me into her husband's archives. He had all these like storage facilities. It's 110 degrees with no windows. I'm inside there. Well, she's ballin' her eyes out because her husband had just died and I'm digging through all of his stuff. I looked through there. I contacted the head of the studios. I found out where Empire Studios got bought by other companies. I literally spent the better part of five years. I could not find this film. But it's the best documentation of the best close encounter of the third kind in US history. So, and it's all filmed in color. One of the things we talked about last night, dinner is Betty and Barney Hill. And I told you that Angela Hill, who's a top UFC fighter, is the granddaughter of Barney Hill, which is crazy. She didn't tell me until after the podcast. And I was like, what? I almost wanted to start our podcast back up again and have her just talk about that. I just wanted to talk about her mixed martial arts career. And then that came up. And I was like, I can't believe this is real. Like, you're telling me something. You're related to your grandfather was the most famous abduction story ever. Him and his wife, Betty and Barney Hill, the most famous UFO abduction story ever. And that was in what year was that? 61. Yeah, September, September 1961. I knew how sure. Yeah. And that is a story again that featured the same sort of iconic beings. Right? It was a very similar. Jacques, you were there with them. You interviewed them. Well, about a year or so later, they contacted me and Dr. Hinek, saying that Betty thought that she was, she had some contact with, you know, the phenomenon it might manifest. It might happen again. And she wanted to do sort of an experiment. So they had some land close to a big lake where they had a little summer place. And so Hinek couldn't go there and ask me to go there. And the Betty and Barney were there. And Dr. Simon, who was the psychiatrist from Boston, who did the, he'd know this of both of them separately and really broke the case was with us. And so we drew a big, you know, circle in the grass. And I had a telescope with little telescope with me. I had a little table set up and spent the night there waiting for UFOs and fighting mosquitoes. Because, you know, the time of year and New England, you're going to get mosquitoes. We didn't get any aliens, but we had a lot of time to talk. And the next day, spend the next day with Betty and Barney and went through the whole thing, we listened to the tapes again. And, you know, the tapes are terrifying. And there is no question. I mean, people are coming now saying, well, maybe it was a test. Maybe they were, you know, maybe there was a psychological experiment. That's not true. I think these people were, their story checks out completely from beginning to end. And I took Dr. Simon aside. And, you know, there are lots of stories of people being regressed, hypnotically, by whoever, you know. But Dr. Simon was, you know, psychiatric during World War II for the Army. And he was an expert in hypnosis. And he was a licensed hypnotist. He wasn't just some mythologies to decide it to hypnotize people, which is very harmful by the way. I don't know why people allow that to happen to that. So I took him aside and I said, Dr. If I had been sitting there in their car on the back seat and here is Barney and, you know, driving and Betty next to him. And they see that, would I have seen the car stop and all these little beings and the beautiful, you know, stopping them on the road and dragging them out. And he said, I have no way of answering that. I can tell you that by the hypnosis that my patients are telling the truth as they experienced it. I cannot tell you what we would have seen if you and I had been there. I cannot make the jump. And I've never forgotten that, you know, I mean, there could be a type of experience that some phenomena induce that, you know, just how not reproducible. And that's, you know, that's a toughest type of testimony, you know, and how do you make sense of it? Even if you have physical data, you know, you know, the car did stop, you know, that, you know, you still I've never forgotten that that dialogue with him a little over a decade later, you have Travis Walton, Snowflake, Arizona. Let's before we go to the start, go. There's a lot more questions. Yeah. So when you say this that if you were there, you might not have experienced it. Well, you're saying that like this, this could have been something that they only experienced that maybe. say this that if you were there you might not have experienced it. Are you saying that like this could have been something that they only experienced, that maybe even witnesses would not have seen, that this could have been unique only to them, like they were chosen for this experience, they were abducted. And I've spoken to quite a few witnesses who said that their cost stopped on the road is a case, you know, two years ago in France that I investigated. Again the witness didn't report it to the French authorities because you know witnesses don't want to be laughed at. So they think it's useless because the scientists are blocked, they will never look at it. So they just keep it to themselves. But what happened is she was in a car with two teenage girls, one her daughter, the daughter of another family and they were driving and they saw this thing. And I asked her, did you see any other girls? And she said no. And well this was an expressway in France in broad daylight. There must have been other cars. And that often happens, you know, they suddenly all the sounds stop. You know, the birds don't sing anymore, they all know dogs barking, you're in the countryside. You know, everything, it's like there's a bubble around you and this thing happens, you have an experience. And we know there were other cars on that expressway. I mean, there's got to to be. And it's like it's a nice, so needed thing that's outside of, yeah, as if there was another time in space. So you're looking at perhaps a phenomenon that we will, we just don't have the capability of understanding. But you know, it's a goldmine for science. I mean, this is why we need to get the academia involved. But you're just getting the anecdotal description. We just look at the fighter pilots and say, well it's a threat because it went around the fighter. But how many experiences like this though are similar where people have these similar stories where out of nowhere hundreds, you can talk to any of the groups that gather that kind of data around the world. And it's similar in that everything stops. And so what, what this might be a constant, really, one of the constants. So what this might be describing is some sort of an ability to control space and time that we don't understand. All of the control, dimension, consciousness, human consciousness, long enough to create an experience. That's what Dr. John Magg, I got to know him quite well. I read his book many years ago. Well, his book, Passport Through the Cosmos is an homage to Passport to Maggonia, which was my book of many years ago. We had those conversations. And his take on it was, he did a lot of hypnotic regression as a psychiatrist with alien abductees. The thing that was disturbing to me about it was actually recommended to me by my friend, Moira. She read it. She's like, you got to read this. This is crazy. These people, they're all having the same story. And she, she might have even given me the book. But when I read it, that was the thing that struck me, like how similar the stories were. They were all of them had a pattern that you could follow. And they didn't know each other. They are from different parts of the world. Yes. And that's what I'm looking for. I'm not looking for individual cases. I'm a computer science guy. I try to look at patterns and things that will take you to the next level of understanding and to take one case at a time. What was John Magg's conclusion after all his years? John changed. I mean, initially he was, you know, he got interested because they were all these books about hypnosis and so on. Done by amateurs, people who are not trained in hypnosis. And he started sort of retraining himself to do hypnosis. He, I asked him if he had used hypnosis in his practice as a psychiatrist. And he said, no, he said, you know, he had to cross in hypnosis of one week, you know, but he never really practiced it. He's relearned hypnosis with some of the ufologists who were hypnotizing people. And then gradually found out what they did was very shoddy and was really completely unscientific. I mean, there were some of those books. They were planting the idea, you know, tell me about the failure. So you talked to them, they had two 35 people. And if you do hypnosis, you don't lead the witness, you don't do that. So he got disgusted with that and redid it, started to redo it his way and, and, fortunately, that's when he was killed. What was his initial idea about what was going on? He, he bought initially he bought the idea that these are aliens from somewhere. I mean, why not? And that they are here to probe, you know, our consciousness to understand humans. And then he, he gave up on that as he learned, as he did more and more interviews and understood more the, the process and looked at the data. And what did he decide it was after that when he was giving up on the idea that there were people? I think he was on a new track of research. But what was the line of that research? I think he was, you know, he was coming to maybe I influenced him a little bit, but he was coming to my idea that we have to look at more than the extraterrestrial that we see in the movies from the 50s, you know, from the 1950s, that this is not it. I mean, we need something more, more complex if we're going to get the scientific community involved. Meaning not just space travel from space as we know it. It's not some super-rocket that comes here. Something interdimensional is more, more possible. And they are not explorers coming here to pick up a few stones because, you know, if they've been, we have 200,000, you know, well, describe cases. So why would you come from? And we're exploring Mars. You know, now we're sending a probe, you know, we're, we're, we're sending a couple of probes to the moon. We're bringing back the stones. But we don't do that, you know, every Friday. I mean, once you've done it, you've got it. I mean, why would you keep doing it? So what is your speculation? What do you think is happening? I don't see myself as, you know, the, the scientist should speak on that because, you know, I know too much about the work of teams. You know, I've worked with many teams in Silicon Valley. I've financed a number of companies there in, in medicine, in space research, in computing, of course. The, it takes a team. We need to get what I can do is I can bring some of the history, like, you know, this is a coral thing where I try to help you in, in the movie. But because I, I know the history. I've met many of these people. I've met the researchers. I know what they went through, you know, including their false officers, you know, I mean, they were under extraordinary pressure. So I can bring that context and I can, I can bring, I would know how to put the AI component on top of the fives. But when, but all the there's a study, people would have to work with it to come to a theory. I understand that, but about all the years of studying, surely you must have developed some sort of an idea of what you think this is. Well, what I'm, I, I'm a student of that material. There is some form of consciousness out there that's teaching us something. You can, I could show you teaching us something. Yeah. Not teaching us something. Like, you know what you have in the movie with those kids. I mean, I asked for the kids are saying, I asked Jacques this exact question. I remember where I was when I did it. It was in a cafe in Silicon Valley. I was with Dr. Peter Stirk regarding some metal stuff. And I looked at you and I said, Jacques, you know, can you please tell me what's going on? And you said, regarding government secrecy is two points and I'll get to yours in a quick second and correct me if I'm wrong here. But you said to me, James, look at the government secrecy this way. It's not so much a question of what they know. It's more of a question of what the government doesn't know. They can reveal that we have structured craft of unknown origin that that exhibit flight characteristics that are light years advanced for anything we have. They have no wings, no tail, no visible means of propulsion. They can go from a standstill to the outer side, the blink of an eye. So they, there's some reports they can travel underwater at hypersonic speeds. They go into space. We don't know who they are, where they come from or what they want. There's no governing body that wants to disclose that nature of reality because suddenly, and I'm not saying it's threat because clearly if it was, we know about it that, you know, we can't, the fly rings are on our fastest chance. We don't, we can't disclose that kind of information. And the other thing you said to me, correct me if I'm wrong again because this is what you're getting at. What's the bigger picture? What's going on? And you said, think of it this way, James, is an omnipresent intelligence okay that has the ability to manifest itself in a multitude of ways. It's nuts and bolts, but it's also psychic that favor talked about that that object went to his cap point to me. He said it made the hair on the back of his neck stand up straight because those coordinates weren't known. Explain what you're saying to people so it's a standalone podcast. So they know what you're talking about. So sorry. Yeah. So David Freaver, who's the Navy pilot that had that dramatic encounter with the tick-tack off the coast of San Diego back in 2004 that was also documented with the, you know, radar and visual confirmation, but also filmed on another subsequent flight just moments afterwards. But he said that this object, first of all, reacted to him when he was flying down to to intercept it. But then after it flew rings around him and we said it made a joke out of the fastest plane that Navy had at the time. It went to their cap point, which is the predetermined Latin longitude strategic point of the military exercise. So how on earth, he said, how on earth could this object know where that point was? So what I'm saying is there's a psychic, it's a nuts and bolts phenomenon, but it's also psychic is what I'm saying, a fairly accurate assessment of what's going on. Absolutely. What gives you the impression that they're teaching us something. Well, that, you know, I could give you a couple of, you know, quick reactions. I mean, they're appearing to children, you know, those children are going to grow up and they will remember what they've seen and so on. But there is another, there is an analytical answer that, you know, one of things I did when I had a good, good databases filtering out. I mean, I think we all agree that 90 percent of the cases are not true UFOs. Okay? So, you know, there are things that the moon seen through a layer of clouds, ball lightning, ball lightning, whatever. All the things that the scientists say, yeah, that's true. 90 percent of it should be removed. Very, very few hoaxes, by the way. Very, very few. Because if you're going to come up with a hoax, you're going to come up with something better, you know, something better than that, you know, you can reveal and you can laugh and so on. This is not it, you know, you don't hoax about something that's that terrifying that people can check. I started looking at patterns the way you look at patterns in science. In other words, you take, you know, you do regressions. You do that. The phenomenon is not constant. It goes through waves on two months or three months over country like France or over Florida or you know, Japan. And it's very intense. And after about two or three months, they go somewhere else, they disappear. So you have this structure. And I started looking at the structure to see if it correlated with anything we know. So I started looking at it, does it correlate with Mars? You know, Mars right now is in the sky because it's close to us. It's a conjunction, you know, of of of Mars. And maybe when Mars is closest to us, you know, we can you know, it's easier for them to come here or something. There is something that happens that facilitates it. That that broke down. Okay, that correlation didn't didn't quite work. And it looked like, but it looked like it was almost correlated, but not quite. And there is something in in psychology called a schedule of reinforcement. If you want to teach, say, a chimp to do something to, for example, pick up a ball or something. Every time he picks up the ball, you give him some food. Okay. So your reward, every good action works with kids too. I mean, works really well with human beings. That's that's why we have advertising, but your, your rein falls the, the action that you want to encourage, except that if your rein falls every instance, where the, the chimp picks up the ball, after a while, he goes play with something else. Okay. And he forgets the experiment. If you, if you want to induce a behavior that will stay there forever, then whenever he forgotten, you have to have some randomness. In other words, you don't always rein falls the same thing. And sometimes he picks up the ball, find, and he doesn't get the food. And you know, so you, you make it random. And that, you know, that the, the, the, the, the, the, the, psychology is to did those experiments was Skinner, Dr. Skinner published all these experiments. And that became gospel for the psychology. So a lot of psychological experiments are, are run that way of the reinforcement of behavior. And behavior control. And that got applied to, to a, a lot of different fields. Well, that's what the, the schedule of UFO cases, if you look around the world, not just one country, not just at Air Force pilots or the Navy or something. You have to look at the whole thing. If you want to see that pattern, the pattern is a worldwide reinforcement of behavior. The behavior seems to be, you need to let go of some of the things you're doing. And you need to let go of technology, that's harmful. And you need maybe to be prepared to go into space. I mean, but interpretation, where are you getting this interpretation from what, what aspect of these experiences is giving you that interpretation? Places where that reinforcement, that's taken place. And the appearance of the phenomenon, because the phenomenon is just at the border of what we can recognize. It's a little bit weird, but they are basically humanoids. I mean, they're not monsters with tentacles and so on. They are, they are humanoid. And the people like, you know, Lonnie, Lonnie Zamora, and they think that there is a communication, that they can look at the eyes of that creature and they, they get something. They get that reinforcement. I want to say something about the Africa case, because I was in China a couple times doing filming for the phenomenon. And I learned of this landing case, it's known in China as Meng Jao Gua. And, and I didn't prep any of the Chinese people that I was hanging out with about what I'd filmed already in Africa, the landing case and the telepathic message that these beans allegedly gave the children. And I got this interpreter was telling me what this landing case in Africa, 1994, same year in China as in Africa. And this guy, Meng Jao Gua got the same environmental message in China at the children got. And I got goosebumps. I'm sitting there going, you got to be kidding me. And here's another crazy part that one of those wild moments in the film, I was in Africa, meeting with Judy Bates, who's now the head mistress. And she said, well, coming to my studio, I'm going to show you some drawings. I keep them in a very special place of what the kids saw that day. And she's taking these drawings out of these beans. And, you know, this, the quintessential big black eyes and big head. And, and even at one point, it had these two indicating these two little apostropies that would indicate some sort of brain telepathic wave going out from the head. And fascinating photographic, photograph, so my iPhone about two months later, I was in Australia doing the landing case in 1966. And I came across these cave paintings that I was learning about from locals from the Wangina. And I saw these drawings that were thousands of years old of the exact same beans that I just saw in Africa. And I literally had the hair on the back of my neck stand up going, wow, this is the one, Gina, they were driving these, they were drawing these cape. How could what is the name of these, these photos? Wangina. Wangina. Yeah, nice. Not sure exactly, but it's Australia cave paintings are cave art. You've seen the one, Gina. You did the book on, on, um, ancient date. Has there been a cataloging of various crafts and various beings? And how many versions of them are there? Like how many versions of crafts have been seen? I know there's square that appears inside of a circle. There's the ones that I like. Yeah, the triangles, there's the ones that look like the tiktak, there's the discs. Oh, there's a cigar cigar. Right. I've got video footage of one of those that a guy took and sent to me really impressive. You have it here. So light a Colorado 1995 Tim Edwards, he can look it up. You'll see it. It's available somewhere. Yeah, so these are the, the key. Yeah, what the far. See, look at that one down at the bottom there. Look at those. I mean, you said these are from Australia. Yeah, those are from Australia. Yeah. Real similar. And I, I literally saw the drawings and there's one in particular that was just really gave me goosebumps. Uh, and I don't know exactly where it is, but it had the face and it had these two kind of apostropies indicating some sort of communication telepathic. Um, just, just crazy. I mean, that's what the children had drawn. Look at those eyes. Those were thousands of years old, thousands of years strange. Isn't it crazy? There's, there's also this thought that human beings will one day be something different. Right. We used to be some sort of an ancient hominid. Now we're this. And if you extrapolate, if you go from what we used to be, we're hairy and muscular and, you know, very ape-like to what we are now, which is softer, our heads are larger or far more intelligent. If it just keeps going in that direction. And if we keep with our integration, uh, with technology and electronics, like that we might be something very different in the future. And it's probably going to look like an iconic alien. There's a lot of speculation that what we're looking at is us in the future. And that these things are what we are going to become or what we are. If there are multiple timelines that are running simultaneously in different dimensions, that these things are what a human being becomes in these other timelines a million years from now, a hundred thousand years from now, whatever it is. You know, you guys were talking earlier about the time freezes during encounters. This is a little side story I want to tell you about when I brought the children together in Africa as adults. They had time to process their encounter and, you know, their adults that could articulate better. They'd had 20 years to think about it. And they said, I said, put me there. I just want to be there. It's such an exciting moment to hear from people who got within three feet of a potential being for another world. And they said, well, if you've ever been out in the remote wilderness and you come across and you have a rare sighting of a wild animal, there's this moment of intrigue and curiosity almost like time stops. And the what you're looking at is just as curious and intrigued about you as you are of them. And they said, that's what it was like with these beans that they were literally standing there and the beans were looking at all the children, their eyes were scanning, just moving. And there was this moment of curiosity that they did not feel threatened. It was a benign encounter, but that time had stopped and it was just mystery, intrigue, curiosity. So with some of my colleagues, we decided to go back to, you know, then reinvestigate, some of the primary cases because there is something missing in all this, where, you know, we're missing some clues. And so we're about to publish a book called The Best Kept Secret, because some of it, some of what we've uncovered was Kept Secret, and it's still secret, even from, you know, the mythologies to really research all that stuff. It's going to be published, you know, early next year, but we are pre, you know, people can pre-order it on Amazon. It's called The Best Kept Secret. And what we've done is to go back to some of the key cases and some new cases where we found that there may have been some superficial information about it, but most of the information was Kept hidden by the witnesses. Now, you know, we keep talking about cover-up, cover-up by the government, which is true. But the witnesses are not stupid. They don't want to be, you know, laughed at by scientists, you know, six or a half years. So they made give you some report because they think it's their duty to report something to the police or the Air Force and so on. But they won't tell you the whole story. And if you want to know the whole story, you've got to go there, which may take a couple of days. You've done that. And you've got to, you know, gain their trust and sit in the kitchen. And if you're lucky, they give you a cup of coffee and you talk. And you talk to their kids and you talk to, you know, and you get to know them and they get to know you. And if you're genuine, if they can see that you're not playing any games, you will eventually get the whole story. And we've been doing that. And that's what the book is about. And it's going to change history. It's going to change the history of the of the phenomena. How so it builds on the human element, the human element, how is it going to change history? How is it going to change it? That number one, the structure of the information is amazing, the real structure, not just with the police bladder or the, you know, air force teletype. It's not necessarily about the object. It's not necessarily about, you know, what somebody heard. You've got to look at, and we found, especially one case, that extraordinary, the people had never, had never talked. And it came to us. And we've been studying it carefully from every angle. And then we've been looking for patterns around that case. That, again, that's the best kept secret people can pre-order it. But what is about the structure? Like, what is, what is so astonishing about the structure of the information that you're getting from these accounts? I mean, I do have to read the book. But people read the book, but you would find was a commonality of the structure has to do with the intrusion in the life of someone. This is not something that all by the way I sort of find software yesterday, you know, and now I'm going about by business. How profound the information goes inside the consciousness. Even those pilots are changed, you know, they are changed permanently. And the information that the thing stays with them. And you can talk to the witness 40 years later, which we've done. And it brings back as, I mean, their memories completely clear, you know, they know exactly where they were, what they were doing. Because it's such a profound experience, right? What about the structure of the information that's so astonishing that's going to change history? The both the materials, and we continue to look at the, you have to look at the materials at that level, not simply that, oh, goody, you know, we can take it to the lab, it will analyze it, and we'll patent it and, you know, sell it as a new weapon noise. Which is sort of the, you know, this stupid way of looking at this. These materials are earth materials, okay, most cases. We're looking at where the complexity is and where, why they were there at that particular time, okay. That's certainly one aspect of it. We don't understand why these materials would be associated with an instrument or vehicle that does what those things do. The situation also is structured in such a way that it ties into our culture. And, you know, in most cases, there is no anthropologist, you know, with the team that goes out there, whether it's a military or scientist or buffologist, they don't bring in an anthropologist. When you look at the traditions, the local traditions, when you look, you can begin to tie the details of the sightings to what would be in the conscious, I saw that in Brazil. I mean, in Brazil, you can't just go there and ask people, you know, to fill out a questionnaire, you know, about how many degrees to the left of the north pole was it, you know. It doesn't work that way. You have to get into the culture and the phenomenon works on the culture at a very deep level. I think. It doesn't work that way. You have to get into the culture, the phenomenon works on the culture at a very deep level. I think that's what we're showing. So they're taking a public mechanism. These beings are having these interactions with people. They're teaching these people something. And that this is becoming more and more prevalent. And we're learning something from this experience. And the more you have stories like the 2017 story in the New York Times, the more this comes. It's almost like a slow trickle effect of getting the information out. And changing our behavior. Do you think it's preparing people for more frequent or more prominent visits? I don't speculate. I can't answer that. Well, one of the things that I'm very optimistic about is that we're living in extremely divided times right now. And this is a story that transcends politics, transcends religion and borders, whether people believe it or not, they're curious. And I think ultimately when this story is starting to come out and there are people behind the scenes working diligently to get it to come out, that it's going to have a very unifying effect on humanity. I mean, I sound like a group hug moment here, but I actually do believe that it'll force us to look at ourselves as who we really are. One race, one planet. And that there seems to be this external consciousness that is affecting our evolution somehow. And a planet that's extraordinarily fragile. I mean, it could be impacted literally, physically by a lot of things and impacted by our stability. I mean, there were three cases in history where the alert went to go bomb the Soviet Union. I mean, three cases where the bombers were recalled because one guy thought this doesn't make sense. I mean, the images involving him and he left the compound to go outside and sort of re-adjust and realize that what he was looking at was a simulation of a Russian attack. And that the bombers were up and ready to open the other. In other words, they mistook the phenomenon for a threat. For a threat. But everything in the defense establishment is oriented towards a threat. You don't have a threat. You don't need all that. That's the problem with the way you were describing the way we're approaching this phenomenon that we're approaching it like it's a threat. Yes. And that instead of the military looking at this, there should be the scientific community that has access to this information. The military has very, very good platforms for observation, like those infrared cameras, like the radar, like all the sophistication that they have. The tracking systems are satellites. That's very useful. But, you know, I'd rather have a cup of coffee with a guy in his trailer who has seen something and can show me the traces in his backyard, you know, because I can do something with that. What I was going to say is, you know, you look at what they do, but you also look at what they don't do. And one of the huge moments for me, and you could extrapolate on this, is what I met with Senator Reed. He kind of accidentally drops his huge bombshell where he talks about the most astonishing aspect of the phenomenon as far as he determined from a tip that secret Pentagon program was that they were not only only observed over super sensitive military weapons installations, but they were shutting our nukes off. And Senator Reed went as far as to say, in a couple of cases that he looked into, if the President of the United States wanted to launch, he couldn't have launched. And I interviewed one of these officers, Colonel Robert Salas, who's a launch control officer, and during the height of the Cold War, and he said, well, the message was pretty clear as far as I was concerned. I said, what do you mean? He goes, kind of like them taking matches out of the hands of a baby. You know, I mean, you know, it's kind of interesting. They give these messages to the children. Look, I'm not saying that definitively one way or the other, this is exactly what's going on, but I get messages to the children, landing cases with children, then you've got these benign encounters and then shutting our nukes off. I don't know. I mean, that has to mean something, right? Well, it's a powerful signal. Is it a show of force, or is it a show of, hey, you shouldn't be playing around with these things? Or is it both? You know, far why? I mean, we're testing those facilities. So far why? When I was bringing that up, people would say, well, you know, we've got incursions over those platforms to see if the guards are really reacting to the tech thing of threat. So on, again, the threat. But that's one thing to fly over a nuclear facility or a storage area where you have nuclear bombs. It's another to overcome the code of the missiles one by one. Okay. And you have cases in your movie where all the missiles, all the silos were turned off. One day, well, you know, and as you said, if they had wanted to launch, they couldn't have launched the missiles. That's not something that, you know, is just an exercise. You know, and especially since the Russians have the same thing. Yeah. And this is something that the general public is always because I'm Joe public myself. I mean, I'm a guy, a civilian that just wanted to get to the bottom of it. I've, I've, I've sort of stumbled upon this thing accidentally. And now I can't walk away from it because I'm going, this is like the biggest story of modern history. I think that every man, woman and child is entitled to know this. But I would always ask these generals every time I meet with these military guys and I've asked them all around the world, why are you guys covering this up? And they said, look, man, you can't look it that way. You have to understand from our perspective. We are, we are employed by the public to protect you for us to disclose that we have these unidentified objects, whizzing around in our airspace with impunity, flying rings around our fastest jets. You know, we don't know who they are, where they come from. That's just not in our nature to disclose that to the public. You know, that's going to open up the floodgate to a bunch of questions of which we don't have answers. So you can kind of justifyably so see why the secrecy is lasted as long as it has. But it's starting to come out now and I think we're living pretty exciting times with it all. I really do. You know, I don't think I've ever mentioned this to you. It's a little anecdote, but I had a friend who was one of the early researchers in France. An engineer named Emi Michelle was something of a philosopher. And he was compiling all this data and he went to the Air Force and got... And the French Air Force was pretty open with their cases. And the man was a calendar-clear one. I remember his name. This was from the mid-60s. And they would have lunch, which is the thing you do in France. You know, you have lunch with somebody and then you talk. And he convinced the clear one that, you know, go to your superiors and find out, you know, we should tell the public about this and we should open it up, you know, and we should tell them this is going on. And the clear one said, well, you know, it's a good idea. Let's have lunch again in one month. You know, I'll tell you what I find out. They get to the same restaurant a month later. And Emi Michelle says, what did you find out from your superiors? Said, it turned out I... My superiors told me to go to the Americans. So I went to the US Embassy in Paris. And I talked to my counterpart in the military. And we're not going to open the files. And Emi Michelle said, why not? He said, well, the Americans think that there would be it would open up too many things, you know, that we couldn't control. That society is not really. That people would be scared, people with panic, you know, that religious ideas would float around, people would fight each other about, you know, what's happening in their consciousness and in their faith. And in their life and we couldn't control it. And, you know, they told us to shut it up. How long ago was this? 64, 63, 64. So the time is ripe. It's crazy that this has been going on for so long. And it's so remarkably consistent. Well, that's not to people on the street. You know, they're not scared of this. And the vast majority of people believe that the government knows a lot more than what they're admitting. Well, they're admitting they know a lot more than they ever admitted before. They are. Exactly. And one of the things I really wanted to establish, if you'll notice, I have a very dramatic encounter at the beginning of the film, which occurs in 1955. It was with Colonel William T. Coleman, who later became public spokesperson for Project Blue Book, which is the Air Force's and Vescatory Arm for UFOs. And you listen to his account of this encounter. It's a really dramatic encounter. It started at nine thousand feet. It ended at treetop level at what he called maximum continuous power in a B-25 bomber of Alabama in 1955. And he describes like he had three engineers in the plane with them. They're at treetop level, flying flat out. And they literally thought they're going to hit this disc. And they're looking right at it and broad daylight going, where are the wings? Where are the exhaust ports? Where's the propulsion? How on earth is this object flying? And you listen to his description of it. And then you fast forward, because we put it, we bookend it to David Freaver off the coast of San Diego. And their description of the flight, the observed technology is identical to what was documented in 1955. So we're clearly dealing with a technology that's light years advanced. It's the same description of witnesses back in the 40s and 50s is what's happening exactly today. So I just wanted to mention that because a lot of people were like, oh, clearly it's some technology that skunk works are working on. I'm like, no, no, no, no, no, this is the same stuff that's been going on the 40s and it's happening today. But we have to make sure that if there is quote disclosure, that it's not just the next chapter of the cover-up, because there are things that haven't come out, like Senator Reid told you on your movie, there are things that have not come out, that shouldn't come out. That has been, again, kept hidden, again, for fear that people would overreact or something. Is there a concern that they haven't told their own superiors? Is there a concern that some of it would be disinformation that they would make up some sort of a story to try to cover things out? Well, I don't know, but you could orient it to a message that would be both interesting, but reassuring superficially, and again, organize it around the threat. And, again, that message of reacting to the threat makes sense for the military, but the cases that they are working on are only 10% of the database. It should look at the other 90%. You know, I interviewed this general, Parvise Jafari, he was an Iranian general, had that dramatic UFO encounter over Tehran in 1976. And at the time I wasn't, I was more focused on the encounter itself, and how extraordinary it was. And then Parvise Jafari, while piloting this F4 Phantom Jet, tries to shoot at the UFO. And he suddenly realizes, maybe that wasn't such a good idea. And his controls freeze up on him. And he has this really dramatic encounter where he talks about he was going to eject the plane, and like, you know, why did I try to shoot at this thing? I mean, it knew he was about to shoot at it, according to him. And 10 years after I interviewed Parvise Jafari, just looking for some sort of additional material for the credit role at the end, I found this really powerful statement from Parvise, and he goes, he was reflecting back on the incident. And he said, my biggest regret was that I tried, instead of making peaceful contact, instead of trying to make peaceful contact, I tried to shoot this thing. And I wish I could go back and have tried to make peace. It's a really powerful statement coming from an Iranian general about an incredibly dramatic encounter. You know, just reflecting back on why is it that we have this stance of, hey, anything that's unidentified in our airspace must be seen as a threat. And we have to go after it and shoot at it. I mean, that's not the kind of contact I'd like to, I don't want that representing me. So I don't think it would work very well. No. But there have been cases where they shot, when they shot what? Are you out for? There's someone shot at UFO? Yeah. Well, 1952 over the White House. Yeah. I almost put this in the movie and Jacques and I went back and forth on this for a long time. I'm so glad you brought this up. Yeah, because I said, did you have that fight? Yeah, we kind of did. Please tell us this story. You were right to keep it at that level because in the 80s, there were congressional hearings not about UFOs, but about something that I was doing professionally, which is building civilian computer networks for crisis management, for industrial crisis management. And we were funded, the company I created was funded to develop essentially the equivalent of computer conferencing we have today on Facebook. This was way before the web was invented. Again, the mid 80s to link together all the nuclear power plants in the major countries, five countries, including Japan, when it was against the Japanese law to have Japanese data outside Japan. And to fall into beyond that network, the data had to be on our computer, which was in California. We operated that network for three years. And this was a closed network. It wasn't accessible by people outside. It was just operated by the international industry essentially of atomic power. And by the way, they detected a number of flaws. This was after the Fremight Island accident that was, could have done a lot of damage. People were scared and they wanted to share the information. And we were essentially the Facebook equivalent to that industry. So I was asked to testify at the Algo hearings on emergency management. And another little company where the only civilians there are the only non-government people there. All the others were from the three-letter agencies, CIA, the NRO, the other agencies, all a FEMA emergency management administration and so on. And that was extraordinary because those were the top people who would manage an emergency. Other than war, I mean they told us, you know, don't even go into the nuclear war thing. Because even in nuclear war, most of the damage is environmental damage, which I didn't know. It's the amount of dust that kills you. It's not necessarily the bomb that kills you. It's what happens after the bomb. So we were just looking at, you know, civilian casualties and civilian crises. And there I met a number of people who were the people in the government who would be handling, you know, nationwide of international crises. Like to build increases of people who had been there in the days of the building crisis were there and so on. How do you structure the information to get all the people who need to know, I mean everybody goes inside into a bunker. And then the bankers communicates somehow and then you get in touch with other countries and get their experts and then you try to manage the situation. Like, you know, suppose a big meteorite falls. The size of half of Chicago. You know, what do you do after that? And government needs to continue. One of the people there was an expert who had worked under five administrations, managing the structure of crisis management for the US government. He introduced me to Arthur Ronda. Arthur Londale was a legendary member of the Intelligence Community. He was knighted by the Queen of England. He's one of two of three Americans who were knighted. And then his buddies at the CIA used to call him Sir Arthur of the light table. Because a lot of the things he did was with negatives, you know, with satellite photographs that were on the light table. Here's a one who discovered the missiles in Cuba and briefed President Kennedy, showed him where that was and why they were missiles and not just trees. It takes a lot of training. It turns out you can't just look at one of those pictures and see. Ah, you know, that's a missile. He was the one who told who was sent by the US to breathe, charge the goal, present in the goal, about the U2 shutdown over the Soviet Union. And we became friends because I was introduced by the people from the Algor hearings. They knew what I was working on. And he had been a pioneer within the Intelligence Community in getting all the, you know, he started the, the Air Force's image interpretation center in Washington for the Navy, the Air Force CIA and the other places. He told me about 1952. He was very interested in UFOs because he had seen photographs. I mean, he was the armed forces for the interpretation center. Okay. Epic. He was getting all those things. He had all the clients that came from all the services. He didn't tell me the whole story, but he told me number one that those things had been photographed. He told me that at the Robertson hearings, he had the Mariana movie, you know. He gave it to the committee. The committee took it somewhere and analyzed it. As I said, they were seagulls. You know, when he got the film back, the first, the first 20 frames were missing from his film. The very famous from the CIA film, the CIA laboratory analysis of the film. Very famous film footage of a UFO's back in 1950 by the 8 million. So that's actually the level of the cover up at that point that they would do that to their expert. And then we talk about 1952. The 1952, the official explanation came from Dr. Mensol and Harvard. Those were inversions of temperature over Washington. Well, it gets hot over Washington. And these photographs of these, right? There was no photographs of what's appeared over the White House. But there were no, that there were, you know, there was tracking. Radar, you know, radar tracking of it. And he interpreted the radar as being inversions of temperature. Multiple vehicles. But they said, of course, they sent the air force after it. Yeah. Well, he said one of the pilots got permission to shoot. Was authorized to shoot. And shot, you know, a piece of metal out of one of the disks. Those were disks or flying. They didn't care about the defenses. They flew over the White House. They flew, you know, over the major facilities down to Washington that are forbidden. I mean, there's no, no over flight. And so they had to do something and they shot at it. The thing was recovered. The piece of metal. The piece of metal was recovered. He told me, you know, I really shouldn't talk about what happened after that. There is no question that there was a piece of metal recovered from that encounter. And then it was shut off, you know, flying disk over Washington in 1952. And all the explanations that were given to the scientists and to the public were BS. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we feature this case in the film. And we have the guy that was actually in the radar room. This guy, Al Chop, we had testimony from a general in that interview to Tom Tulion back in 1990 something. And it's very rare, extremely rare footage of an interview with a very man who was in the radar room. Listening to the cockpit. Listen to the pilot as he was surrounded by UFOs right over the, you know, Washington DC White House Capitol building. And he was terrified. And suddenly found himself traveling at 600 miles an hour through the pitch black darkness. And he was surrounded by unknowns. And he literally radios down to the tower and says, they're completely surrounded me. What do I do? And they were speechless. They didn't know what to tell the pilot. They could see on the radar all the disks, all these UFOs around surrounding this plane. And Jock said, well, I know, and we feature this in the film. You probably remember that part. And then Jock said, well, it goes a bit further. We actually did shoot at them. And one of the pieces of the debris from the UFO fell to the ground. It was recovered. And where's that piece? We went back and forth on whether to include that in the movie. And I finally said, I kept, you know, I maybe at some point they were able to tell you where the, yeah, where it is. But those are the things when, when would you be able to do it? Yeah, do it now. Why would you want to wait? I think some of the, you know, I respect the need for certain things to be managed in a particular way. And it wouldn't really add to, you know, to the story to talk about that. In the book, we go, you know, a lot further in talking about what those materials are, you know, what the questions are, what the questions are for science. But also what the questions are for disclosure, if there is over disclosure. But there isn't going to be one big disclosure that says, well, we've got contact with aliens from Alpha Centauri. And that disclosures come in layers that come, you know, everybody needs to get around to all the truth. But there's a piece of metal from the 1950s. Isn't it about time? Yes. So, we've done years ago. We've done years ago. We've done years ago. We've done years ago. But we've got plenty of others. You can answer his question indirectly by that memo, the cross memo that you, that we did feature in the film. Who wrote it? He was a metallurgist. And what lab was he working at? So, you know, the cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- The cross- And somebody thought if the Russians were to simulate the UFO thing by throwing, you know, artificial things in the sky or whatever, they could saturate the communication and we couldn't deploy the defense system. So, we've got to do something about it to reduce the level of reports from the public. So, they create, they call together five of the top sentences in the land. You know, Felton Page, Luelwares, people like that. Nobel Prizes, people who knew the nuclear secrets from the days of up in highmost. And they brought them to discuss what they should do and be briefed by Arglundal. That's where he lost his 20 pictures, which were the best pictures from the beginning of the term. Okay, you never saw again. That's where Heineck testified. But Heineck was, as he says, cooling his heels in the anti-chamber in the lobby. And they would only bring him in for a couple of things before the scientists. They, long story short, the outcome was a classified recommendation to explain away most of the phenomenon to the public, to reduce the number of reports. So, the idea wasn't to make the problem go away. It was to make the reports go away because the reports were clogging up the communication channels that were vital to the defense of the country. Okay, man. That bit sounds, I mean, there is usually some reason why the military does something. Sometimes it's not obvious, but in this case, they were, it was logical. So, Heineck was there in Heineck at a bunch of papers from his testimony and so on. After my PhD at North Western, I had an office at the computing center. There's a whole summer coming and I offered to Dr. Heineck to reorganize his fights, which were complete shambles. And so, he says, sure, I mean, that would be great. You can put it in new folders. So, I buy new clean folders and I start going through all the files because we had copies of, you know, essentially 20,000 reports from the Air Force that were unclassified. And so, I make these new things and I put everything back in order. I also punch the cards for that so that we have a database at the same time, which I still have. And with the names of witnesses, by the way, which, and I find this folder, which is full of stuff. And in it, there is two pages, an onion skill. Everybody, I mean, your audience, I'm sure your audience has no idea what an onion skill is. You know, when you have a typewriter, a hand typewriter, and you want to make several copies, you put a- what an audience can is. When you have a typewriter, a hand typewriter, and you want to make several copies, you put a carbon between the first page is your letter. And the others are thin paper. That thin paper is called an audience can. Of course, now we have computers, so we don't need carbon copies. So it's a carbon copy of a memo. From somebody I've never heard of, to somebody in the intelligence community, saying we should not have that panel, because we are not ready. And which is interesting by itself. I mean, who are these people who want to stop, the stop level scientific panel of, you know, these states defense established. I mean, who do they think, oh, the other thing about the memo is that it's type of secret. At that point, I still have a French passport, and I have a green card. So I'm legally in the United States, but I'm not even a US citizen. I became a US citizen. You had to wait five years before you could be applied for citizenship. But I certainly didn't have any reason to look at a secret memo. But I start reading it, because I need to tell Hinek that this shouldn't be here, shouldn't be in my five. Hinek told me that he had not only had he forgotten that memo, but he didn't think he had ever seen it. That if he had seen it, that would have changed certain things. Well, it turned out that group turned out two things. Number one, that Robertson panel was not altogether by the Air Force, was brought together by other people in the intelligence community. The Air Force was recovered. The scientists were never told that. They didn't know that. So you bring together the top, you know, top clearance, top physicists in the US, including a couple of normal prizes, and you don't tell them who you are. Well, okay. Can I step in just for a quick sec, because this was something that we featured, and it was really complicated story. So basically what Jacques is saying, leading up this, we had a really difficult time deciphering this. So basically, there was that massive sighting in 1952 over Washington. The Air Force had to do something. They decided to convene a panel of the smartest minds that had to deal with this. It was called the Robertson panel. The Robertson panel was then told not to happen by this memo that you find, which basically is an unknown government agency with more power, more influence in the CIA. It was a different agency. It was a contractor. Contractor. The budget was a contractor. They had a contractor to look at you at first. And what they were saying is, you know, it's a good idea to bring these sages, but this is premature. We're not ready to tell them about the patterns. It's always about these were top-level computer people in 1954. They were working with punch cows, but punch cows work. I mean, there's nothing wrong. Punch cows. They were, they wanted to bring the best information, and then they had ideas that they wanted to discuss about how to test their hypotheses about what UFOs are. They, the Robertson panel went on, ignored that memo, it went on, and it concluded that they should discount the reports from the public, and they should look at instrumentation from the military, which is what people are doing now. I mean, we see the military with these advanced cameras, the limits, you know, all those things that are in your movie. And they've discounted reports, they kept project blue book growing so that the public would have a place to write if they saw something, but it was a very low level thing. But we got to this, we got to this, because you were saying about the examination of the metal. Yes. We never got to that. Well, the, the memo that, so when I discussed it with Heineck, and I got only one other person in the confidence, the memo came from an organization in Ohio, called Battelle Memorial Institute, top organization on the analysis of metals. They were the ones who invented titanium aluminide. They were the ones who invented some of the coatings and some of the metals used in, in spy planes, like that were used later in the U2, in the SR-71, in those undetectable airplanes and so on. They were at that time the experts. They were also the experts on UFOs because they had a contract with the airfalls. And I think that, that memo, which I really didn't want to expose, you know, but, I would have written that memo, you know, and in that, that conference was an attempt to cover up the reality. And what, what the Battelle scientists were saying was, wait a minute, you know, we need to look on the ground. We need to simulate a UFO wave, see what the statistics are. That's going to take another year. Don't, don't convene that meeting now. Right. But, you know, I read them, they were, but Joe's question is, where would that piece of metal that was shot off the UFO? That memo revealed, it was written by a metallurgist from the Memorial Institute. So if he had that metal in the possession, it would have been analyzed by metallurgists at the Memorial Institute. Yeah, but at that point, these, the different pallets didn't, well, not communicating. But did they examine the metal? I shouldn't talk about that. I think, you know, the, the book talks about how complicated it is to get, once you get the metals or the samples or whatever, what do you do with it, and what does it mean? Why shouldn't you talk about whether or not the test of the metal? Well, because I'm not, I don't have the complete information, you know, I mean, obviously, that was classified. Artrondale told me that because number one, you know, he knew that I knew the rest of the story. Number two, I had just testified before, you know, a congressional panel on crisis management for the United States of America. So he knew that I understood how those things happened, you know, how they're managed. But there is plenty of other metal. I mean, I don't really care about that, but it could have metal. If you can't tell about that particular metal. Well, we, you know, we should be able to, we should be able to, but if there's a piece of metal that was shot off of a UFO in 1952 that's proven to be of a consistency or with some sort of a, we have others, we have others. What do we have? We have others from Argentina, from Brazil. You said there was someone from Brazil, Russia, the other places. Has it been proven? You were talking about the other people? When I say we are talking about, no, my buddies and the lab we have in Silicon Valley. But these other people have similar things. Right. But these metals, have they been proven to be of a structure that we can't replicate? Not when I've looked at so far. What have you looked at so far? They're easy to believe they're extraterrestrial. They conditioned under which they were found and the reports from the witnesses about what they did. Okay, but if you're talking about something that doesn't seem obviously extraterrestrial, how do you know? How do you know that this is an extraterrestrial piece of metal if it has the same characteristics of metal that you'd find here on earth? The characteristics of the metal are going to be the same ones that we find on earth. Because iron from miles of Venus is like iron, you can pick up. But let's go back to the time we talked about that one. Is this particular silicon, mainstream? It is engineered at the atomic level for, say, 1954, at a level where our technology hadn't evolved to the point of, for example, separating the isotopes. And you've found things like this? Yes, not me, but some of my colleagues believe that they found things like that. But they only had a tiny amount. I went to Argentina and I got more of this stuff because there is still some, some stuff there. And I brought back test tubes with enough material that we are going to be testing it again. So they haven't tested anything that shows that it's clearly extraterrestrial. No one has any concrete evidence from any of these samples. The, the, the metal that was found in, in Brazil where people described an object flying over and then an explosion that showered some of it fell in the water, some of it fell in the sand on the beach, some of it fell on rooftops. And so there was a lot of stuff. And for a long time, we only had, you know, pinhead, where stuff, which is good enough for one measurement. But people told me you can't come here with one measurement. You need 20 different machines, different things, different techniques if you want to do it right. So that's what we're doing. But, but do you understand that what I'm asking a mass? Yes. Is there, is there one smoking gun? Is there one piece of metal that you can say this, this was made at a time or this is from 1952. There was no technology to recreate this metal then. We didn't know how to make this. Well, the, the one that I'm talking about was 57 over, Uber, two buying Brazil. And other groups have the similar thing. And we'll compare notes. But the, what was found was that one of the components of the magnesium, one of the isotopes of the magnesium, was way over what it would be in nature, in the natural magnesium, which means somebody took it apart and reformulated the magnesium. The magnesium is very light and very strong, unusual. Yes, it also ignites in contact with air. And so it blows up easily. And the reason our sample doesn't blow up, is that there is oxide, it oxidizes very quickly. So there is a layer of magnesium oxide on top of it. And the analysis, some of the analysis that have been done would indicate that, number one, it's extremely pure, pure and the Dow standard for magnesium. But, you know, again, if you go to see a physicist, but I can buy the Dow standard, and I can refine it further in my lab. Okay, it's, Dow, Dow chemical, you know, they supply metals to everybody. They never had a commercial need for that, that if I have a need for that, I can do it. So that doesn't prove anything. But if we can verify it, and if we can look at the ratio of the other isotopes and so on, highly precisely, which we can do now. But that hasn't been done yet? No, no. We'll do it in the next few months. Okay, so the answer is, if I can round this out, there's no real clear evidence that any of this metals extraterrestrial. Correct. So when you say we have lots of metal that seems to have come from a UFO, what would lead you to think that if none of this has been proven to be extraterrestrial? Well, because people saw the thing crash. Yeah, but people don't know. They always tell the truth. After, isn't part of the problem? As the people don't always tell the truth? Yeah, but if they come up with, if they say this thing crashed, you know, you've got ordinary people in Brazil and they can all tell, you've got the police, you've got the, you know, telling you that this thing fell. And here is where stuff, you take this step to the map. What does this stuff clearly manufactured? Is it clearly refined in manufactured? So this is not something that could have come from an asteroid? No. Okay. No. I asked the same question. I was in the lab with him and Gary Nolan. And I was exactly like you. I was like, well, what do you come in? I'm right. Where's the evidence? Yeah, I need to know. And Gary said to me, and some of which had to be edited down a little bit because he went a little beyond the comfort zone of Stanford University, he said to me that what we're looking at has an isotopic value that he didn't understand that if it was to be recreated on Earth, it would be in the billions of dollars to do it. No. That's what he told me. And they said, Yeah, then he said to me, we don't understand it. It's engineered at an atomic level. We're learning that with this new device that we have. And Silicon Valley, we don't understand it. We want to understand it. And we feel like it could be revolutionary breakthrough technologically if we could understand it. And this other material that in the Silicon Valley that they had discovered 20 years ago that your friend had analyzed and he said, has nothing like it and we've seen nothing like it since then. Yeah, but this is one was given that sample. Right. And we don't know where that is now. We don't know where it is. We don't know where it is. But he said, an author, you know, matrix of author silicate that he couldn't probe within his lab. And, you know, obviously, but that would have been a logical place to look at that because they had all the people who signed that memo were metallurgous. So that makes you think of something. I get frustrated with it too, because I went to the lab and I saw the machine. I saw the metal samples, which you carried around like this. You never let them out of your site and I said, Jesus, are you paranoid or so? What are you worried about? You said these things that was going on. They have a way of disappearing. And I asked the same questions you're asking. What do we know? And he's concerned that he's going to make a statement that's going to be premature that the further scientific analysis that the scientific journals and the peer review hasn't happened yet. And therefore, he's been really conservative. But basically, what he's telling me is the sub-engineered at an atomic level, it would be in the billions of dollars to recreate if we could even recreate it. And we're talking about pieces that recovered as early as 47 and 57 and, you know, et cetera. So it's extremely exciting, but it's too early to make any concrete states. Okay, but that's much better. But the least you're saying that there is something, some evidence that shows that there's something and whether or not it's made for materials that exist as we know it currently on Earth, it's made in a way that there's no way anyone can make it today without like some insane budget. And much less likely in the 1940s. Yes. Again, this is human testimony. Yes. This scientist from that company with that matrix of office, silicate the Air Force calendar who told me about the thing he could lift with one finger, the whole wing, the calendar also with the stuff that he recovered, that he was given by the Army. I mean, initially the Army had the project to analyze this and right up to the war. And that he gave to the different labs. What we need to do is go through the normal scientific publication process. Why hasn't this happened? Every time somebody tried, Dr. Heineck tried, they wouldn't publish it. But in 2020, don't you think there'd be more likely to be interested in possibly publishing this? What would find out? So you still have all these metals in your possession or in someone's possession. Yes. What other kind of evidence is there? Is there anything else that's compelling? I don't know of any biological evidence. That's what would, like a body you mean. Well, we don't even need a body. I mean, you need a saliva from a mushroom. We can do the DNA. I brought this up with Chris Ramellen recently. And because you hear that same old argument, you know, oh, you know, the skeptic. And I think it's perfectly healthy to be skeptical. I'm the be the first one to tell you that the vast majority of UFO reports can and have been explained away in sort of down to Earth conventional terms. But there's that core 10 or 15% of cases that truly after careful scientific investigation defy a terrestrial explanation. And those are the cases that we folks on. And I asked Chris Ramellen, what do you say to the skeptic that says, oh, there's clearly just anecdotal evidence as to the reality of UFOs? He's like, well, we put that to bed a long time ago. You've got visual confirmation, radar confirmation, ground-to-air visual and ground-to-air radar. You've got photographic evidence from the cockpits of these military aircraft. You've got landing prints in the ground. You've got soil sample analysis from the propulsion. You've got plants and soil samples. There's a preponderance of evidence of cases all around the world. You know, the only question is, you know, who are they? What do they want? Where do they come from? I mean, that seems to be where we need to set our sights. And Senator Reed says something really interesting to me. He's like, look, just because we don't understand something, it doesn't mean we should shy away from it. It doesn't mean, you know, we should, you know, focus and the scientific community and get to the bottom of it and put the necessary resources in place and stop treating this as like a taboo subject that we have to all, you know, shy away from. Well, whoever has a strange hold on the information and the intelligence community seems to be in a position where a lot of what they have is I don't know. Yeah, and they're also sitting on footage of, you know, apparently according to all the people the military guys I've talked to, crystal clear photographic evidence, landing film footage evidence, cockpit film recorded evidence. I mean, there's that statement I read earlier from about this latest story breaking about two Navy pilots getting one triangular shape UFO that came out of the water. They've got a crystal clear photograph of that. That they're not releasing to the public. So I think we should get the pressure on for further government transparency. I really do and I think that the more tangible, solid, compelling evidence needs to get released. It's so fascinating and everybody wants to see something like this, you know, it's this biggest story ever. I mean, the cockpit recordings that Chris Ramel and Snuck out of the Pentagon ended up on the page of the New York Times. That was huge. Everyone is waiting for that type of evidence. We know it's there. We've had confirmation from a extremely high level government officials, people in the intelligence say it's insane. It's there. We just have to get it released. Well, at the Al Gore hearings about emergency management, the question of the satellites came up. And somebody said one of the Congress people, we pay you guys to deploy the satellites and you look at the earth all the time, you know, with 10 centimeters resolution. So if you see something, you should be able to, that could be a crisis, you should be able to tell us if it's going to threaten the population of the United States. There was one guy there who didn't laugh because he was respectful of the committee, but he said, we've all the respect. I cannot under this audience. I cannot tell you where I work, but there are three letters to my employer. And what I can tell you is that I measure every morning, the amount of snow that has fallen on the nose of the statue of Juleschinsky in downtown Moscow in front of the headquarters of the KGB. I can measure, I can tell you how much snow fell that night because I measure it. So that tells you, you know, the kind of instrument that we have. I'm by regulation, by law, I must turn off my satellite when it flies over the United States. I'm not spying on your house. If you authorize me to run the satellite, you know, acquisition, I could tell you when there is going to be a flood in Arizona. Because I measure the amount of the snow that fell on the Rockies last night. And we've got these climate prediction schedules. We can approximately tell you where it might melt and where it's going to go when it melts and how big the reservoirs are going to be. And when the reservoirs are going to overflow, that I'm not authorized by law to look at any of the data. And if I look at it, I wouldn't be authorized to disclose it to you because you're not cleared for the characteristics of the resolution of my device. And I'm sure that, you know, in March, I'm going to be sitting with my wife and my kids looking at the TV. And I'm going to see this woman in Arizona with her two babies in her arm up to here, in her kitchen up to here in water, because the dam has flooded, because it happens every winter. Because the snow melts, so it comes down. But I'm not authorized to tell her. And even if I told her, I would have to tell the governor. The governor would have to tell the sheriff and the sheriff would have to disclose, you know, send somebody in there. But then he said, now four levels of management. Did he indicate they were picking up UFOs? No, no, well, we were not talking about UFOs. We were talking about agencies. But you were saying that if we have these satellites that can do these incredible things, why are we not picking up UFOs? Well, no, I'm saying why, if they're picking up you, I throw why they're not telling us. They can't even tell us when there's going to be a flood in Arizona. Okay, so there might be, and there's a good reason for them. They might be picking up these UFOs, but they're not giving us the data. That's what Al Klondal was saying about his experience. The other compelling story of abduction that you had briefly brought up for a second before, we were still on the Betty and Barney Hill story. It was Travis Walt. Yes. We interviewed Travis for potentially for the film, and then opted to kind of avoid that aspect of, I don't consider the Travis Waltan an abduction so much as an encounter that didn't end well. And he probably was taking a board to get recovered. But what do you mean? Well, they were in the woods. Snowflake, Arizona, I think it was 1970. It was a logger, right? It was a logger. They had a contract with the government to log a certain area or to clear a certain area. And it was late and they were behind on the schedule, so they were working a little bit later than they normally would. And they all got in the truck. They had a four door truck that had like seven of them driving out and they saw a light in the sky. The thought was a fire. And as they got closer to it, it was this perfect disc, hovering about treetop level right out the window. I mean, they said they could have hit with a rock. And he told the driver, Travis Waltan, stop the truck, I'm gonna jump out. They all against their will. Don't do that Travis. And he just left out of the truck and started running towards this thing, thinking it was gonna just shoot off, but it didn't, it stayed there. And as he got closer to it, he started to kind of freak out a little bit. And it started making a weird sound, like it was spooling up or something. And so he tucked down behind a log that was on the ground. And they're screaming at him in the truck, get back, get back here. What are you doing? And he realized he was dangerously close to this thing. So he was gonna make a run for the truck. And he got up as this thing was spooling up according to him. And he tried to make a run for the truck. And some kind of energy force hit him and knocked him like a raggedy end-all all the way across like 60 feet and he landed. And those guys took off, thinking they were next. And they left him for dead out there in the woods. They're driving down the road, high tailing it out of there. And then the driver realizes like, we can't leave Travis, man, we gotta go back and get Travis. And they were all freaked out, thinking that they were gonna be next. Finally, they argued and he said, look, man, I'm going back to get Travis. Whether you guys are with me or not. And if you want, you guys can stay here. I'll come back and get you there. I can, no, no, let's stick together. So they all stick together in the truck. They turned around the way back. UFO gone, Travis gone. They go down into town and they have to tell the authorities. You could imagine 1975, they're telling the local authorities. And there's a small enough town where everybody kind of knows everybody. Hey, our buddy got abducted by a flying saucer and he's gone. They were like, yeah, you guys are all under a restaurant. We'll start at intense search the next day with helicopters, dogs. It made world news all across. As you can imagine, these guys took a light detector test. They said, they stuck to their story. Even though they knew that people wouldn't believe them, they thought they'd kill Travis and they buried him somewhere in the hills. So they're all doing this five day intensive search. Well, Travis Walton reappears five days later with facial growth. Here's the really fascinating part of this story that I find. Incredible because again, don't look at what these the phenomenon does. Sometimes you look at what they don't do. Well, they didn't drop them off where they picked them up. That was the most, I've been out there. It's a really remote area in the mountains in the forest. He would not have made it back alive. Drop them off in the middle of town. They didn't do that either. But they dropped them off right on the outskirts of town. So he could, they did it in a little valley. So they minimized any possibility of their exposure. They dropped them off in a place where he could get help, but they would minimize being seen. They did it at night. And five days later, he reappears. And of course he he's back. And he recounts the same story. And he's been recounting the same story. And what is his story story is he woke up. It's funny actually I met with Travis a handful of times. And I sat down with him. And a lot of times when I really wanted to absorb a story, I closed my eyes and then their words recreate the visuals for me. So I see it. And so that's what I did with Travis dinner just the two of us. And I closed my eyes and he told me he woke up. On board, he was on a table. And there were, and he was kind of blurry eyed, but he could see these little beans. And initially thought, what am I looking at here? Where am I? And he saw these little beans and typical beans, the diminutive body, big head, big almond shape, black eyes. And he was absolutely terrified. And he grabbed some sort of instrument that was on the table. And he said that he even touched one of them. And he goes, I was surprised at how light it was. it moved really easily. And he started aggressively swinging some instrument that he found on the table towards these things. And then they skirted off and left the room. He went off, they went to the right, he went left. And he was. And he started aggressively swinging some instrument that he found on the table towards these things and then they scurried off and left the room. He went off, they went to the right, he went left and he was walking down a hallway and he said, you can imagine like polished aluminum, there were no seams, no rivets, no weld marks, but it was all solid like one solid piece. And he said it was tight and my shoulders were rubbing on either side of this hallway and I was running down the hallway. He totally freaked out to know where he was and he could have it in a hard time breathing. He took a left and he went into this room and there was a command chair and in the he sat in the command chair and he started playing with buttons. He was trying to get out, he just wanted to get out and all of a sudden there was a holographic projection of like a star chart that was holographic that appeared and he was moving with these buttons and everything started to move and he thought, my God if I'm on a spaceship I could crash this thing, I don't know what I'm doing. And then two very humanoid looking people, beautiful angelic people with these glass bulbs came in with tight fitting suits on and he said, oh my God you guys are here to save me, thank God and they wouldn't talk with them. They just took him by the arm and they escorted him out, he went down a ramp and then he said, I was either in a hanger or I was in a big huge, another spaceship, I don't know if it was a huge hammer, a hanger on the ground or if it was another spaceship but there were lots of discs of different sizes parked inside this hanger looking thing but it was indoors and they escorted him out with a map with another woman. I said, well how you know it was a woman, it was a woman in a glass bulb and they took something over his mouth and he kind of thought but he said he was weak and next thing you know he woke up in a field and looked up and the disc was just leaving departing and it was five days later. Yeah there was a movie made about it called Fire and Sky but the ending was Tracy Tormay wrote that in the ending of the film was changed last minute and it was inaccurate. Yeah because the fucking I know Hollywood exactly. Yeah, fuck right now and he fought it and they said, look you want the movie to get made? They were changed in the ending. But that's the real ending in the movie that was right from Travis Walton to me. But I decided in the movie he's still alive? Yes he is, where's your love? Snowflake Arizona I believe he still lives there. Wow. Yeah he's great, he's stories exactly the way he's in the way. He's probably maybe late 60s. Yeah and I went to the actual site with him. We actually drove out to that site and I tell you man when we got there he got out of the car and he was just running, just running towards the spot. It had recently snowed and there was snow in the ground and I could keep up with him but he was running to go to the exact location where and I could see him reliving the whole thing. It was a really powerful moment with him and it was a very remote area of the mountain range. It's a very compelling story. It's a really compelling story and they all passed and I interviewed a number of the eyewitnesses that were with him at the time. And there's a movie made about it called Travis I believe, it should definitely look into it but a documentary. But he was really funny, he was working at like a Walmart. You're going to say pass a polygraph test. Yeah they all did. But I was talking to one of the witnesses, I'll never forget this and I was like, what did you see? Can you describe what the disc looked like? He goes, you ever seen like a brand new Corvette like that beautiful brand new Corvette? And I said, yeah yeah he goes, it was more perfect than that. It was just this perfect disc and he said it was lit up like you could see these almost little windows in it and it just suspended in this darkness. And it was kind of just wobbling there. And he described it, he made the correlation of a Corvette, a brand new Corvette and that funny. Yeah and yeah it's a fascinating case. And I decided that this is the first film that I was dealing with. It was my fourth one that I dealt with close encounters of the third kind which is one of the witnesses claimed to report beans. And that was about as far as I wanted to go with it because I was concerned about the mainstream participation I was getting with like Harry Reid, Podesta and Governor Bill Richardson and those, Christopher Mellon, Jacques Valleye. And I was concerned not to go too far with it and to take baby steps. And one of the things that's been incredibly exciting for me to see for the first time, keep in mind is my fourth film on the topic is that not only are we seeing A we've got people like Dan Farrah, who's a mainstream, you know he produced Ready Player One with Steven Spielberg, who's attaching, he's the latest producer who's associating himself with this film. But you're getting like Harry Reid and all these household names that are not only looking at it participating but publicly endorsing it. And that is extremely exciting because that is an indication that people are getting ready for this story to come out. You know what I'm saying. And I felt it was important to take those baby steps and not go too far because there are some aspects of the phenomenon that if you're unfamiliar with it might be a bit of a stretch. And so. Well it seems like the public is more interested and more open to it now than ever before. And it seems less ridiculous to me. Oh totally. No question about it. And the New York Times thing really made the difference. I really believe that. Yeah. I did for sure did because it was sent to me by a bunch of my friends that are like legitimate intellectuals, professors, scholars, like people that are really really smart like look this is right up your alley. Look at this. New York Times now. Exactly. That I have people that have been really killed me. It really killed me for decades ago. Oh my god. I mean like the guy that lives across the street from where I grew up his Walter Murch senior he edited Apocalypse now. He's like the pinnacle of success editor and he's always kind of made little jabs at me over the years and then he finally goes, boy James you might as well you might be right. Yeah. That was really satisfying for me. And then to see Lou Elizondo probably endorse the film and we're talking about like if you think about it. You've got people endorsing a film that take my name off it. It's just stories that we reported on but that deals with potential close encounters of the third kind. that's so amazing. I mean if you walk down the street and you meet average Joe and you say hey did you hear about the UFO at the end of the Africa? The occupants got out. Communicated tell them how to get the fuck out of here. Get the fuck out of here. You crazy. Go so crazy somewhere else. Like you would. Yeah. But it's happening. We feature it. We were in the edit room for three and a half, four years and we said where we go and we're on the road to ruin. That was our mantra. Road to ruin. What we meant was let's compile the evidence and let's build our case so we can allow the audience to work. the end of the film saying that landing case in Africa might have actually just happened. And I think we should think about all these cases whether it's Travis Walton or Betty and Barney Hill or the African cases. If you weren't there and you've never experienced anything like it. It was just this one unique thing that happened. It would be it's so hard for anyone to accept unless you see with your own eyes unless you're actually there unless you experience it. It's so hard and it's so easy to be incredulous. It's so easy to be skeptical. But when you get people like David Freaver. Yeah. Like I you know he's so compelling. You listen to his testimony and then you listen to the parallels of the observed technology, the no wings and how baffled he was with the whole thing. And then you hear the stories the same technology back in the 40s and 50s ago. You should listen to him on. I don't know if you've listened to him on Lex Friedman's podcast. No. It's amazing because Lex you know Lex is he does art he did artificial intelligence work with MIT brilliant guy and him and David Freaver go on forever. Oh wow. About the experience and the encounter and also just his understanding and knowledge of aircrafts and kind of just of air travel and it's a it's an insane story. Like I had him on my podcast with Jeremy Corbell and that was great but it was even better on Lex Friedman's podcast because it was just Lex and David together. Oh that's they went deep into the weeds about the story. Yeah I mean apparently it was an object under the water which we were like. Did we cover that we kind of mentioned it quickly in the film show when he aspects of that. The thing is you can only see the water breaking over the top of it. You couldn't see the actual object itself but there's many stories about things that are in the water. If you wanted to have a base or you wanted to have some sort of a of a mothership you wanted to hide it and plain view. I mean 90% of the earth's ocean is undiscovered or unexplored. I mean you could easily hide something in there and no one would ever see it. That's one thing Chris Remellon said. He was disappointed with the New York Times and I thought well gosh the New York Times did something pretty brave I think. And the due diligence they did apparently according to the authors was insane. They had to cross check everything make sure they had to speak to Harry Reid. They had to see the government documents. They had to verify the existence of A-tip. I mean they really worked hard at it. But Chris Remellon said well they kind of missed it. I said what do you mean they missed it? He goes well it's great they revealed the A-tip program that secret Pentagon program. But the bigger story was these things are real and they're here. This is happening now. They've been going in and out of our oceans for 270 days out of 365 in 2015. And that they the Navy finally just said we can't stop them. We've tried to intercept them. They fly rings around us. This is leave them alone. That's crazy. Because that's what David Frever was communicating with was it the ship? Who is he communicating with? They've been seeing these. Yes on radar. Going up a week space. They would go from outer space 80,000 feet was the highest we could detect them. And then they'd shoot down to like five feet over the water. And it's like that. Yeah. And then just you know shooting around and then they'd of course get invisible confirmation. But they didn't even do anything for like was it days or weeks? And they didn't get any of that. Yeah. It's crazy. Well listen, you're documenting fantastic. I really enjoyed it. I watched it twice. It's excellent. Your contribution in it is amazing too. And I really appreciate you guys coming down here and talking about it. And I can't recommend the documentary enough. If you're into UFOs like I am obviously it's the phenomenon. It's on I got it off iTunes Apple. I was going to say really thank you for that. I really appreciate you saying that. But if you want to rent it, rent it. But if you want to buy it for the same price on iTunes or Vimeo, they offer three hours of bonus free material. So if you're going to purchase it, do it from iTunes or Vimeo. Don't forget to rate. And I want to put a shot out to Ernie Klein. He's got ready to play her too out right now. He's been incredibly supportive of us. He's right here from Austin, Texas. And my writing partner Mark Barris has been incredibly helpful. Jamie, didn't you just start reading Ready Player One? Ready Player Two rather? Yeah. The new one. Yeah. Apple can preorder the best kept secret. And when will that be available? Well, that's on. It will be probably Q1 or Ernie Q2 of 2020. Next year. Okay. Beautiful. Thank you, Jack. Thank you, James. It was awesome. Thank you. Really appreciate it. It was great time. Bye, everybody.