The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day All right, here we go. What's up, man? Good to see you too. So we were just talking about Ari blacking out trying to keep up with Shane Gillis who is a Super human drinker with bizarre the volume you could put down and you were you were saying your voxies on yeah I mean obviously there's a tolerance that's built up with drinking a lot But believe the number is approximately eight percent of people have a mutation in a gene Such that when they drink alcohol it increases their dopamine levels very quickly and they get you for it They feel great these are the people like that character in madmen the dondra per character like you'd go out and just get plastered in the next day You know he's all fresh and and ready and pop part of that is tolerance But in certain Scandinavian countries north and European countries this gene tends to be more prevalent and these people are the people that can just keep drinking and drinking They feel great when they drink whereas most people they feel disinhibited at the beginning You know you have a couple drinks before brain shuts down a little bit because that's what it does They start talking more talking more, but if they keep drinking they're blacking out, you know They're stumbling they're slurring their words This eight percent of people by way of this genetic mutation alcohol affects them very differently It offsets all that sedative property and they could just go and go and go and go This is the person who's doing a case a day or at the party and she has shot for shot and just looking like they're improving in function Obviously they're not but you put one of those people against a Arishafir yeah That's what you get yeah, so even for those people though It still has a negative effect on your body, right? Oh, yeah, I mean the toxicity of the alcohol is Universal but in terms of how it impacts brain function and you see this across all these different categories of drugs too, right? You know Somebody takes a riddling at a raw modafinular armodafinular these are the common prescribed drugs now and people use them Recreationally for ADHD in fact in researching an episode for our podcast on ADHD Turns out that more than eighty eight zero percent of college students will rely on ADHD meds quote-unquote recreationally not prescribed they buy it from each other in order to study 80% and those drugs work Mainly by increasing dopamine and increasing adrenaline and they make your focus like this scenario and you're you're in a trench and you can function but a number of people take them and Feel super distracted and lousy, but this is of course what they prescribed to kids with ADHD Yeah, now when you you modafinos that's that's providual Yeah, now there's some it's very expensive It's like a thousand dollars a month in some cases really? Yeah, it was originally for a narcolepsy so to offset daytime sleepiness That was the original use of the drug and then it also does work for enhancing Focus, right? I mean what that has drawbacks. It's not perhaps as detrimental as like recreational drugs to increase focus but most of the students out there and the Tech workers and this is big in the finance world too are relying on riddle in at-or-all and things like vivance and to be clear They have legitimate clinical uses. It's a five-inch. It's another one of these drugs for ADHD Here's the story around why these drugs initially came to be if you look at kids or adults with ADHD like true attention deficit Disorder or hyperactivity disorder. You don't always have the hyperactivity what you find is they can focus really well if it's on Something they like so kid with a D D or ADHD that loves video games that kid will play video games with laser focus for three hours That sounds like me, but then you put them in front of something they don't want to do and they just can't anchor their discipline They just don't have the discipline that also sounds like me Although I doubt that I don't know we maybe will come up later But your discipline for fitness and ice baths and training calm right well You well and if you can arrange your life such that most of your stuff is around that great but these kids if prove that if you like something you can focus and Right it comes as no surprise in that the drugs radiate universally increase dopamine because dopamine is this incredible molecule that enhances focus motivation and drive and literally narrows the aperture of your visual attention and We've all experienced that and of course drugs like cocaine and fenamine do that to a hyper extent and then there's a crash But with these drugs have prescribed in the right way in the right situation. They're terrific They teach the kids brain how to focus but nowadays there is rampant adult ADHD and ADD part of that is probably do the phone probably part of that is probably just due to all sorts of things But there is also a lot of recreational use of these prescription drugs not illicit drugs like cocaine amphetamine but prescription drugs that increased dopamine and supplementation for increasing dopamine as well. I had read something about a modafano New visual providual which whichever one it was that initially it was created as a performance enhancing drug But they needed some sort of an ailment for it to you know to be Prescribed and that was when they decided to describe it for knocker. Let me see had you heard anything like that I thought it was in the reverse, but I'm open to take your Listen that the course of a lot of these drugs and how they hit market is super interesting I've been learning more and more about this because one of my colleagues who works on aggression and mating behavior which fascinates me has identified some peptides that can really reduce anxiety They put these to the pharmaceutical industry pharmaceutical Intracy wasn't interested in them all even though the safety margins are huge You say why why wouldn't they want this? Well turns out these same drugs failed in a schizophrenia trial a long time ago So no one will go near it with a 10 foot pull so what the way the pharmaceutical industry generally approaches drugs is They love to remarket drugs for which there's already FDA approval because then they don't have to go through all the safety stuff and when they do that they can renew the patent This is crucial right because if you can get the generic version now with things like good RX and these like little apps You can get them you can go into a pharmacy hit good RX and it'll say oh yeah We've got some stuff that's about to expire this $300 a month drug is $10 I've had this happen. It's a you know amazing if they can keep it out of the generic market That's huge and the way to do that is to finding new clinical use So I don't know which one came first in our collapse here are these these focusing ADHD uses But or as a performance enhancer, but if the Pharmaceutical industry the people that own the patent to that drug can find a new legitimate use they just bought themselves I think another 10 years on the On the patent so this was originally prescribed for schizophrenia and then they were gonna use these peptides for mating Yeah, so here so in terms of the aggression This is really interesting This is the work of a guy at Caltechno David Anderson and he works on mating and aggression and the relationship in Yes, work related to humans and the neighboring lab works on humans but in mice and in humans But these areas of the brain are really conserved this this all we can talk about which brain area But what he discovered is the meaning Sorry that in mice and in humans these brain structures look identical Okay, and that the same classes of neurons exist that if you were to stimulate them because neurosurgeons have done this people go into a rage or An animals if you stimulate them the animals go into a rage in fact There are these videos online they're incredible where this is dye you lens work when she was in David Anderson Labs you take two mice male mouse and female mouse and they're mating right as it were and then they stimulate these neurons because they can do that now And using light believe it or not and those and the male immediately tries to kill the female You can even just put him in a cage alone with a glove filled with air It's walking around you stimulate these neurons and he just goes into a rage right? Just trying to destroy this glove, but here's what's super interesting and no one understands if you put this animal into a cage alone and Stimulate looks pretty normal it doesn't do anything so it's not like it attacks itself You know and every time there's this you know horrible news event like the school shooting thing or something like that I always think you know like what's going on in the there's a certain brain air It's called the ventromedial hypothalamus This is a brain area that's really interesting because it has a population of neurons that control mating you stimulate them and animals We'll just start trying to copulate with basically whatever is around if you give them a choice of their usual preference of you know females if they're male Males if they're female because that's the way mice mice go one or the other They will just try and start mating you stimulate the other group of neurons and they will try and kill the other mouse Is so these are like switches in the hypothalamus? And are these like very distinct? Like when you we talk about like neurons and switches like how do you distinguish between the one? Can you see them like what is the difference great question? So for many decades it was known that if you stimulate this brain area You could get aggression. This is actually Nobel Prize winning work of a guy named whose last name is Hess and What they found was if you stimulate this brain area cats would go into either two kinds of aggression It was either defensive aggression kind of with with you know hair up Or you would stimulate a little bit more and they would do that that you know predatory aggression Right, I'm probably doing this wrong, but you know like ears forward and you know you're the hunter last time I'm still learning about you know animal behavior in this way But what's really interesting is that for years no one could understand Why if you also stimulate this brain area and you used a different pattern stimulation? You get mating behavior and it turns out that the neurons are mixed in there like salt and pepper David Anderson's lab figured out that these are molecularly distinct neurons and What makes them distinct is really interesting if they stimulate only the neurons that have the estrogen receptor? They become aggressive and this again goes back to this thing that we talked about a while ago, which is that testosterone Aromatized converted into estrogen has these incredible effects on aggression and in masculineization of the brain and a lot of people think In fact people heard me say that last time and said oh you're trying to say that it estrogen is doing everything Testosterone is doing no it's that things like testosterone and estrogen control gene expression and so the fact that it's estrogen or testosterone it doesn't really matter it's the fact that these are molecularly distinct neurons They can trigger these neurons and they can get very distinct outputs of behavior But what's crazy is you stop stimulating the animal just goes back to doing whatever and then it goes Oh, yeah, I think I'll try and mate again now eventually the females like hey, this is getting confusing but this It's clear that these sorts of things are also happening in humans, but normally we have kind of a waiting of aggression versus mating behavior Right some people choose to combine those right there's the kind of extremes of that Rape there's rough sex there's all sorts of you know, it's it's uncomfortable for people to think about that but there's a continuum between a aggressive versus approach type behaviors and For whatever reason this drove me to start looking at different mating behaviors of animals online like if you watch ferrets mating It's like he's biting the back of her neck. She's squealing all over the place like this is uncomfortable for some people see some people probably like watching this stuff but you look at animals mating and there's a kind of a Balancing act between you know what looks it's not you wouldn't call it love-making. Let's get at that You'd call it mating. That's pretty aggressive and that's very common in the animal kingdom so is it common in the animal kingdom because in order to have strong genes that pass on You need a strong animal and so they express themselves in this aggressive way to prove to the female that they're strong enough to mate and and procreate Like what is the reason for that sort of aggressive? Is there a reason? Well, it's a great question So there's this theory called hydraulic pressure theory. This is developed by Conrad Lorenz which is another Nobel Prize when who studied animal behavior And here's the idea is that all of these just different populations of neurons are in the hypothalamus This is a little tiny tiny thing. I mean it's the size of like a little gobstopper candy like a little gumball And you've got neurons for aggression neurons for mating neurons that turn on to make sure that you that animals don't try And mate with the wrong species right we take this for granted like how come a cat doesn't try and mate with the dog Now the dog might hump, but that's a different thing altogether So it's all harbored in there and this hydraulic theory is that all of these things are kind of Weighted probabilities so there's never zero probability that any of this will happen unless they're in sleep But maybe it's 10% aggression 80% mating while they're mating Maybe another male enters the arena Now they're sort of like a confusion like am I gonna have to fight or can I keep mating these kinds of things because oftentimes these animals are communal In some way and so the way that Anderson explained this to me and we had a conversation about this recently is that The brain might actually get confused in certain moments that you know and there's also a kind of opioid Pain relief thing that gets released during sexual activity pain threshold goes way up Right and we were talking about this in the context of fetishes because you know If you look at fetishes, they're not random true fetishes are Like it can be pathologies where people actually require The presence of some thing in order to become aroused and those things almost always if you look at true fetishes are things like Feet dead bodies feces animals things that are all very infectious Exactly your facial expression illustrates it perfectly my facial expression for those listening is yuck exactly so You know That's discussed and you have circuits in your brain that are for discussed at or about getting you away from that thing because it's Infectious-putured disgusting and out of context and then you think about sex and food appetite and all that and it's it's all Competitive as they call it it's moving towards it It's bringing in more of those molecules as opposed to trying to get away from like vomit or something But the feet thing isn't like guys like pretty feet You know, we're very visual animals and so it may get crossover individual perception and what arouses people differs Obviously people have their different proclivities, but True fetishes are kind of a confusion of this circuitry right where people Confused or learn arousal associated with something that's actually quite dangerous. I mean you take the extreme one like dead body It's like incredibly normal. No, no, excuse me. Not normal calm like the dead body one Not common not common. Come on enough that you brought it up though Well, I've been reading up on this because I'm I'm fascinated by the primitive as a In addition to the more evolved parts of the brain So the way Anderson describes as you know, you'll see animals mating and then all of a sudden you know he'll bite the back of her neck or sometimes she'll bite him and The theory is that some of the neurons and they've seen this in brain imaging in real time Because they can do that in animals some of the neurons that are responsible for aggression will just suddenly You know spike up there right and and we'll kind of overtake the other behavior and then they'll go back to mating Now when you're talking about studies on animals and they're doing this It's caught that there There's these ethical questions if you're going to do a study on humans if you wanted to stimulate those same neurons and try to Insight aggression or hostility or even arousal, but has anybody done it? They have they have they have so Good friend of mine Eddie Chang is the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF. He's spends his life and he makes his living Probing around in the brain of people who have epilepsy Looking for the site where if they stimulate the person will have a seizure so that they can burn that area out or make some other manipulation and he's told me that he's been poking or you can't poke around at random Right you can't you know every scientist would love to just do that experiment just going in kind of search But there are sites where they'll stimulate Thinking they might evoke a feeling of pleasantness or no feeling at all and the person will go into a rage in the in the OR in the Operator because they're wide awake You know you probably see these things of people with neurosurgery and they're playing the violin things. Yeah, sort Occasionally they'll hit an area where the person will say I'm feeling super angry right now And they'll say let's back off a little bit from there and they'll chart where they were in the brain that is wild So there's just like a spot. Yeah, there is and we have switches right? I mean we have switches for rage switches for all these things I mean that's like the psychologist Carl Jung, you know this idea that we have all things inside of us I mean people vary in their propensity for rage or for Love or for anything but At some level we do have all things inside of us. We have the circuitry within us and do you think that feeling that variation is Neurochemical that there's I think it is neurochemical and I think it is learned as well This peptide that we were talking about earlier becomes relevant in this context So David's lab discovered. There's a peptide called tacky kind in it's related to another molecule That's involved in pain relief called substance P that we all make tacky kind in has a bunch of different forms But in humans there's tacky kind in one and tacky kind in two in mice or humans that are socially isolated for a period of time tacky kind in levels go through the roof This is very relevant to the recent past of around the pandemic in my opinion It goes through the roof and what happens it creates anxiety anger and in particular aggression And so there are drugs that are tacky kind in inhibitors And I asked David I said well why aren't we giving tacky kind in inhibitors to people that are feeling anxious and aggressive and you know kind of tamp that down and we just had yet another school shooting And we could talk about what that's about but or not But and he said this drug is actually approved. It's very safe when you stop. What are you saying? There's a drug that can't but you're saying what that's about but we're not oh is sorry that the The tacky kind in I mean is was it elevated in for instance the kid that went in and shot all those kids in how could they find that out post more? I think they could do what's called mRNA and situ hybridization They could see how much of the gene for tacky kind in was being made. I think they should do post more And I don't know how he was killed if his brain is still intact I think like most people there's very little concern about him and more concern about the symptoms as it should be But just like with CT and football players you'd you want to know where the damage was And also whether or not there was a brain thing there and if that brain thing was there doesn't mean necessarily that he was born with a bad brain He might have been born with a dysfunctional brain but social isolation increases anxiety and aggression There's no question and actually I was in social isolation increases aggression absolutely really absolutely feelings of aggression and kind of friction with the world Us them kind of thinking I was in New York of this a few months back and it was most eerie experience because we were there recording some podcasts and Something came over the news that you know, there was literally killer loose and it was like I'm Brooklyn went into a subway release some smoke bombs and shot people right they found him in the Lower East side walking around So I'm found so like killer on the loose in New York became a real thing for the time We were there no super weird because we're staying down near the Lower East side and They get the guy and what do they say they say the same thing they always say about these guys He was a loner he was socially isolated then you find the angry posts You find the things online, but it's never like oh this okay You've got crazies like the BTK killer and people who were like in their church and stuff But we're so you know sociopathic killers on the on the sly But these kind of random act what seem like random acts of aggression almost always these people were highly socially isolated Which and I'm not evoking sympathy. I want to be very clear. You know, I mean nothing makes me more I think everyone is furious and frustrated about this situation with the shooting But I asked David about this. I was like why aren't these drugs being used or prescribed? And he said because years ago there was a trial at a pharmaceutical company Exploring the role of this drug in schizophrenia for reasons that aren't clear and it didn't work and it cost the company a ton of money So now no companies want to go near it There's this kind of you know black listing of drugs that failed in trials and as a consequence There's probably dozens if not hundreds of very useful medications out there that are just not being explored Hmm so when they do studies on people to try to find out what areas of the brain that you can Ignite to get people hostile. How do they how would they perform those studies? so Unfortunately, I guess fortunately for guys like e-long because they have companies based on this but unfortunately for for kind of the exploratory purposes making this easier They shave the head in a little spot They drill out they make a tiny little hole in the skull and they're lowering electrodes down there And they're the way these electrodes are built. They're not just a single wire It's actually pretty cool. It's like a barrel of wires and they're able to like put them to different depths So you know you imagine a hundred or a thousand wires all at different depths and you know probing around and stimulating at different levels So it's all happening very fast and then They'll hit a spot where the person will say I feel like I'm about to have a seizure or sometimes we'll have a full-blown seizure Like okay, that's that's the spot and so in the kind of poking around the dark They are I mean the brain I'd love to tell you that we understand so much about how the brain works I think we understand a lot but most of what we know about how human brain structures work are from Experiments like the one I just mentioned which is clinically oriented But then you're doing some experimentation along the way or case studies like the famous HM They always give their initials not their names because to maintain an anonymity But we know more about human memory from one guy who had both his hipel camp eye Leesened because he had epilepsy in his hipel camp eye. This is a memory encoding area They kept him in the laboratory for years and studied him and they learned things like you might appreciate this if you Went in and you said hey, I'm Joe nice to meet you. He'd say I am You know whoever he was HM Henry whatever and you'd say great you walk out and come back in and say hi Who are you and you say I'm Joe? I'm gonna tell you a joke. They did this experiment and you tell him a joke and he'd laugh Laugh you leave you come back you tell him the same joke He doesn't remember the joke, but he laughs a little bit less and the next time a little bit less So something in his brain is familiar right this speaks to the importance of novelty and surprise and comedy But he can't remember that he remembers and so that starts to open up all sorts of interesting questions about consciousness and not Wow, so he likes kind of sees it coming But it doesn't know why he sees it come yeah, he doesn't know why it's it's not as funny the second time I mean it's never it was funny the second time right but are the people that are saying it are they saying it with the same enthusiasm Is it the same person? They didn't control They I don't know that they used good comics or good jokes Most of the jokes are pretty lame right they're kind of laboratory-styled jokes which are always lame But they always it my understanding is that a lot of the joke if the laughter of oaking quality of a joke is the surprise Although I have to say when I saw you go do comedy at the Vulcan a few few months ago there's some Bits you call them. Yeah, yeah, okay That you do wear like I'm thinking myself. Oh no, he's not going there. Is he is he really like you're leading us down this path And I'm thinking oh no, he's not gonna say that is he and then you go there and that's what's funny about it So I realized when watching that I took a mental note to myself I was like, okay, so jokes aren't always about getting hit with the surprise sometimes it's You know you're going down this path that is really really uncomfortable. Well comp. It's Very hard to describe what comedy is because you don't even know it unless you're doing it like while you're doing it You're like you're trying to work out bits. It's almost like you're on instinct you're trying to like sort You're almost like you're like the way you're probing the brain the dark You're kind of doing that a little bit with comedy Some of it's sneaky some of that you're like sneaking things in on people you're catching them before they like because like The worst thing is when you know where someone's going and you see the setup and then You anticipate the punchline then the punchline comes and you don't think it's funny because like I thought that myself I saw that coming the best ones are when you think something's gonna happen and then another thing happens Instead and it's even funnier right or when you you get you recognize this thing that this person's saying that you Didn't think other people recognized and you're like yes, right, you know, there's that too But you don't know what you're doing while you're doing it sometimes I saw you do a question and answer part at the end I was there with Lex and he turns to me Like I can't believe he's gonna do this Why not? Because that's real time. I mean I guess you're yeah, you're fucking around. Yeah. Well, it was amazing I mean I think that for us we were just saying like wow like you're for it's two scientists like two super nerds To put yourself into the situation deliberately where you don't know what's gonna happen It's like the worst you're trying everything about science is trying to control variables. It's all about control right This is probably why Lex is still single Just kidding Lex. There's so many there's so many women that want to marry God he's gonna kill me. He's the black values you just do not me. Oh no Lex. I'm so sorry He's over in Russia right now. I hope he comes. He's not real listen. He'll be so far behind on podcast He's not gonna list this one don't worry about it. But I come back with a wife. Maybe yeah, maybe that's his move find himself a nice lady over there I'll understand him Oh goodness, there's so many things I want to say here, but I have to be very careful Whoever Lex marries will be one lucky Woman and vice versa. The only thing I would worry about with Lex is that he's so busy I do not know if he has the time for relationship. We actually discussed that on a podcast I did with him on his podcast. It's gonna be really soon He was talking about whether or not he has time You know like he has time for relationship. He's not sure if he does Well, he's also gonna have to start following a somewhat more normal schedule because these guys basically an Octurnal I get texts from him like four in the morning. Yeah, but that's what he likes. Yeah, he's nothing wrong with it You know, I think some people's minds work best at I bright my best material really late at night What's really late? 23 in the morning, but you get up really right? Yeah Yeah, but it depends on the day like if I state if I write till like three four in the morning I try not to get up before 10 But it's normal days. I'm getting up at seven or maybe even a little earlier But when I come home from shows Often times my mind is very excited and that's when I like to what's what I like to write Yeah, you know, there's a really cool phenomenon where in early in the day or after I we should say After someone's been asleep for a while for that first zero to nine hours of the day I call this phase one just because got to leave everything with a name to make it clear during that time We know that dopamine a adrenaline and cortisol healthy levels of course are highest in your system In those first nine hours you might not wake up quickly, but they're highest and then those start to taper off and Molecules like serotonin start to predominate and the way these molecules like dopamine serotonin they do a lot of different things They're involved in tons of things, but we can generally say that they modulate. They're called neuromodulators They Bias the probability that certain brain circuits in areas will be active and certain ones won't so when dopamine and epinephrine are really churning around in your brain You're really good at linear types of things like math organization working out sets and reps. This does this as this we're going here I tinnoraries where there's a right answer and you're just trying to plug in chug as Serotonin and other molecules kick in which is later in the day and that night The brain becomes much better at these I call this phase two of the day they become so it's like seven to 16 hours Sorry 10 to 17 hours after waking so zero to nine for phase one and 10 to 17 for phase two Your brain is much better at non-linear thinking creative thinking brainstorming Yeah, I don't know what the writing process comedy processes for you, but you know You're doing anything creative you're organizing existing things into new ways You're kind of playing with ideas and it actually can be beneficial to be slightly sedated. This is actually why so many Great writers and musicians and maybe comics have used a little bit of alcohol a little bit of cannabis to put their brain into that kind of Liminal state where you're not you're not super laser-dane. You're not looking for the right answer The right answer just kind of comes to you and for some people they have a hard time accessing that when they're in this hyperdrive mode and Jazz musicians right famous for abusing a lot of substances because jazz is all about the spontaneous incorporation of notes and etc. So I think that late night creativity makes a lot of sense Yeah Tim Dylan and I were just having this conversation because Tim is sober and you know Tim used to have a like a real problem with substances and He says he does his podcast really late at night Like they don't even start filming until like after midnight. That's why he's got the aviator. Yeah, it's proper but it's also like That's sort of his drug, you know like he's sleepy and he's kind of just like half out of it and You know when he puts the sunglasses on he just it's almost like he's in an altered state of consciousness But without having to snort ketamine or whatever the fuck he was doing. You know he's definitely healthier approach The case is smart ketamine. I don't know. I don't know. He's now legal, but please I can't imagine snorting ketamine Is good ketamine is legal though. You can get you could do ketamine therapies which are really weird Like a lot of people are doing them for depression. Why so here I've got Colleagues who study ketamine. I've been spending a lot of time trying to understand how this drug works It's a dissociative anesthetic so it is it's like PCP It works by blocking something called the NMDA and methyl-DS part 8 receptor if people want to look that up this very similar Right Carl Hart was telling me that it's almost the same thing as PCP absolutely this receptor is a receptor that Becomes active only when you're hyper focused on something and it chit and it has the capacity to create brain change in a very dramatic way Sort of because you brain kit they say oh your brain is different five minutes after this conversation It's done something and it has the capacity to create brain change in a very dramatic way. Because you say, oh, your brain is different five minutes after this conversation that was before. That's basically your brain doesn't change unless it needs to. And that signal of need to comes from something that you really intense, really stressful, really exciting, really novel. Makes sense. Why are we programming the machine unless there's a need? And so you have a chemical signal. I mean, basically, it was initially used to block memory formation after trauma. So people would come into the emergency room. Let's just imagine like horrible scenario, right? And someone was just in the passenger seat and watched their closest loved one get impaled on a steering call. That person is in a state of shock and they're never going to forget what they see. So what do you do? You give them ketamine, you try and dampen the plasticity, the brain change that would occur to remember that incredibly traumatic event. Now it's being used as a way to bring people into the clinic or it seems like it is pretty rampant use now and put people into this dissociative state so that they see themselves having an experience. In fact, I've talked to people who've gone through ketamine trials and they describe it as watching themselves get out of their own car. They're like third personing themselves. This to me sounds like a horrible state to be in. But a lot of why is that? I mean, I've been working my whole life to just be comfortable with the body. I'm in and I'd like to stay in it not because it's always comfortable to be there. But because, you know, getting good at that seems to be the key to having a good life being able to tolerate discomfort. This is about getting out of yourself. But isn't the point for these people to try to figure out what they're doing wrong with their life so they can look at it objectively as a third party? Yeah. That makes sense to me that they would look at like for instance their suicidal depression and say, you know, like this, the new AG kind of thing is like you are not your feelings. That's a tough one for people to incorporate because when I have really strong feelings that it certainly feels like it's happening inside me. So this is allowing them to get next to their feelings and see their feelings as an experience, not them. Yeah. I mean, but even when you know that it's definitely happening to you, you know that you are also sometimes not burdened by those feelings. That's right. So it's some sort of external factor or even if it's an internal factor. It's a thing other than the core of what you are. Right. It doesn't define you. I think that's what they're trying to do. They're trying to figure out like why are they so overwhelming at the point where they want to leap off of a cliff? What is causing that? Yeah. And it seems to work quite well for intractable depression as it's called. What's really odd about the fact that it works at least to me is that if you look at the other new emerging very effective treatment for severe depression, it's the exact opposite. It's this incredible work that Matthew Johnson and colleagues are doing out at Johns Hopkins giving people macro doses of psilocybin. I talked to him. We had him on the podcast and he and I asked him like what are your thoughts on micro dosing? And he's like macro dose. And I thought like, well, this is an academic saying this. This isn't like some guy who's you know trying to push psychedelics for his own agenda. This is a guy who's studying these in like purely through the lens of science. Like what are you talking about? What's critical about the macro dose? We'll see macro. What kind of dose you're talking about? I don't know how they dose these, but this would be like in the gram. Gram. I need to check with we should check with Matt before people run off and start and take it. But certainly not micro right there hallucinating their feeling a lot. And I said, what's the key thing? You're seeing success after success after said eating disorders depression, and he said, it seems to be quote unquote letting go. And I'm like, that's not science right? What is letting go? Are you talking about heart rate 50% above baseline? Are you talking about breathe? And he said, there does seem to be something crucial about the people in these trials, experiencing what would normally give them a complete panic attack and being able to just let go and go into the experience without trying to control it, without trying to tamp it down or ramp it up just be in it. What kind of experience that would give them a panic attack? For some people, you know, he said there was one woman who came in I believe it was a woman who there was a painting on the wall and she thought she could jump through it and so that they're holding her back, you know, yeah, they're holding her back. They do give them tools to control their anxiety. So my lab works on a lot of breathing tools for real time rapid control of anxiety and we handed some of those off to Matt so they give these to people as tools. They also have different leaders in there. They have everything because it's a, you know, it's a university say just in case. And he said that the key thing is that they kind of feel overwhelmed, but then they feel supported enough by the therapist to lean into whatever's happening and they stop trying to regulate it and that's where apparently he thinks the breakthrough is. And so that reveals something very fundamental. It says that there's something powerful in terms of long term depression relief that can be learned in those states that has to do with not regulating oneself or one's need to run for safety. And I find that fascinating because, you know, it raises all these questions. For instance, do you need to hallucinate? Maybe not. Maybe it has nothing to do with hallucinations. Maybe it just has to do with getting the person into a state of like real fear and then allowing them to lean into it. I don't know that's a speculation, but I think that what's interesting about all this work on psychedelics is it's clearly working in these clinical trials. I mean, overwhelmingly the data are more positive than negative. And yet no one knows exactly why it's working. No one knows what's being rewired in the brain. There's all this speculation and like, oh, dendrites grow and there's plasticie sure, but like in what direction? I mean, trauma is plasticity too. So something powerful is happening under these under the control of these psychedelic drugs in these clinical settings that are teaching people something valuable they can export. And it everyone has a different narrative like, oh, I saw this face or the green, green ones or whatever, you know, melting reality. But it seems to be the ability to let go of the attempt to control one's internal state. The one of the weird things they found out when they started studying people while they were under the influence of psilocybin was the lack of brain activity. Do you wear that? Well, I know there's more. So that the receptors for psilocybin are many, but one of the main ones is the serotonin 2c and 2a receptor. And those are in this layer of the cortex, the outer lining of the brain called layer five, which is extensively involved in lateral connections. And so it's absolutely true that you see more broad activation of the brain by any one stimulus. You know, show someone a picture. It's very broad compared to when they're not on these drugs. And when you brought in the amount of activity, I could imagine you reduced the total amount of activity in one and any one area. But my understanding is that these brain states are just so atypical. They're not like anything you see in sleep or dreaming, although they're similar. Right. There was a guy at Harvard for years, Alan Hobson, the genius and neuroscientists, he was saying dreams are repetitive. They help people through trauma. It's part of the trauma release process, blah, blah, blah, and psychedelics basically mimic that. And he may very well be right. He may very well. But they also mimic normal human neuro chemistry, right? Like the most potent ones like DMT and even psilocybin is some sort of relationship to DMT. Isn't it like when it's when the body processes it, isn't it something like four, four loxie and dimethylchipped to mean? Like there's some things that are happening while your body is processing it, that mimic what is actual possible for your brain to produce. That's right. I mean, you have two component parts. One is made by the pineal and the other is naturally made by neurons and those have to be brought together. I've never done an Iowa Oscar journey. Admittedly, I've just haven't done it. Have you done mushrooms? In my youth, you know, back in the old days? Back in the old days. And not responsibly. Right. I regret it. Because I was a wild punk rock skateboarder kid. I was not this, you know, I was a university professor. And honestly, I regret doing it at a time when my brain was so plastic. I wish if I'd done it, I would have done it in like clinical trial and gotten data and that kind of thing. But I'm a nerd. But you could always do it again. Sure. Yeah. I think that... Have you thought about it? Well, I was part of a clinical trial looking at, this was originally intended to be three dose of MDMA. I did two and then I decided that was enough. This, again, was part of a clinical study. I found it to be incredibly beneficial. I mean, I thought I was a nice guy before. But it made me... It made me not afraid to feel feelings. And I think before that I could feel from the neck up and from the waist down. But I had this block. And I remember taking MDMA. There's a physician there. They're talking to you. And all of a sudden I felt like... Not something like a crazy person. But this is how it felt since... It was my sensation perspective. As if my body had been in Saranarat before and it was just kind of unzipped. And from that point on, I've been able to feel things body wide. And then I started thinking about all sorts of things. Like, I have an unusual number of deaths and losses in my life for somebody who wasn't in the military or didn't grow up in the inner city. It just had some bad luck. Like, you know, new people that had bad luck. And all of a sudden I was able to kind of digest that and think about it in a more reasonable way. I think before that I was just packed it away. Just work, work, ignore it. Or try and sublimate it or turn it into anger or fuel. Which, you know, it couldn't be its own use as you know. But at some point I was like, you know, I think I need to actually spend some time on this. And yeah, I think it made me a nicer person to myself. Yeah, I think there's real benefit in those things. Whether it's MDMA or so-side and I think there's real benefit in a lot of them. And I think there's definitely benefit in macro, but I think there's benefit in micro, too. I know a lot of people that micro dose and they just feel like an elevated mood all throughout the day. I don't think you're going to get these sort of transformative life-changing experiences where you transcend whatever it means to be a person and get a chance to look at yourself and look at the way you interface with reality in a different way. But I think what it does do is it alleviates a certain amount of anxiety and tension for people and it allows them to have a more enjoyable experience just in like regular everyday life without being intoxicated. That's the key. It's like it doesn't change the way you, your motor functions are, doesn't change your visual, well, it does actually improves your visual, which is really weird. I forget who the scientist was, but he did study on being able to recognize whether or or not, it was like edge detection and being able to recognize the changing in parallel lines. And he did it, see if we can find out who this scientist was, but he was a very straight lay scientist, he wasn't a whack job. And his joke was it seems like you can detect reality better when you're high than when you're not high. He says people that were on civil side and were able to detect, so if you have two parallel lines and they move one slightly off parallel, the people on civil side and were able to detect your quicker. Then the people that were sober. I believe that for a number of reasons. Well, first of all, civil side ended at a basic level. When we think of it as like a drug, but it's like in many ways it's a lot like they still call SSRI's like Prozac's a little off in those things that they work on serotonin, it mainly increases serotonin, but different receptors than things like Prozac and so a lot. The ability to, that would be, we call that a psychophysics experiment. They'd vary that ever so slightly as you described. The thresholds for that are going to be different for different people, but if anything that can more narrowly tune attention is really going to help. I was surprised to learn this. I'd be curious what your thoughts are. I'm not a cannabis smoker. I just never really liked it. But I had a guest on my podcast named Paul Conte, he mainly works. He's an MD mainly works on trauma. Incredible trauma therapist and has written about trauma, wrote the book on trauma that I think is the one in my opinion. And then we got into a discussion about different substances and do they have application. So we talked about ketamine, et cetera. Asked about alcohol just by way of comparison. He said there are basically zero therapeutic uses for alcohol, therapeutic. But then I asked about cannabis. Now this isn't something he does in his own clinic. He does talk therapy, not drug therapy. Although he's a sick address so he can prescribe things. He said cannabis is interesting and it may actually have some therapeutic potential, but the main effect of cannabis is to narrow attention and focus. It actually can increase attention and focus. Now the problem is it's not a very good filter. So people can narrowly attend to just video games or just to their anxiety if they're already anxious. That's a problem. But when it comes to psilocybin, psilocybin seems to increase creative thinking, new kind of new rules and algorithms about what could be an answer. So I'm not aware of how it might directly impact visual perception unless it narrows focus. But most of the drugs that impacts serotonin are going to increase focus to some degree or another. And that can be good if what you're focusing on is pleasant. It can be really bad if what's you're focusing on is really unpleasant. I knew people, I'm sure you don't, who just smoke weed and they have a panic attack. Yeah. The smoke weed thing is a weird one because it's like many things that's completely dependent upon the individual. Like they're individual genetics, their biology, whatever it is that they've had in their past. I know people that smoke marijuana and they're high functioning. And I know people that smoke marijuana and they don't get anything done. And I don't know if they're relate. Those two things are related. I think people who generally have drive and discipline, marijuana gives them a break. It gives them a nice little, just a little rest stop. And I think that's probably beneficial. And I also think it makes it a little kinder, a little more compassionate, a little more sensitive, which is probably very beneficial to someone who's hyper focused. Like people that are like type A personalities and trying to get things done all the time, you smoke a little potting like what am I doing? What the fuck is it? It's fucking relax a little. And then you get back to it. You're right. I think it's, that's, there's a great benefit to that. But I should also say that it's very popular in the Jiu Jitsu world. Oh yeah. I always thought that had something to do with the kind of creativity part of it. Like that you can't plan Jiu Jitsu. Right. You have to improvise. Yeah, there's jazz in a lot of ways. There's definitely that, but it's also the focus thing that you're only thinking about that. Like while you're rolling, you're really only thinking about rolling while you're smoking cannabis and then rolling your hyper focused on it. And physical strength, you feel fine. You don't feel lethargic. And don't, not at all. I actually enjoy it. I actually enjoy when I lift weights too. Oh, I haven't tried that. Yeah, I feel it. Like I feel it in the fibers. It's almost like I'm more aware of like what's going on instead of like this, uh, blunt, sort of, um, you know, you know, almost a distance from each individual muscle fiber, which I am normally normally I'm just trying to warm up and then I warm up and then I start getting going and then I, you know, lift light first and then I work my way up to what I normally use. But when I'm high, it's like I could feel like we're next to the bone. And that just, I feel everything. It just makes you more sensitive about what you're actually doing. And for, um, martial arts techniques, particularly for striking, I feel like I incorporate leverage better into things. I'm, I have better balance in terms of like not trying to execute a technique when I'm off position. You know, and it just makes me, uh, just more aware of like what's going on with my body. And that's super powerful. We had the nerd in me once they neuroscience, they call that interoception. Like people very tremendously in their awareness of their internal state. You can know if you have a higher low degree of interoception by trying to count your heart beats without taking your pulse. Some people can just do that. It's a skill you can build up over time. This is great for some people, but some people were highly anxious. sucks to have a lot of interoception. But we know of course that the mind muscle connection is really powerful. And it's not just mind muscle connection as a whatever they call bro science thing. The reality is that from peer reviewed studies that if people focus on the contraction of a muscle during resistance training as opposed to moving the weight, right? Something that's hard to measure if they're actually doing it, the strength and hypertrophy gains are much greater. Mm hmm. I think it's like a 15%. I had Andy Galpin on the podcast and he would know the exact number. But I always wonder about this. Like in gyms where they're mirrors and people are watching themselves lift in the mirror. I mean, you're ex-terocepting. You're not focused as much as you could on the actual feeling. So you know, there's always a waiting between extra reception to the out everything beyond the confines of your skin and interoception. And if cannabis allows more interoception, you could imagine that those workouts would be more effective in that way. But isn't there benefit to observing yourself in a mirror because you make sure that you use the proper technique? Absolutely. I mean, I've right. I mean, you always see those people like shoulders, hunch, and they're making a mess of themselves overworking their strong parts. And, you know, I mean, some people walking the gym and it's clear they've never actually looked at the lower half of the mirror. That's the saddest thing. That's so sad. That weird. The skip leg day thing is a cruel joke, but it's a cruel joke in the right direction because there's nothing worse than an imbalanced physique. I mean, where someone has done a lot of work to try and create something. It's so bad for your body. It's like having small legs on a large upper body is so unhealthy. You like for sure your lower back is going to be flocked. Well, structurally and also just nearly, you know, again, as a neuroscientist, you think the nerve to muscle connections, what contracts fibers. And you think about somebody who's, you know, big upper body, small legs, that person that neurons in their brain that represent their body are also completely contorted. Now, but what do you think about a person? Like, I bring him up all the time because he's so odd. John Jones, like John Jones has the smallest calves of any man I've ever seen who's in the elite athlete. And obviously he's in elite athlete. He's one of the greatest fighters of all time. And even now, while he's worked his way up to heavyweight, he hasn't fought in two years because over that time he's been building himself up. And now he's like a legit 255 pounds. He's fucking huge, tiny calves. Well, what's going on there? What's really interesting is if you look at elite sprinters. Is that real? Yeah. So look how short the muscle bellies are on his calves. But if you look at elite sprinters, Olympic sprinters, they'll have big legs. But if you look at, and sometimes they'll have big bulging calves, but their calves are very short, that's actually going to lend itself to sprinting. You don't see many Pacquiao calves on sprinters. Interesting. Not good ones anyway. But he's not a sprinter. No, but he's got a lot of explosive power from what I understand. Oh, yeah. I mean, I'm not a knowledgeable about MMA. Pretty much everything I know about MMA, I've learned from you and from Lex. So look at him there. Even at 255 pounds, I mean, he's got tweezers done there. He's very small calves, which is, it's really unusual for someone who's built the way he is. But his explosiveness out of those calves is probably met by that short muscle belly. Well, he's not the fastest guy. And his whole thing is he's the best at controlling distance, because he's very tall, especially for light heavyweight, not going to be as tall for heavyweight. But he's fantastic at controlling distance. And if you're a person who wants to maximize your, like you have a certain amount of weight you can be, you could be 200 or five pounds. And that's it. If you want to be championship weight at 205 pounds, he's got the perfect physique. So he's really long long arms and legs. Long arms and legs. So you can't get close to him. And he's a fantastic striker. And he uses those arms and long legs in a great way with his wrestling and his submissions because he has fantastic leverage. He's really like the perfect build for fighting. How tall do you say he was? He was a six plus. I think, yeah, he John is six, three, six, four. Is he back in it? I know he had a steroid pop, but is he back? Oh, yeah, I know he's back. That was a long time ago. That's the steroid pop is a weird one, man. You know, he kept six, four. So he just skinnied. Yeah. For it's six, four, 205 pounds. Exactly. He kept, you know, I don't know what happened. But the story was that he got some tainted supplements, right? Which, uh, Marmin, I betrot. The problem is he just laughed when this. Yeah. Last time we were talking about the Decobrito, the, the, the, the, I mean, anyway, sorry, go on. I just, I couldn't help but chuckle. But some guys do get tainted supplements. That's a real issue. You know, I know, one of the ways I know it's a real issue is we didn't get, uh, um, steroid, the, what happened? We didn't get steroids that showed up in, um, on its supplements. But when we were initially starting out, we used this, uh, third party company that would, uh, mix our ingredients. And they would mix ingredients for other supplement companies as well. You know, it was a company that packaged stuff for you. And so we did third party tests on some of our stuff. And we'd find vitamins in there that weren't supposed to be in there. And then we were, just trace amounts and we realized, oh, they're getting it from the vats. Like these guys aren't cleaning the vats properly that they used for the previous supplement. Now if you're getting a lot of cheap stuff, particularly if you're getting stuff that's made overseas, that's the same companies that are making steroids. So they're making, you know, wherever it is in China, what have you, they're, they're allowed to do that or whatever. It's not regulated. So there's guys that are buying off the counter real normal supplements that are supposed to be steroid free that have steroids in them. Now there's also unscrupulous companies that will add steroids to their products just to make them more beneficial, just to make them more functional. And that, that's, that's true too. So this guy named Tim Means, he got busted with tainted supplements. And if you look at Tim, he does not at all look like a guy who takes steroids. I mean, not at all. And he was just taking some normal stuff that he bought from some health food store. And it turned out he popped for a very small trace amount of this stuff. Previous test is nothing. And then this tiny small amount, which would indicate that, and this is what they said about John as well, the problem with what John did was like John tested negative and then he tested positive. But the positive amount was so small that like it's almost like he's getting off of it. So he would have to be on it for a long period of time. Like he'd have to be on it for weeks in order to reap any benefit. But meanwhile, it was less than that time ago he was negative. And now he's got this trace amount in his system. So there's a lot of things that seem to lean towards the idea that he was accidentally dosed that it took a tainted supplement. However, there's, you know, more plates, more dates. Yeah, Derek Derek. Yeah, like Derek, I was really pleased to see him on here. Love that guy. This is great. He's great. And I love his show and he's super, super knowledgeable. And he calls bullshit. But he calls bullshit on a lot of guys in the UFC and he goes over there a specific blood work. And what he was concerned with was more the testosterone to epithetop, epithet testosterone ratio. He said it was off, way off, and not normal. And also the amount of testosterone that John had, the free testosterone in the system. He also felt was so low that it seemed to indicate that he was coming off exogenous hormones and that, you know, there's maybe some masking don't going on or whatever. But it was enough to make John ban him. He blocked him on social media. Which, Derek goes, that seems to indicate, you know, he hit a sore spot. Yeah, the blocking, the blocking move implies a, a worry at the very least. Or he had Derek goes deep. Yeah, he goes really deep. went over Paul, there's like quite a few guys that he, who Paul coast is another guy who's built like a bodybuilder. He's like a freak specimen. And he kind of calls bullshit on him too. He calls bullshit on a lot of these guys. Yeah. And the lines have become really blurry because there's, you know, it used to be if anyone was taking any exogenous androgens, they were quote unquote on steroids. But now of course there's TRT, which is up to 200 milligrams per week. If you can't do that in MMA, it's not legal. No, that's not allowed. But I looked over the list for Duncan French sent me the list that they have for UFC athletes. It's interesting. I still want us to download Jeff Novett's ski sometime. Jeff's very interesting guy. Yeah. I mean, he would definitely have a conversation with you about this. He's also a guy that is really honest about what they can and can't catch. He's like, there's a real problem. And also honest about the list of band supplements. If you go to the U.S. Auto website, the amount of shit that you can't take because it's tainted, it's crazy. It's like hundreds of supplements. Or because it works. Yes. Last time I was on here, we talked about Tonga Ali. And there are now additional papers showing that yeah, it raises testosterone and estrogen a little bit in parallel with that. It looks like it's not going to cause people to flag red in most leagues. But the increases are not what one sees with. What about Tarkestron? Tarkestron hasn't really been looked at by it's not on the list that I saw. But it's supposedly pretty fucking effective. Yeah, it works through this estrogen blocking mechanism and it seems pretty effective. Derek sent me some of them yet to take it. But there are things that are short acting that, for instance, women in a lot of women's sports, they'll use low dose oxangirlone anovar, which is DHT dihydrotestosterone. It doesn't convert estrogen. That's the stuff that makes you hair fall out. Exactly. And makes beard grow. And it also hardens people up. It gives them that really dense look. And people will take it before workouts because it immediately makes you feel pretty quickly, makes you feel kind of aggressive and like you want to train not angry aggressive, but you want to move your body. But then it also blunts and a lot of doctors prescribe it for this reason. It reduces sex hormone binding globulin, SHBG. There are a lot of things out there that can reduce SHBG. SHBG is what prevents testosterone from being free testosterone. And I asked a Tia, Peter Tia, like what's the healthy level of free testosterone that a normal person should have, normal male should have? And he said it should be about 2% of your total testosterone. And there aren't a lot of tools to do that. So someone has a testosterone of 1,000 and their free testosterone is 5. That's bad. You'd expect it to be up in the 20. So the oxangirlone anovar can adjust that, but it also can crank up liver enzymes. But it's very fast acting. So a lot of athletes, especially female athletes, will take this in the short run and then train with it, cut with it. That's how they get the, like I have this theory. And again, this is just theory. There are a lot of these female CrossFit athletes that get those turtle shell abs. Some of them might have low body fat to begin with. But sometimes you'll see a look and you just have to, you know, you're projecting. But it's like, okay, they're taking something. They don't look androgenized, but they look like they're definitely taking something. Why could speak for the Jiu-Jitsu world? And especially in competitions where they're not testing, there's a lot of girls that are taking things. I have a friend who used to day to grow, who's a competitor and she started doing steroids and he started getting weirded out. But it could have been some large men's are real things. She didn't get that yet yet. This was quite a few years ago, but he was just weirded out that she was like taking testosterone and just to try to, you know, be better at strangling people. But it's really unregulated in a lot of ways. Like, I mean, some Jiu-Jitsu competitions test, but they kind of test in the realm of the old UFC testing where it's really just an IQ test. Because if you're smart, you know what to take and when to get off of it, when to cycle off before you weigh in and, you know, it's not that big of an issue. But these in between competitions is where they're making all their gains. Right? So in between competitions, what you saw it does is they do random drug tests throughout the year. And even Derek says even that, like, you can get away with it. He explained what they're testing for and why you can get away with it in multiple videos. And I don't want to fuck it up because the science of it, I'm sure I'll butcher. But he's very skilled at all that. I mean, I think that testosterone replacement therapy part has also contaminated the public discussion. Like I really appreciate that years ago, you just kind of outed with you. Like, yeah, you know, TRT. But I've been telling people from the moment I started taking it, I'm not ashamed of it. I don't know why. Not only that, like, I'm interested in all kinds of things that make my body function better. And I'm also interested in telling people. I would never take something and not tell people that I was taking it. If it was good, I'm like, if it was good, why wouldn't I tell you? And if it wasn't good, why would I take it? Like, so if I'm taking something and it doesn't work, I'll tell you that. I'll tell you, it doesn't work. But if I'm taking something that works, like I don't understand this fear of expressing, you know, what supplements you're on and what things you're taking. It's very bizarre to me. Yeah, I don't know what part of human psychology that reflects either. I mean, I think that, I mean, look, it's clear that testosterone. What's wrong with what things you're taking? It's very bizarre to me. Yeah, I don't know what part of human psychology that reflects either. I mean, I think that it's clear that testosterone, whether or not it's replacing or maxing out or whatever, I'm not maxing out like super physiological doses, but to raise testosterone through injection or whatever of sip unaide and reasonable dosage with the doctor, you feel better. You effort feels good, you recover quicker, etc. There are limits to that, right? Think vert estrogen, it has to be done properly, but that's very clear. Yeah, you don't want to have hyper physical levels. No. No, you get people retain water, they get puffy, they get really emotional, they get gynecomastia, there's all sorts of issues. And then there is this issue that if there's a pre-existing prostate cancer, it can make it worse, but I don't think there's any evidence that it can cause prostate cancer. Actually, probably the opposite. If estrogen is too high into testosterone is too low, that's actually worse for prostate health. I mean, young guys don't tend to get prostate cancer, they can, but it's pretty rare. But in general, as it relates to sports, it's tricky because, for instance, last time I kind of walked around this issue, but this time I'll just say it. I mean, I don't like basketball anyway enough that I would worry that it would be. I know someone who's a professional basketball player and I asked him about steroids. And he said, well, if you get injured, you can take up to 200 migs a week, which is considered a TRT dose. But that's actually a pretty big dose. That's a one typical one mill injection. That's a significant difference. That's going to put... Hold on, is it a one mill liter? So the typical dosage of testosterone is 200 milligrams per mill. So one CC is how many milli- One mill. So these guys are taking two? No, they're taking one of those a week is what they're allowed to take. That's fucking huge. Because most people are either brachate. We talked about this, I think before, but breaking that up into some smaller injections amounts is probably better to just keep androgen levels more reasonable. What's a normal level that people take per week? 100 to 200 milligrams per week is pretty typical. Typically spread out. So typically spread out. Two tenths of a CC. So if you're thinking CC is like someone might divide that into. So half a CC on Monday, half a CC on Thursday. Right? That's a reasonable thing. But that's still a lot. I mean half a CC? Yeah. I couldn't take that much. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Most typical now people will take somewhere. It pays to think about it in milligrams. People will take somewhere between 10 and 40 milligrams every third day or so. Right? You just think about that. So about 40 really? Yeah. Somewhere between 10. Yeah. Because some people came into it with their testosterone at 650. And when you talk about replacement nowadays, people will prescribe 40. So hot. 40 milligrams every three or four days. Still 120 milligrams per week or so. That seems all. 40 on Monday, 40 on Wednesday, 40 on Friday. I take 1.5 every four days. 1.5. Yeah. Like, if you look at a 1 CC, you take the little point. Yeah. That's 30 milligrams every four days. Yeah. But you probably have 9.5 is 30. Okay. Wait. Which I, is it 0.15 or 1.5? 1.5. Like, you know, like if 1 CC is 10. So your take is 10. Yeah. It's like that big. Yeah. But with it's 200 migs per mill. So for every little notch on there, every major notch on there, not the little tiny ticks, but every little, that's going to be 20 milligrams. That's what, so even so what, so if it reads 1, that's 20 milligrams. So it goes 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, up to 1 if it's a 1 ml syringe, 1 CC. 1 CC. And so are you taking the whole syringe worth every four days? No, no, no, no. Then you're taking far less. Just to the number one at 10. The point one. Yeah. So you're doing the point one. So you're taking, I'm taking point one point, like, point one. It reads, it reads 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 1. It reads point one. When you get to 10, that's 1 CC. Correct. I take 1.5. Every, every 40. So you are taking, you're taking a very low dose. You're taking, if it's 200 migs per mill, which almost certainly it is in this country to this ostrich and sipping it. It's going to be, you are taking 30 milligrams every four days. So someone, some people take up to four. We'll take, some people are taking essentially more than three times what you're taking is allowed according to this player. Right? I don't want the NBA to come after the most people. Either, yeah. Either they're going to come after me to fit. Yeah. Looking into an article about just to see what they were saying. This is on ESPN a couple years ago. It was like the, it's a little secret that nobody knows about. They're talking about sleep deprivation. The whole article is about sleep deprivation. But testosterone is mentioned a bunch. What, what about sleep deprivation? You know, I was reading something about that with sleep deprivation and jet lag. They were talking about one of a game that was played where the players flew in the day of and didn't have the best performance. And they were talking about it. WNBA game recently. The players were complaining about it. Not WNBA. Oh, it was regular NBA. Yeah. I just know that that happened at WNBA game like last week. They were complaining about that. But it does happen in the end. It must be a factor like you'd never do that in a fight. Oh, huge. Are they talking about it? Dropped these players down to like a 20 year old down to a guy with, that was like, should have been in his 50s. Oh, so they did a test on their testosterone. Okay. So, Hoier and his staff considered their efforts to counter sleep loss like deep breathing exercise to optimize sleep to be all but a band aid for a broken bone by the 2014-2015 lawyer and his staff had fully committed to their investigation of sleep deprivation tracking 18 players over multiple teams in each conference. When the season began, those players testosterone levels ranked on average in the 88th percentile compared to males their own age. After two months of NBA play and traveled, their levels had fallen to the 70th percentile. By March, the 30 second percentile, a 64% drop in just five months. So that's just being worn the fuck out. I mean, I get called a lot, do some work with military, do some work with any kind of high performance teams that are dealing with this kind of thing. They want to know how can we maintain hormone levels and performance and you always start with get regular sleep as much as you can. It's everything and how do you, you know, one night no big deal, but two nights three nights you're impaired and a lot of these guys also are really disciplined but some go out and party afterwards and that whole thing. So it's always maximize exposure to sunlight in the first half of the day. Number one thing for just making sure that you sleep well that night and then limiting artificial light exposure by dimming lights from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m. Very few people do those two things but they have an outsized effect on sleep and there's a really nice study out of Israel this last year that show that if you had people this was men and women, go outside for 20 minutes three times a week and try and expose as much of their skin as they possibly could to sunlight while still being decent. Right. That it raised testosterone and estrogen significantly. Why? Because skin isn't just an organ to tattoo and protect our organs. It's a organ that actually functions as an endocrine as a hormone organ like vitamin D. This kind of thing. And there was this whole pathway that delineated in this study really interesting based on carat no sites which are these skin cells in p53 which is a cell cycle molecule. Super interesting it showed getting sunlight on your body getting sunlight exposure to your eyes early in the day. Increases testosterone and estrogen increases feelings of well being improves sleep etc. It's like all the things we know. Right. But people are think are finally catching on to this and even though I kind of blab about this ad nauseum on my podcast people always say well can't I just crank up my phone really bright in the morning and sit there there's always this kind of negotiating. Like you're not going to out negotiate the sun. Right. And then people think oh the sun that's really kind of woo technology. No. We evolved to get sunlight during the day and to avoid light at night. Have they done studies on people that live in like say the Pacific Northwest where they don't get a lot of sunlight and whether or not that affects their testosterone and estrogen? Yeah. So they definitely it depends on where they start out because there's some genetic variation. The variation in testosterone levels is huge hence the huge reference range of like 300 nanograms per Tesla year all the way up to you know 1200 right. And this is what makes TRT kind of a tricky topic but more seasonal depression for sure. Greater requirement for sunlight viewing but the in order to keep mood high and hormone levels high. But the good news is people that are very susceptible mood wise and hormone wise to lack of sunlight respond best when they start getting light. So there's a really nice study that looks at like night owls and people that don't get much sunlight during the day. If they start doing getting some caffeine exercise and sunlight in the early part of the day. Yeah. Just to ramp up their energy levels early on get them outside but also eating in the earlier part of the day. You know just trying to bring their active schedule into the earlier part of the day. It doesn't caffeine just make you feel like you're not tired. So this is a really cool mechanism. There's actually a trick to avoid the daytime afternoon crash. It's not a trick. It's biology. But caffeine is an adenosine antagonist. It basically as the longer you're awake, a denticine or a matwalk was a adenosine. A denticine builds up in your bloodstream. It's what makes you feel fatigued. Caffeine essentially blocks the adenosine receptor. But then when caffeine wears off, the adenosine that's still around binds to that receptor and you crash. You feel really sleepy. So one thing that you can do is when you wake up in the morning, don't ingest caffeine for the first 90 minutes or so. Like really push that off so that the adenosine and adenosine receptor interactions can all take place and dissipate. Then you drink caffeine and what you'll find is that if normally you would crash around two or three in the afternoon, you don't experience that crash anymore. Because the caffeine wears off, but there isn't a lot of adenosine there to bind the receptor. The crash that I experienced from caffeine is lack of caffeine or caffeine and then getting off it is nothing compared to the carb crash. Carb crash for me, like if I have a sandwich, like if I go to like a fucking Jimmy Johns or something and have a big giant sandwich. How often does that happen? Very rarely. But when I do, I'm like, what's wrong with you? They used to play a place called Cavaritas in the Valley that I used to go to and they would have these meatball subs. They were fucking sensational and sausage and pepper subs is like an old time Italian, deli and every time I would eat one, I would just go into a coma. But you are mostly low carb meat. Yes. I actually talked to Paul Saladino a while back and you guys now eat fruit as part of the carnivore diet. Well, I do. Yeah, some people don't. Some people are just eating meat and that's it. That's their whole life. You know, that's rough. Is it rough? Well, I mean, I love meat. Right. I really do. But I love vegetables and fruit also. But I do like a nice bowl of rice or oatmeal after I train. I'm kind of old school that way. Yeah, no, I eat butter and cheese and all that kind of stuff. I don't do it in huge amounts. I mean, I do a little bit to butter and a little bit to cheese. I try and limit it, but I do love tortellini and pasta and pizza. I try not to eat it, but I love it. That's not the problem. The problem is the way it makes my body feel. It just doesn't feel good. I feel it shit. I feel like I ate glue. You know, by the way, though, some pasta makes me feel less like that. And I don't know what that is. And, you know, I speculate on, I don't know how much you've looked into glyphosate how much of an impact glyphosate contamination has on people. Because we looked out at the other day, there was a study that showed how they went over a bunch of different things, different plants and produce and things. And the amount of glyphosate they found was pretty stunning. Glyphosate, which is round up, which is a very common pesticide or herbicide, I guess. Is it herbicide? Is that a herbicide? Well, I forget. But either way, it's fucking really bad for you. And there's many people that speculate that what a lot of people are calling gluten sensitivities is really you're having a reaction to glyphosate. I mean, I should be clear. I try and eat plain rice or oatmeal. When I do eat, they got clean carbs if they're such a thing. I hear you. I mean, if I eat a lot of carbohydrates, I crash. Do you know anything about glyphosate? Well, I was in Copenhagen recently. I was going to talk about totally unrelated things. But earlier in the week, Dr. Shaina Swan was there. I think she was on here. This is the woman who wrote that once. Shaina Swan, excuse me. And she gave the talk about the phthalates. The world's most impossible to pronounce word. Starts on the pee. It's like ophthalmology. They're ophthalmologist that can't spell ophthalmology. I'm an ophthalmology department. I see it misspelled all the time. Her talk was amazing. And you asked about kind of regional differences and relate to light in terms of testosterone. But what I took away from her talk was that people who live in rural areas because of the use of pesticides that sperm counts into testosterone counts are way way down. They're really suppressed in those areas. And stunningly. And I mean, why that isn't front page news. I don't know. I mean, maybe there's a political side to it. Maybe there's not. This is also recent finding. I mean, I believe it was 2015 when they figured out the phthalate connection with people's dip in testosterone, dip in sperm count. And then also an uptick in women having miscarriages. But I would think that would be from maybe just the way my. I think the problem is there's no solution. And so when there's no solution to something like that, plus it could harm the economy. Like I think people panic. And those they don't know what to do about something like that. If there's a thing and this thing has a solution like, you know, like, oh, don't drink this, eat that. Because if you drink this, this fucks you up. But if you eat that, you're going to be good. You know, that's something that they would talk about. But when something like this, when you find out that the average person eats a credit card size portion of plastic and microplastics every week, one that that's a little weird too, right? We try to figure that out the other day. The calculation that might be a little figgy. You guys actually did the math. Like something now there's an article that sort of described how they modeled it, like how they came up with that credit card thing. It's like clearly variable, right? Like some people will have more. Some people have less. But when they say the average person, it's like, it's a little. But the point is that's a real issue. And that's one thalates or one thing. Round up is another one. This glyphosate thing is a real issue. And apparently it's in a lot of foods. Yeah, I don't eat many processed carbohydrates. I mean, I look more and more at what we eat at home and it's stuff not in packages. But I don't know if you'd be get away with it. I think glyphosate is commonly used thing and just on crops. I don't know if like by eating clean, you're getting away from glyphosate contamination. So like if I rinse the organic strawberries, I could still be ingested. I don't know. I mean, the problem is it's only legal. It's legal here. But that shit has been like eliminated from a lot of countries. A lot of countries don't want people taking that in. But in this country, it's like widely used. Like how many, how many countries allow glyphosate use? Or how many countries have outlawed glyphosate? I mean, I feel like you can do things to offset some of the damage. Like getting sunlight, getting exercise, trying to eat well. But yeah, not direct compensators. Look at this. Following the landmark case against Monsanto, which saw them being found liable for a four-burg groundskeeper, 46-year-old Dwayne Johnson's cancer, 32 countries to date have banned the use of glyphosate. The key ingredient in Monsanto's Roundup weed killer. Okay, because it's so it's an herbicide. Yeah. It's some scary shit. I saw Dwayne Johnson. I thought the rock was different to Wayne. Different to Wayne. It's a fork, fairly common name of Dwayne. But that, but someone, I was reading this whole thing about someone equating gluten sensitivities with glyphosate, because they were saying that how much of wheat is contaminated with glyphosate. And they were saying that maybe what people are calling gluten sensitivities with some folks, it might be actually that. Well, her talk freaked me out. And this freaks me out because I care a lot, maybe I'm getting old, or because I care a lot about next generation. I really do. I mean, I feel like I've kind of made it through the shoot. If I get hit by a bullet cancer or something tomorrow, like I've had a really good life, I want to keep going. But I worry. I think about the school shooting thing. I worry about what that represents at a larger thing in terms of just people feeling that disenfranchised and then people feeling that scared and concerned all the time, the things like that are going to happen. And if you can't trust the food, you eat. What can you trust? Right. I'm not a paranoid person, but I like to think that we are emerging or have emerged from the last few years, the whole pandemic bit with people more focused on what they can and need to do for their own health. Some people. It seems that way. But then again, on social media, you get a limited window. But I worry tremendously that people are still waiting for some large governing body to deliver the school lunch that's going to make everybody healthy. Like I think it's very clear at this point that everybody has to take responsibility for their own health. And that's two things that's learning information and then trying the things that are going to, you know, accessing the things that are going to work. I mean, that's a huge part of what my life's about these days. And this is why I find that whether or not it's a discussion about carnivore diets or vegan diets, I mean, I look at the debates around that and I just have to chuckle mostly about the way that debates are playing out because it's so theatrical, like, liver king on the one hand and then these like, do we be vegan scientists, many of whom I'm not talking about Stanford colleagues of course, but others that are just like so combative in different spheres. And there's no solution to come from that. Yeah, the liver king thing drives me nuts because that guy's on steroids. Well, just shut the fuck up. So he I know he's eating really healthy. It's clear he's eating all these animal foods and, you know, he's eating organ meat, which is very rich in nutrients. That's true. But he's dodging the main bullet. It's too late from now because he said no. Yeah. Even on TRT, he's he should come out and just say it. Well, look at it because I mean, just do you know how rare it is to have a physique like that and not be on steroids? You would have to be in the 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.1% of the human population, just the rare genetic freaks. I mean, I don't care how much you lift weights like that is a freak physique. Like pull up a photo that dude. One of his main assertions and others have made this assertion is that when you eat an organ like a testicle or a liver that the nutrients in that organ are specifically channel to the organ that it would most benefit. Is that real? I mean, that's true. I mean, that might be that looks like I mean, am I going to just if I were to just put that through my knowledge of hormones and biology and I would say TRT. Oh, that got you had the photo, but I'm saying what you just said. Oh, so the direct note. So there's no evidence that I am aware of that if you eat, say, liver that the nutrients are specifically directed towards your liver, right? There's no evidence. No, there's some old old studies using radioactive labeling of organs, having animals in just those organs and then slicing up the brain and body and looking. And there was some small but interesting specific diversion of brain to brain. In my opinion, if you're eating brain and it's diverted to your brain, that's actually a concern, not a benefit because of pre-ons. Yeah. So I'll go on record saying to my knowledge, there's no evidence that eating testicles, for instance, supports your testicles because it's directed to the testicles. Now there may be some bioactive may be some bioactive hormones in there that go in support testicular function in some other way. when things are brought into the gut, they're broken down into their component parts and they go out into the bloodstream and then which organ gets that stuff depends on whether or not they're say a blood brain barrier, which keeps the loss of out of the brain, or a blood testis barrier, or a blood over a barrier, every organ like the spleen, et cetera, has a barrier. So some things get in more readily than others, but to my knowledge, zero evidence that eating spleen helps your spleen. Right. So why do people say these things? Is this like old wives' tails? Is this... Why is it just bro science? Well, I think it's because I think it's because that there are nutrients, for instance, in liver, like very high concentrations of choline, precursor to acetylcholine. It is true that liver is one of the most choline dense foods in the world. Far more than an egg, far more than any vegetable or nut is going to give you an album. Sure, some celery warrior will come after me. Celery warrior. Something like that. Celery. Because you know better than I the moment you say one thing categorically, you know you're kind of inviting it, but I've kind of learned to enjoy that response. I learned from it. And correct me if I'm wrong. But liver incredibly high in choline, so you could see how the the lore would emerge that eating liver is really good for you because it is. If you're interested in getting a lot of choline and vitamin D and or vitamin A and other things, that sort. But the idea that it would be diverted specifically to your liver, that seems kind of crazy. Now there's also this idea. I won't name names here, but there were people on social media for while saying, well, walnuts are really good for your brain because walnuts actually look like a brain. And that's why, and you know, testicles look a lot like testicles too. But the point is that walnuts have certain things in them that are good for lots of cells, not just for brain tissue, but they have healthy fats. Right. Definitely. I love walnuts. So she went with the red walnuts are amazing. My, my girlfriend's obsessed with all this like hard to find like old fashioned food, like red walnuts and making it. I don't even know what a red walnut is. They have the skin on the walnut is red. The nut isn't red, but the skin on them is delicious. I don't think they're skin. Yeah. The skin. Yeah. Yeah. So was it look brown and the, oh, they're so good. Okay. And it looks like a brain. Okay. I have seen those before. I was thinking the outside shell was red. No, it's confused. They're delicious. And whether or not they're better for you than standard walnuts. But walnuts are good for you. Walnuts are great for you. I mean, you know, they're caloric calorie dense, but they're great for you. So one of the things that Paul Saladino always wants to talk about is plant defense chemicals and about eating plants that plants don't want you to eat them. And so when you eat them, they're excreting these plant defense chemicals. Now my thing on that is, and this is one of the things that Rhonda Patrick likes to talk about is that that may have a hormetic effect. So there might be benefit to that. Just like there's benefit to cold therapy and hot therapy and that there's some foods that eating them, even though they do have these defense chemicals, those defense chemicals, at least in certain doses, might have a beneficial effect on your body. Makes good sense to me. I'll say this. I'm going to try carnivore because I told Paul I would. I'm going to do blood work first and then after. But I'm not giving up my athletic greens and I'm still going to eat cucumbers, which he says are fruit and so I'm home free. He told me I have to cut the skin off them too. So I'm going to try it and see what happens. But I've also talked to Rhonda and she's really big on this broccoli sprout thing. A lot of things that are incompatible in the Instagram space make a lot of sense to me scientifically, like eating some greens, but also eating some meat, et cetera. In terms of plants being bad for us, I mean, there are a lot of toxic components of plants. Typically the further out on the branch you go towards fruit, the less toxic they become, eating the bark is generally more dangerous, although berberine, a commonly you substance for lowering blood glucose, like Metformin. So our poor man's Metformin is made from tree bark. Aspirin derivatives, things of that sort of alkaloids. There is something interesting about plants and I've talked to Paul and other serious colleagues in the amino acid science space. So there is something called non-protein amino acids. There used to be a guy at Stanford who had studied these and he's a world expert in non-protein amino acids. Many seeds and plants contain amino acids that can't be incorporated into proteins and may have some toxicity to them if they are ingested. Now there's never been a widespread systematic exploration of all the seeds and all the plants that people eat to see whether or not there are a lot of non-protein amino acids. But these things act in a sort of preon-like way when they get into the brain or they get into different tissues. And so I don't want to spark fear that some flower seeds are going to give you preon-like syndromes, but it's conceivable that by eating certain plant compounds, one could ingest these non-protein amino acids that they would get incorporated into existing proteins or that they would look enough like protein amino acids that they could sneak their way across the blood-brain barrier or into cells and cause certain kinds of dysfunction. And this particular lab's focus was on figuring out whether or not neurodegeneration was a downstream effect of some non-protein amino acids. Really? So in that sense... What was their conclusion? Their conclusion was that a lot of plants and in particular a lot of types of seeds contain non-protein amino acids that if they were to be incorporated into mammalian tissues and cells, that that would be very bad. This is also like low levels of certain chemicals that are in seeds that are really bad for you, like apple seeds. Right? Don't ask it. Yeah. And there was this idea years ago that the marijuana plant could inhibit the reproduction of animals that want to eat it by way of increasing aromatization, the conversion of testosterone to estrogen. And then when I was in college, there was this thing, everyone would say, don't smoke the seeds. It'll make you sterile. People used to say that. They were high. They were high. They wanted to go home. That's funny that that was in college. Yeah. I remember saying don't smoke the seeds, they'll make you sterile. That's ridiculous. Yeah. I don't know that there's any... How many of them? Children were accidentally birthed because of a certain college. Someone smoked the seeds like, don't worry, baby. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Today is a universal rule. Never used the argument that something lowers sperm counter testosterone as contraception. Yes. Right? Because I know a former pro bodybuilder who was juiced to the gills and told me that he conceived both of his children on his heaviest cycles ever. Really? Yeah. Somehow he maintained some function. Yeah. Well, the whole thing just made one sperm idea. I guess. Either she was hyper-fertile or he was hyper-fertile or both. But there are two kids that he claimed were conceived on everything from deballed ox, Andrew loan to... Those kids look like. They're actually great looking kids. He lost all... Most of that muscle. He's now walking around like a normal human being. Did you hear about that child who is abnormally large at two years old because the father was taking testosterone cream and the kids started showing pubic hair and an enormous penis at two years of age? The conversion of testosterone at DHD, which causes penis growth, will... Well, the question is, will that kid think or punish his father later? Well, I don't know. The question is, are other people going to try that now? That would be terrible. There's the boy. Two-year-old child signs of puberty after he was exposed to his testosterone gel. He developed pubic hair and his height was off the chart. So he's like the size of a five-year-old at two. Then on top of that, they talked about his size of a penis and his raging erections. Have they said that? Was the word... Goddamn pop-up ads? What did it say? They talked about as something about his 26 pounds at the age of one, put it over two pounds a month between the ages of 12 and 18 months. He's had massive sustained erections. Well, it's happened in the other direction. Women who were using a lot of evening primrose oil, common in a lot of lotions and things like that, it's a very strong estrogen. There are examples of their male sons getting a premature or not even premature breast butt development from contact with their mom. So primrose is like a thing that women put on in lotions and that's an estrogen lotion. Has enough estrogen like properties that boys were showing, estrogenization of some of their features? A women aware of that. That stuff has estrogen quality to it? Probably not. I've gone on and on social media and elsewhere about the fact that I am not a fan of melatonin. Low doses every once in a while for treatment of jet lag or something. But melatonin has a specific role which is to suppress puberty during development in addition to all its effects on sleep, etc. The idea that people are prescribing that to their kids, I don't know that it's screwed up their kids' puberty trajectory. But just the idea that you would take high doses of hormone, look, we're talking about low, well controlled doses of TRT. It's a little freak out. But then people pop melatonin like it was M&Ms and they give it to their kids when they're clearly better alternatives. I mean, it makes no sense at all. I don't think they think of melatonin in that way. I don't think melatonin, but I don't think most people think of it as a hormone. Well now there's some evidence coming out that it may have other negative effects. I mean, I don't like to be the scare tactic guy, but it just seems to me there are a lot of reasons to just avoid it unless you really need it. And occasional use. But the stuff in kids is really serious. And the Dr. Shana Swan stuff from the Al-Aids and then you're talking about evening primrose oil or you're talking about, I mean, this kid, I have a confession as that didn't happen to me. But when I was a kid, when I was five or six, I had hair growing on my Adam's apple. And my voice was the same as it is now. They call me froggy when I was a little kid. I basically grew into my voice. And so I had a genetic. I had hair growing on my Adam's apple and my voice was the same as it is now they call me why they call me froggy when I was a little kid I basically grew into my voice and so I had a genetic test recently and I actually have a mutation in an Andrew-gen receptor now that didn't make me super strong I wasn't a super impressive athlete or anything like that, but the this particular Mutation probably is what allowed me to work really long hours. It relates to kind of cortisol production and things like that And when you start exploring you find that yeah about 12% of young males Have mutations in one or the other of these hormone pathways That sort of shift you towards being able to for instance like I can work very very long hours And it's not because I'm I'm no David Goggins, right? It's just I can just like work a lot and there are other mutations that are more subtle like you seem to have I can't believe you can do four podcasts a week the MMA thing and the comedy thing like to me doing one podcast a week is like It feels like a lot plus I run my lab But that just feels like a lot But I asked you a while ago if you you know your voice ever goes or you ever get super tired You're like no, I think some people just naturally have more Andrew-gen receptor They make more androgen and then of course if they supplement androgen through TRT or something and get away with lower dose because it Just hits their system more efficiently for me with podcasts and MMA and comedies all things. I really enjoy though Definitely not but that's the big thing like people say you work really hard like Kinda I kind of don't work. No, that's how I feel to yeah I do a lot of I put in a lot of effort There's a lot of effort involved in my life, but there's very little work You know, you know what you know what I have to work talk to Jamie when I have to do ads That's fucking work. I'm like fuck like I fuck them up like fucking cock suck or I say well Terrible about it. I have to do them three or four times. Jamie knows the truth. It's still not that long. It's still easy It's still easy. It's still easy. It's not like working. Yeah, it's not it's not like a fucking labor in the hot sun all day But none of what I do is work. That's how I feel. I love podcasting and I love you love science I love science. I mean I have a I have like scientific Tourette's right I just want to learn to learn and share share share. There's a there's a like a real lesson in that for people if you can find a thing that You've really truly enjoyed. I mean people said that throughout time find a thing you love you never work a day in your life Let's do do that thing that you love that's that's how I feel. I don't feel like I work a lot Yeah, I mean I'm based when I was six or seven I'd spend the weekend reading about medieval weapons or like frog biology or something and then I come into class on Monday And I just ask him like to give a lecture now. I just I would they they took me a psychiatrist And they're like yeah, my parents were like is he okay? And they're like he just I used to go this is so embarrassing You know those carnivals are used to throw a ping pong ball into the thing and win a goldfish. Yeah Well, I love to query and goldfish But I knew that most of those fish were gonna die because people weren't decorating the water So I used to go buy D-chlor and go to these carnivals my mom used to take those little and I would give I'd give you free D-chlor for the fish if you want it But you had to listen to me lecture about the chlorate dechlorization. Oh my god. How old are you? It's like six or seven and I didn't charge for it And I felt so good just knowing like these fish are gonna survive. They're gonna have a great fish like I just loved But mostly I just wanted to tell him about D-chlor Wow, and now I do it like on a podcast. That's hilarious. I feel six or seven. I just I never stopped talking Yeah, being a fucking carney with three teeth on math and some fucking kid comes up once I talked about chlorine the goldfish This is I got shit for this the other day because I won't say we were living but at all but a certain neighbor has Some very high-level security next to them right not a super fancy neighbor. It just so happens that I'll just say it That say had it the secret service or park near me now and so I got to be friendly with them walking back and forth to the mailbox And you know kind of learn and thing and they're real friendly people real hardworking they work super long hours They're not to the secret service. Yeah, then they don't choose who they protect what he say you elect him We protect him and I said Careful. He decided who elected who but I'm independent But the fact of the matter is that they're really nice But we've got in discussions around sleep because they're on these crazy sleep cycles and how to regulate sleep and fitness stuff and This one real nice secret service agent. She said to me um Are you always like this? I said what do you mean? She said every time you walk by here you end up giving us a 30 minute lecture And then you give us a supplement That did people too. It's funny like I'll have a conversation with someone at dinner or something like that and they'll ask me a question I'll say well actually I had a guest on my podcast that explain this and then I'll like have this like I can retain Information if it's very fascinating to me, but something that I'm really interested in and I can say what you know The studies were and what what the you know And these conversations have how people they're like oh, so you're like podcast mode. I'm like That's just how I am the two one of the reasons why the podcast works because I would be like that anyway, right? Because like Just like you were saying like it's hard doing a podcast a week. It's just talking to people. Yeah I like talking to people. Why do these solo episodes are hard? That's a lot harder Yeah, the interviews are fun, but these solo episodes are long Going over very specific data and you have like a whole thing that you want to get out Yeah, it's what but I love it I love that it's hard and then it and as I kind of ratchet through it and kind of go through the various rhythms Also, I'm learning and I love it so much and of course if I make any mistake I mean my goodness the internet is harsh. This is the best. It's amazing. I love the critique Yeah, I do I love it at first. I was like oh, this is rough And now I've learned to just so embrace it like even the people have dedicated their entire lives to finding my mistakes I'm grateful. I just spend time going. Okay fantastic. Yeah, there's a lot of miserable folks out there But they can be beneficial because they can find some things that maybe you missed Oh absolutely and and I'm certainly grateful for them I do worry about them though because some of these people are like presumably have other things They're trying to pursue and they don't realize that they're kind of circling the drain slowly by focusing so much on other people Oh, yeah, but look everyone makes choices in life I mean, I've decided to try and like you make new things and be a creator But you know it was Lex that said you should he told me you should start podcast and then he said Whatever you do though just make sure it's not just you blabbing That's a there, but that's not he's not correct though Because like some of my favorite podcasts like Bill Burr's podcast is just Bill blabbing Tim Dylan just Tim blabbing Yana's Papa's just Yana's blabbing, you know like some of my favorite podcasts are these interesting people that just start talking shit Yeah, you know, they're really interesting guys and in your case you're You're talking about like really important things to a lot of people and the way to get it out is really to do it the way you do it And I'm curious about it. Thank you. Yeah. I mean I We've done episodes on grief and I'm on eating disorders I thought when I did one on eating disorders especially anorexia They were gonna be like oh, you know this white guy was shaved head who lifts weights What is you know about eating disorders and the feedback was wonderful people were like you know I didn't know for instance that the frequency of anorexia is not going up It's been constant since the 1600s and maybe even earlier. Whoa, this is a it's also the most deadly psychiatric disorder Wow, so you know all this idea that social media is impairing body image Yeah, that's probably true, but true anorexia people be getting an evursive relationship to eating That's you know I learned about that and then the therapies that you can point people to so on and on but but like the You mentioned Rhonda like I'm obsessed these days with deliberate heat and deliberate cold Yeah, it would be a minute talking about this freezing right now because I just did the cold plung how long I have one right here three minutes Right before I come here how many days a week are you in I'm in it almost every day now amazing Yeah, but when I break it up though because I read that you have to wait two hours after lifting like so to get the benefits of hyper hyper hypertrophy. That's right struggle with that one You need about two hours post workout before you plunge but I get in the sauna immediately after every workout That's great sauna is almost every day and then cold plunge is at least five days a week Maybe four days a week. That's a lot and and and with good reason So there's a scientist out of Scandinavia her name is a doctor Susanna Soberg SOE B. R. G. and She showed up on social media a few you know six months ago And then published this really amazing paper in humans what they showed was that They figured out the thresholds for how much cold deliberate cold exposure you need and how much sauna for it to really start having Beneficial effects now that all the nutrition PT people which seem to me some of the more frustrated human beings on the planet I don't know why but online sort of like nutrition and physical therapy or where like there's a lot of contention I don't know why neuroscientists are nice people contention in what way they love to nitpick and and so and I respect that they know a lot about what they do But there seems to be a lot of infighting in neutral around nutrition and around physical therapy I don't know why it probably relates to some childhood feelings of powerlessness. I don't know the The the but what's very clear is that From Susanna's work is that if you put people into deliberate cold up to the neck like uncomfortable cold People always say how cold it should be I want to get the hell out But you can stay in safely and that's gonna vary but person to person even day-to-day But if you get people into that for 11 minutes total per week. So not one session But they're doing three minutes three minutes three minutes whatever get to 11 minutes at that 11 minutes per week threshold They observe legitimate increases in brown fat the good kind of fat thermogests like that the oil in the candle goes up people become more comfortable at cold temperatures and Metabolism increases the increases in metabolism aren't huge and the PTs and nutrition folks have really been like it those increases in metabolism or like a cracker or something but That's just one of the effects one the big effect of the cold is that you get this 2.5x Increase in dopamine that lasts many hours after the cold exposure I mean it really puts your brain into an anti depressed state and do a more alert motivated state and nor epinephrine as well Yep, so nor epinephrine epinephrine and dopamine are called the catacolamines the those three catacolamines all increase substantially and that can be from a Free brief exposure to very cold so like one minute or three minutes really cold or in the study that was published in the European Journal Physiology where this initially was first shown they put people into 60 degree Fahrenheit water up to their neck for like 45 minutes or an hour Which isn't super annoying and it's sitting they had them on lawn chairs with weights So they're just sitting there. Oh, god, but you can do a much shorter exposure Rondo is telling me you can even do like 45 seconds really really cold and still get that blast effect Which makes sense what would be really really cold? Well for for you or for Cam Haynes You'd probably have to go to almost dangerous levels like I've seen some of the cold He's like like I saw a post with Cam and he's like grabbing ice and like putting on himself. He's making it tougher. You know, oh Coldplay yeah, the cold Yeah, he has the same way I have the moroscale. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that thing's really nice I mean they're getting beautiful now There's the the plunge the moroscale and then the blue cube or whatever. Yeah, the blue cube is what we have here I like you know the interesting of that the blue cube the water is like Circulating like you're in a stream. Well, that's where so the circulation actually is key So if you get into cold water and you're completely still like super stoic you're building a thermal layer That's keeping you a little bit warmer So if you really want to make it tougher you can sift your your body a bit because you break it that thermal layer So the moroscale is 34 33 35 degrees and this one's 37. That's not distinguishable the difference But this one moves. Yeah, so it's the water it's fucking sucks. Yeah, you're breaking up that thermal layer You can't and you can't and if you try not to huddle or you go hands in feet in yeah No, I go up to my chin. That's great. Yeah. Yeah. It's I mean it's it it is an antidepressant In fact again the met metabolism increase probably isn't super big, but it's still there and then there's but it's mostly this Neurochemical effect and the resilience and the inflammation control But then with sauna it's really interesting. It seems like the threshold total for the week You can do more but is it fit? Believe it or not? 57 minutes per week This year. Yeah, there we go. This yours. Yeah, she's terrific Okay, Susanna oh, I follow her because of you Susanna soberg She actually posted something on something that I posted and so that and then I saw that you were quoting her So I went to her she's terrific terrific scientist terrific person I met her in person when I was over there in Scandinavia. We didn't cold plunge, but is she in Scandinavia? Yep Yeah, she's in ten more seven minutes a week as healthy benefits Heat increase heat shock protein heat shock proteins are important for cell communication heat shock proteins Repair damage cells heat prevents nerve Nope, that's what they're damaging diseases potentially. Oh interesting heat prevents nerve damaging diseases potentially Alzheimer's disease Parkinson's disease and On a scroll stroke no right there on the big thing. Okay. Now there's some growing evidence There's a she hash tag sober principle So there's this thing in science where if you name something after yourself then you're an narcissist But you can name things after other people so I named this sober principle is if you really want to get the maximum metabolic effect When you end if you're and you're doing heat and cold end with cold yeah, because then you have to warm yourself back up Yeah, I can't tell me about that now I've been doing it sucks Drink water before if possible during why would I drink during I thought the whole idea is to like make your body Cool itself off. I don't drink during. I don't know what that's about. Maybe that's fucked. Maybe that's related to sauna Do you drink water in the sauna? Yeah, but that's what is but if I do drink in the sauna I have to be fucked. I have to have made a mistake where I'm like I'm really tired and I'm really struggling and then I always go back in after I drink the water and you're going hot I recall we were texting back and forth about this at one point. I mean typically it's gonna be about 184 to about 210 is a good range Fahrenheit and That's hot although you know I mentioned that I think on a social post I said, you know that's really warm approach with caution and all the Eastern Europeans the things and the Russians where they were like making fun of me They're like you're a wimp we do it at two-thirty The third I guess brisket they started when they're when they're little kids I mean they yeah, or if you ever go to a bonia The release Russian bonias and they hit you with the leaves and yeah, yeah, I Yeah, I've done more than 200 before I was doing 220 for a while because the Laird Hamilton was doing that But I was actually burning my throat like I was I was my voice was And it was and I was realizing you fucking idiot. You're cooking your mouth Well, he's a nut in the best sense Laird goes in the barrel sauna with the airdine bike Yeah, and pedals with oven mitts on He wears oven mitts because the metal gets so hot you can't touch it so he's in there airdining oven mitts on this average, but it's also why it oblives 56 55 56 He maintains incredible athleticism. They still like one of the top You know big wave riders surfers on earth. It's like it's crazy The amount of work that he puts into it, but clearly is benefit to it, but I look forward to it I really do I look forward to the suffering of these sessions because I'm like kind of addicted to the benefits that I get afterwards That dopamine rise is real a woman you had on your podcast Dr. Onalemki dopamine nation She talked about a patient who was in getting off of cocaine. He was feeling low So he started using ice bath as a way to wean himself off You know it you can't argue with a 2.5x increase in dopamine that's long lasting big spikes in dopamine that crash That's bad because it's like up and then down but this you know 2 3 4 hour Increases in dopamine epinephrine in norepinephrine your alert. You feel better your kind of your RPM are set higher Is there any benefit to reemerging yourself in the cold like once it starts to wear off? I do it more than once a day well You eventually become cold adapted and you need to start doing things to make sure that it's still a stress stimulus because that Stress stimulus is what sets that all in motion So if you get really comfy then you're gonna have to start making the water colder sifting the water around I mean you can only make it so cold before you eventually have tissue damage, but that's a wide window That's why heat is great, but the upper threshold for as you mentioned like your throat starts hurting you actually burning tissue is bad There's an amazing finding on burn that I can't myself but share there's a paper that came out that showed Well, there's based on observation burn victims showed dramatic fat loss not Burned by the fire or the burn so for many years they become leaner and leaner and leaner and no one ever understood Why this was that turns out that burn and local heat application can set in motion a whole bunch of biological cascades that burn up Body fat wait a minute so that means those belly fat things are real well. They're now using local heating and these are I there people people really need to be careful with heat because you know burning yourself to burn body Faz just dumb and dangerous but Using they have at this UCP Device excuse me, but in the laboratory But what they're doing is they're using a laser that heats up locally the tissue and they're seeing a systemic increase in Body fat utilization. Do you remember those cold sculpting things that they used to do to people? But apparently it fucked people up Don't remember the belts. I don't remember the cold sculpting. No, they were doing a thing where they were like cool sculpting Where they were saying that they're gonna But like blow cold air all over your fat area and it was gonna make your fat people like calm bullshit on it I'm calling bullshit on it because I think that it's probably some general systemic effect of being cold and metabolism going up Right and of course we should say this people If you're eating more food than you're burning off total you're not gonna lose fat I mean that the rules of the loss of the pandemic still pluck because sometimes people here you can do anything and still lose fat But those bodyways belts to people but on those legit because they do heat up that area You know there may be some truth to this you know the right but it's not going to be spot reduction This is where it gets miss length even though it's applied locally. It's not spot reduction They're talking about heat causing a systemic increase in body fat utilization again on a backdrop of caloric deficit More body fat burn. That's the argument. That's why do people wear those big rubber neoprene things that go around their waist Those belly fat trainers you know I'm talking about. Yeah, why have a theory about the same reason women wear corsets Although there are other reasons for that too which is that they like the way that it makes them feel and look there's a kind of the other reasons That women wear corsets. Yeah Because they potentially look hot in them if you like corsets right with the way they feel and look but they also But they were originally designed to bring the waist in Horse it's for like right to send it in to give them hourglass shape to accentuate the you know the features that they want Essentially right of course, right there was something else. No, no, no. I just was thinking about corsets for second the But the I think this is Actually characteristic of a lot of things in the health space. So for instance I get asked a lot about sauna and people but what about infrared sauna in my opinion most infrared saunas don't get hot enough right and I got really interested in infrared light It's like what's going on with infrared light does it have real uses? Right Turns out there was a Nobel Prize given I believe it was in 1908 I might have the date wrong maybe it was 1916 But there was a Nobel Prize given for photo therapy for the use of Light to treat lupus for instance, so this is not a new idea But I think a lot of people like red light because of how they look in the red light sauna It gives that really smooth look to the skin. It's kind of like that nightclub sexy feel so people like ooh infrared sauna The name infrared it sounds high tech it sounds high tech and yet there are legitimate uses of infrared light for instance viewing infrared light as long as it's not too intense in the early part of the day if you're over 40 There's amazing data at a university college London my friend Glenn Jeffries lab showing that can help improve mitochondrial function in photosceptors and off-sau age related macular degeneration and and visual loss can be offset What about like those jouve lights? So there's jouve there's cozy there are a bunch of these brands now And I've there are three main areas where they've shown some real efficacy in good studies one is for wound healing and acne There really does seem to be some therapeutic repair of tissue The other is the eye stuff so exposure to red light and near infrared light as long as it's not too intense And you have to be over 40 you see the effect etc But their real improvements in vision in animal models and humans that's been shown wound healing now wound healing It sets in you know red light is different than other light because it's long wavelength and that means it can pass through tissues Shortwave length doesn't go as deep into tissue. So that's why the red part is important not just that it looks cool the When it passes through the upper layers of the dermis it appears that it can go and Trigger some activation of things that in the so-called stem cell niche That creates new hair cells new skin cells. So they're using it for hair growth. I doubt it has a massive effect on hair regrowth I saw a thing the other day where the gun has got a helmet on and it was taught Some sort of a laser helmet and the helmet was making a regrow hair Probably would assist in maybe augment some existing therapies for her hair for increasing hair and then There's a growing population of people that are interested in using it to increase testosterone by putting the red light on their On their on their testicles And of course there that they're the the anus Sun viewing. Oh, yeah, so Whitney comics Really yeah, she does that she does that she should take it should go to her Instagram The picture of her with her feet up in the air with her dog. She might just be in funny Well, I think the result that's relevant there, which is a real result is the one we talked about earlier Which is getting sunlight exposure on your skin provided you don't burn? Obviously people wear sunscreen if you need it, but sunscreen is interesting conversation too if but getting Sun light onto your skin can increase testosterone estrogen feelings of well-being etc It's not just about viewing it with your eyes. But red light has different effects than just Protect just sunlight right, but you've got red wavelengths in sunlight And you've got but the near infrared wavelength combined with red is what's used in these acne treatment scar healing and there is one Stutt in rats showing that red light exposure tears. She is Here's my girl look at her She's so great. She's just being funny though. I mean she's probably doing that for real, but she's also being funny I love her post because she seems to really be enjoying. Look at it says here self care Perineum. Perineum. Sunning day. Next up 42 cold plunges 9 saw on his five hours of throwing a tire down a hill and then four sticks of butter and one espresso And probably and 10 new pit bulls the number of dogs that She's a dog mom. Yeah So but those red light things like the june don't they also? Do they do something about collagen and your skin or something too? The idea is they can trigger skin repair through the through the skin cell niche The and what do you show them? Yeah, the same doctor from before has a whole post on infrared therapy and everything You just said oh Susan That has increases and all that's interesting. Yeah, so stabilize okay Stay until you feel uncomfortable but save the benefits. So this is infrared only correct Okay, so different kinds of songs or so they have maybe there's just a different thing Maybe it doesn't get as hot, but it does something else says benefits blood vessels and activates neurocept nerve receptors in the skin you sweat more at a lower temperature a good alternative to traditional sauna Traditional sauna more efficient more stressful with increase of heart rate. So that's exactly what we're just saying right? It's something to supplement with stabilize the heart PVC to early Contractions in the heart Increase a lasting in collagen in the skin improve recovery after training So a last in collagen the skin how would it infrared sauna increase the collagen in your skin? I'm not aware of any peer review data, but you know you get your infrared devotees I'm only aware of the eye stuff in the wound ruined in acne stuff and then infrared for infrared for infrared light I don't think there's anything unique about combining heat and infrared. Oh, so this are and so Jew Van Cozy Light and these other companies that yeah, the big panel so that is technically infrared Red light therapy with infrared that's right. It's usually it's got a panel where it's a red light and then it's a like near Infrared so you could stare at those like you can actually look at those red lights. It's not damaging for your eyes You don't want to get too close. I mean how close so a good rule of thumb is if you feel like you need to close your eyes because it's painful It's too bright rise So you want to be at a distance that it's comfortable to look at you don't ever want to be you know tearing over squinting You know these natural mechanisms that are built in us to protect our eyes and I would trust those But this is a place that I went to that has a more robust bed and they have like these goggles They tell you with this red light therapy that you should put goggles on Yeah, if you're gonna hit your skin really hard with red light or near what's called NIR near infrared light You then you wear those little Little they look like little suction cups. They go over your eyes because you don't because it's really bright Just like a tanning bed or so the kind that like a Jew has is not the same as like a commercial light those get the Jooven the cozy's get pretty bright so you want to stand far enough back that you're comfortable But not as bright as those like high tech like commercial units correct and it also You know it depends on where you hang it if it's on a wall That's coming right into your eyes like flashlight to your eyes is very different than if it's on your body and you're getting it indirectly to your eyes Right, right, but as a rule of thumb, you know getting Healthy amounts of sunlight as long as you don't your skin doesn't burn and getting it that to your eyes and your skin is Good if you've ever had a cut you'll notice it heals much quicker if it gets sunlight Interesting. Yeah Oh absolutely and that's because of the way that these long wave length lights trigger The stem cell niche that controls skin and the karat in a sights and repair Here's a weird one. This is a mystery, but I heard this the other day and I'm totally obsessed by this if you have a cut somewhere on your body a wound of any kind it takes a little while to heal if you bite your cheek Yeah, it heals almost perfectly like newborn skin. Nobody knows why and you have tons of bacteria coming in through this Oh you're eating stuff like there's a you know, it's all care. I've a contain healing properties It does and so there's a group at Stanford actually and elsewhere Also, of course that are studying why is it that the environment of the mouth is so Effective at healing itself. I mean it's crazy. I mean I've got scars from you know 20 years ago But I've bitten through this cheek a bunch of times. It's painful, but then it's perfectly fine Yeah, like the next day the next day so there's interesting biology there and people are starting to think about that Sunscreen yeah, so so there are two areas aside from nutrition that feel I feel like are really hot button issues like for the moment We talk about this we're we're gonna catch a lot for this but I'm getting used to that nowadays Do you guys stop reading comments? Well, it sounds like you're affected by the comments and hate mail and death Threats the whole thing Threats ah, yeah, you know, I think you know, there's so many what are people man at you for more so there's there's kind of this idea that because we cover topics like trauma and some mental health issues There's more the idea that that we contain answers there and you know people aren't they're thinking isn't always so correct No, no one has said I'm this upset with you about Something you said about butter or something that I that I want to kill you although some people might feel that way and For that reason I now live in New Zealand and you're welcome to look for me there so it's like the mitigation of mental health issues Yeah, yeah, it's sort of fixation stuff or people or people thinking that You know that there's some secret message in what's coming through so sometimes it's really But but I would say 99.9% of things that come back have been supportive or Critical in a way that's that's rational Sunscreen and EMFs are like the two third-rail topics. Yeah, so glad you brought that up. Yeah, here's what we know There are compounds that exist in commercial products not just sunscreen that can cross the blood brain barrier and that are bad for neurons Period know that is indisputable Some of those compounds have been shown to be in abundance in certain sunscreens and other Cosmetics so I'm not saying that all sunscreen are bad I'm saying that there are some sunscreens that contain some things that were they to get across the blood brain barrier would be bad You know those things These are these are small molecules that can cross the blood barrier into neurons and that can cause neurodegenerative like conditions what things well these are typically associated with triclosans and some of the other things that are shown to be in certain detergents and soaps like they're Their detergents and soaps. They're now off market because they contain some of these very small molecules related to triclos land triclosans and related products, but There are healthy there are safe sunscreens. There's no question like what's a good safe sunscreen? Ah, so there we get into brand names I that's a tricky one. I don't want to get to outside my wheelhouse I'm researching this for a future episode. This is really a place where I want to want to tread carefully Here's what I think is important for people to know not all sunscreens are safe Not all cosmetic lotions are safe not all cosmetics are safe. I think we're probably going to arrive in a place not that different from the silicone breast implant kind of landscape where Turns out dependent on what implant and how long they were in and you know what they were packaged in like so many things Like trip to fan the amino acid that was people used to enhance sleep now you get it readily But it was banned for a long time because a few people actually took trip to fan that had contaminated binders It was the stuff People used to enhance sleep. Now you get it readily, but it was banned for a long time because a few people actually took trip to fan that had contaminated binders. It was the stuff that was in there with it and they got very sick and there were some fatalities even and so it was taken off market for years for all the wrongries. I mean taken off for good reason, but it was the binders not the trip to fan With sunscreen there are many things that are good about sunscreen like avoiding skin cancer But many sunscreens are bringing in these triclosans and other small even if a molecule is small enough It'll cross into the blood brain barrier and we don't know what the long-term effects of those are But I think it's worth paying attention to similarly I used to teach this in a big undergraduate course if you look at the data on EMFs and you look at the data on cell phones You will find animal studies that show that if you put a cell phone under a rats cage or a litter of rats cage and Two separate studies you'll find dramatic decreases in testosterone in some studies and you'll find subtle increases in testosterone in others I don't know what the effect is or how it's working but clearly There needs to be an exploration of this and clearly it's gonna be a really inconvenient thing to do that right? I mean I use the air buds. I use the air buds, but nowadays I sort of wonder should I maybe use the wire things more I've been using the wired ones more. Yeah, yeah, because I'm Chicken shit I'm hearing things well, but I don't know what's real people like start freaking out about EMFs I'm not sure if the writer of the 10-foil hat in it Yeah, and I'm in the same boat and I'm sure that some of my colleagues You know the moment we say you know EMFs and sunscreen people are gonna freak out and yet I will go on record saying that some of the very scientists who say oh like don't even worry about this There's some of the most unhealthy looking people that they've ever seen Yeah, you know, so they're not really incentivized to get it right nor am I a conspiracy theorist But here's my wish is that we look at everything and we look at it objectively and that we take into account that there are Some animal data that point to the fact that getting these EMFs in close proximity all the time might might not be the best idea There's certainly some kind of an effect and depends on the individual and the dose and a lot of stuff But that what you're saying about scientists is an issue as well There's certain people that they're talking about Things that affect your health and they're clearly unhealthy. It's like boy. That's a hard pill to swallow coming from you Well, and I think what you know We go back to liver king and some of the other more colorful aspects of online nutrition and health information People wonder actually saw some I made the human mistake of going on to Twitter in the last couple years I never really was on Twitter and it's such a weird landscape as you know But one of the things I discovered was that a lot of the people in the science and medical community are there kind of poking fun at online health and nutrition and They wonder why they're so like how is it that this person has millions of followers and so on and the reason is actually because they're doing such a poor job of Communicating health information in a meaningful clear and like actionable way and so it provides this enormous opportunity for someone to just show up and kind of just say Whatever and grab a huge audience. Well, let me push back against that because they're just How would someone who's a legitimate professor? Make some kind of an impact online come on my podcast But that's maybe the only way like you'd have to find an established portal Sure, or create your own and that's a long laborious task of building up an audience and provided them with good content And hopefully getting on a podcast for people like have a large audience and an appetite for that kind of a thing work Or I mean or more realistically go on your podcast. I mean that's what I was saying. Yeah I mean I think that what you know what you do and to some extent what I do what Lex does and then of course There are others is you know try and provide a venue for people that would otherwise be locked away in their laboratories or locked away in their kids to get Information out there and to have someone across the table for them like this You know kind of pushing and you know saying but tell me more like what exactly what do we know? What don't we know mice or humans? You know like how many people this kind of thing because in the absence of that I Really think that people are just left to kind of there's a kind of gravitational pull towards the thing that's most sensational So they go like maybe just eating testicles is like the key to a good life or Maybe just eating plants is the only way to live and be healthy And I think that there are I mean there's incredible science and incredible medicine And I think most at least my experience has been that most scientists Want to share what they know we've never had someone tell us no and we've had Howard Hughes investigators We've had you know we've got a few future Nobel Prize winners and Nobel Prize winners coming you had dozens more than we ever have I have learned so much from Shaina from I thought about you know, a Tia I mean Matt Walker Davidson Claire. I mean it goes on and on. Yeah, you know, I mean could list it off I think that scientists want to be heard. I think they really do they just they need the opportunity Yeah, but I mean let's saying that they've done a poor job I don't think it's because they've done a poor job It's because that's not what they do. I mean that the quibbling on social media. Oh, yeah I think a lot of that is just frustration Because if someone does spend their time researching and writing papers and you know You'll see papers online with like a thousand views 2000 views and these you know how many people are looking at these peer reviewed papers Yeah, they're not reading them with right. I mean those of us in the game of science I still run a lab so I'm familiar with this It's the number of people that will actually read a paper start to finish who are qualified to parse what's in there Yeah, is you can count on one hand maybe two and for really you know block buster papers that have a huge impact That number might get into the hundreds or thousands right so when someone starts talking about like how does this person have millions of followers? Well, it's because people have an appetite for these things and if you don't like that that person has millions of followers And you wish you had more it doesn't just magically come to you. You have to put in effort It's like you have like someone wanting to be a touring comedian. They go that person sucks. Why they selling out everywhere Why why I not well because you're not even on the road you fucking idiot like this is the same kind of conversation You're having with these scientists. Yeah Like if someone's upset at you and the thing about the social media the the bickering that I do see The one thing that it does do is make me know that you're an extremely flawed person This person who is like concentrating Whether it's nutrition or whatever it is which which I agree with you. There is this weird sort of I don't know what that's about it's wanting attention It's not not feeling you're getting enough attention for your own research and then finding Whatever one thing that you think someone's doing wrong and going after them and attacking them And then there's also people that are legitimately upset that people are pushing out fake information bullshit like Lane Norton's great for that Yeah, he's always got someone's pissing him off. Oh, yeah He we've exchanged a few notes online. He actually I saw him on I think it was a Tia's podcast and he did a masterful job of Explaining nutrition actually his persona on podcast is very different than his social media Yeah, he's a little extreme on social media, but he's a great guy. Yeah, it's very smart Yeah, very smart and he actually we align on this thing about eating organs Directs those nutrients to specific organs. He doesn't believe that either and he actually used to work on Amino acid labeling of proteins and things like that No, he's a good example of where somebody can sit straddle both sides But he likes to mock a lot of charlatans because there's quite a few sure I mean, and he does a really good job at finding those people and pointing those things out But that's the thing is that there's this appetite for information So when someone comes along and says something that's counter to what everyone's been told It reinforces this desire to have like who was some secret information out there that I didn't know about all I have to do is he testicles and I'll have more testicle power like that kind of shit is like for whatever reason very Attractive to people. Yeah, so it's very important that someone in his I'm not talking about him when I'm talking about bickering really I'm talking about some very bizarre Characters that haven't developed these online followings, but try really hard to get them And I also think there's probably a bunch of like social issues that these people have as well But you know he's he does a great job of mocking these folks and And it look a good counter to some of these more preposterous claims that you do see very very prevalent It's particularly in the alternative health space You know you see it from a lot of these like vegan people and all these alternative health people It's like there's so much horseshit going on There's so much weird nonsense that these people push and that's how they make their you know That's how they get attention. You know and Lane has done it for instance a pretty good job of using kind of more Sensational like content to combat sensational content. So he does these like ohs and these you know That's not the style that I use although I will say he Call me out on something that's worth mentioning because I think I was grateful that he did I mentioned in a tweet that there there is evidence that alcohol can increase the aromatization of testosterone estrogen and he pointed out quite correctly that it depends on dose and There might be some individual variation so that's where like someone saying wait a second hold on That's not the whole story right allowed me to see data that I wasn't aware of and made it more clear So that to me is a is a great example of the use of social media to bring a more nuanced Conversation about and I actually wrote to him and thanked him and don't what you're great about that I've seen you do that before when but that's also science right science is like you have a certain amount of data And you discuss that data and then someone else who has a deeper understanding of it can maybe point to some other study That maybe you weren't aware of and you add that to it as long as it everyone's not dogmatic But when you get into the heavy-duty carnivore space and you get into the heavy-duty vegan space My problem with a lot of that is it's very dogmatic and a lot of people claim that they have all the answers to all the things Like you know Paul Saladino likes to do is this bullshit like you ever see that yeah There's like little it's the bullshit thing. Yeah. Well. He does it. Oh, no. He does these things on social media like olive oil is olive oil Rose it. Yeah. Well he talks about this is what's wrong with this the defense chemicals the this the that that this He's very committed to like a complete animal-based diet The guy looks great. He does look to be in great shape and I asked him straight up I just said listen are you on TRT of any kind and he said nope and in his 40s And he said he looks really healthy. Yeah, he looks very healthy. He's also but very active Constantly perfect. Yeah, I mean moved to Costa Rica Just so he could serve every day, you know and like living the jungle and eat like organic papaias and shit Doing really well, you know, he's obviously whatever he's doing one thing he's not doing He's not poisoning his body with junk food He's not eating bullshit and process sugar and nonsense and he's very physically active And he's getting a lot of sonics exposure So all those things that we know to be absolutely without a doubt beneficial. He's incorporating all those into his life So he's got all that. Yeah, no would he be just as healthy if he ate a salad every day I don't know. I mean I don't think he would be unhealthy. I don't think salads are bad for you No, I love think pesticides are bad herbicides are bad. I think you get that shit in your salad That could be an issue. Well one of the things that I believe in this is really hybridizing as we say nerdy speak for crossing over two separate things I think that people have a lot of different kinds of friends can look at any conversation around politics or about guns or about Nutrition in a more nuanced way. I've always enjoyed. I believe this is you as well Speculating here, but this is what I see is that you know, I've got friends who are hippies punk rockers Republicans Democrats libertarians gun owners gun haters all of it by being friends with a lot of different kinds of people He's kind of get you just come to understand as you put it wants to me and I really internalize this like it's about people Right what the dogmatic stuff is when you know 99% of your friends are of one orientation or another your world view Just shrinks to the size of an atom. There's also a problem with people wanting to be right You know, and they want they want to win like if you Believe that the democratic party is the only way forward for a rational peaceful society and you have this Confirmation bias that only the Democrats have the answers to this to that the other things Or if you're a person that believes in God and the Republicans and we need the first and second amendment and this and You're so committed people get so committed to these ideas that they're not willing to entertain any other Idea and then they fight rigorously rigorously they fight as if you're defending your own Life your own your own soul you don't fight you don't discuss these things on the merits of their You know what whether or not this is a good concept or that's a good concept You you're literally almost arguing for your very existence being valid and it's very strange because people equate themselves They attach themselves to ideas and when their idea gets challenged they get emotional They get excited they get angry they get aggressive and it's so sad to watch it really especially as people get older When I see like a 60-year-old man who gets hyper aggressive and starts yelling at people about ideas It's like God damn calling people morons calling people assholes. It's like Just talk about the idea just just don't attach yourself to it talk about the idea You look far better you'll see appear far more intelligent. It's a far more evolved way to communicate about things But so many people are just completely incapable of it when they're challenged on their ideas They can never say I'm wrong. They can never say oh I was incorrect. I thought this like they don't have they literally don't have the ability to do that They will find some way to try to pretend that they were wrong or that they weren't wrong It's very bizarre it is bizarre I mean I immediately think of neuroplasticity is robust early in life and it tapers off right It's and they're you know brilliant people like Richard Feynman the great theoretical physicist I mean he was known for doing crazy things bongo drumming naked on the roof of Caltech But also designed to become an artist not a great one but an artist late in life or he also wrote a lot of theorems And did his work in strip bars and Pasadena he loved being among different types of people and he believed He wrote a lot about this that remaining curious genuinely curious and I define curiosity as being Interested in something without being attached to the outcome right you you lit legitimately want to find out what's on the other side that that Maintains this youthfulness in this plasticity and I think when one approaches a conversation of any kind from the stance of I don't want to find out I want to be shown to be right. Yeah Curiosity is dead Right and and that I mean I think that's tragic. It's just very difficult to get people to sit down and have civil Conversations when they have hot button Hot button topics that they're opposed to like if one person is hardcore right wing and one person's hardcore left wing To have them sit down and have calm rational conversations is incredibly difficult because everybody wants to win Everybody wants to because you're literally defending yourself You're defending it's not just an idea like say if you want to talk about the first amendment and whether or not freedom of speech should be Like the first amendment protection should be Extended to social media or whether or not social media should be thought like things like Twitter Which is it the town square or is it a private company like these kind of discussions like people Will get fucking emotional and furious and angry and add hominins and they They lose jobs I mean grown adult throw themselves on the steak. It's so wild. It's crazy. It's wild But it's also it's indicative of what we are as a human as a human species like we have this Incredibly strong desire for validation and incredibly strong desire to have our ideas reinforced Not challenged because we attach our idea to our own self value and our own self worth I've done my very best to distance myself from that as much as possible And as I've gotten older and had more of these kind of conversations. I've gotten better and better at it But you seem like you straddle multiple viewpoints on a number of things or willing to have that I was curious as anyone ever walked out of here like it would felt so confronted that No, I'm nice When if I don't get along with somebody there's been people that I wanted to attack Believe where that you wanted to walk out of here. Well, there's none some people that I've just learned. Oh, God You're so sloppy and lazy like these thoughts are just so weak and then I will see them You know talk about the experience on Twitter And I'm like oh my god. You're just so lucky. I didn't go after you because it's like there's so many people that have these sloppy lazy ideas and then they exist in these echo chambers Well, this is one place where I think a scientific training is useful Independent whether or not one decides to become a career scientist when you take your so-called oral defense examination You get up there and there's five or six different faculty and you're qualifying exam and they they ask you questions Until you say I don't know They the idea is to find where your cliff is right right right right the moment that you start wondering and stumbling That's when you actually know you're doing a good job I mean you don't want to do that too early, but they'll ask crazy questions hard questions that are unrelated to anything You think you should have have to prepare and I sit on these committees now I sit on the other side of the fence social media for me has actually become a good kind of repeat of my qualifying exam because occasionally Something comes in that I oh wow like I never thought about it that way you're absolutely right But the moment you say I don't know that's when you are allowed to pass up to the next level in science It's not when you know it's when you are willing to admit that you don't know that they say now you can go pursue a dissertation Then you do a dissertation and then you have to defend it and everyone thinks so you have to defend it by showing its It's water type you actually defend it, but a really good defense committee We all meet beforehand and we're like how are we gonna beat this guy or this guy all up and we decide We're gonna find where the leaks are and get them to admit that their study is wonderful Perhaps but not perfect and then you become a doctor of science Then you trust them that's right because you trust that they're only interested in information that's factual They're only interested in the facts. They're not interested in just getting their ideas reinforced That's right, but it's it's a complicated dance that human beings do because the your egos involved and your reputation is involved and that for a lot of people That's a lot of who they are a lot of who they are is how other people see them You know, there's a lot of folks out there that You know day to day Their life depends what you I mean I'm sure you've met people that got offended by something that doesn't seem logical Oh, I tend to to raise the story, but I'm not going to because I don't want to draw fire again But no, I I once credited a colleague who was an amazing colleague and someone picked up on something in the article about them That was totally unrelated and was of the times and what and it was like suddenly the conversation is shifted completely and then you realize It's all about them. It actually has nothing to do about the topic. Yeah, and that's where I think things can get really diverted I mean, I tend to not respond to comments too often occasionally You know, thanks for your interest in science and like give people cue people to an episode I do not get into online debates. I'm happy to do it on a podcast But I don't do it in comment section. It's too hard. It's too hard It's a shitty way to communicate too You know when if you sit down across from someone you look at my eye and have a conversation People tend to be more civil they tend to be more kind It's so easy to be shitty with text over Twitter. Yeah, it's just so easy and so many people engage in it I was watching a friend of mine is a comedian Arguing with people back and forth. I was gonna reach out to him. I was going with the fuck are you doing? Don't do that so bad for you too And I'm looking at his timeline and it's like this is taking place over many hours in his day I'm like bro that hour those hours you're never gonna get back and that day's gone that case that day's toast and you're arguing with people about some shit that has very little to do with you It's more to do with your ideological position like you're standing in this whatever group you're in right or left Yeah, and as a creator the goal is always to create new and better Yeah, what it works and so it really does seem like a a true time-sync It is a time-synching. It's also like your time is fucking valuable You're giving your time to something and that's robbing you of effort It's robbing you of whatever you could be doing to increase your Proficiency and something and crease your knowledge and your enjoyment doing things you enjoy You know fucking enjoy arguing with people on Twitter. You don't even know that's crazy Yeah, I didn't become a lawyer for a reason. I don't really you know I actually have rules for my engagement on social media and the podcast I always try and put out information that's really about the audience. I want them to benefit It's not about me like you know occasionally that can get murky because you'll say you know I You know I you know I learned this thing and it can seem like it's about you But it's really about them getting something that I think will be useful to them and the other one is I Net why don't you I don't generally get angry anyway? There are things in life that make me angry, but I never bring that to the table That's very important now when you're talking about all these things for optimizing health and fitness and performance How much of obviously you're very fit you work out a lot? But how much of your own body and that your own experiences do you use like do you experiment on these things? So that you could have more data or you can have at least anecdotal data Absolutely, I mean I try and do as many things so I'm right I mean just at a top contour. I'm lift every other day run on the days. I don't lift That's kind of like lift run and what about your recovery stuff? I do I get into the cold I hit that 11-minute threshold per week by getting in three or four three minute sessions in the cold I do have a barrel sauna so I'll try and get in there for an hour total per week or more. Oh, yes So you have to go get ice no no I have a I have a different one have a plunge I don't have any like commercial relationship with the plunge it makes it look like a bathtub porcelain tub I use a cold plunge. There's no ice actually floating in there so I'll get in there So I do the cold I do the heat I lift every other day for about 45 minutes or an hour. How cold is your cold thing? It goes to I said it about 45. I'm not as tough as you and cam and I'll catch up You know so I'll do that. I mean you do that for 11. Yeah, so we yeah, and I I eat you know between 11 a.m And 8 p.m I know right now intermittent fasting became really controversial recently because there was a study showing that there's no additional benefit of fasting for weight loss as compared to caloric restriction But right, but that's weight loss. There's other benefits. Yeah, clearly and that set off a storm and It was a storm I was happy to sidestep and enjoy watch go by because it was really interesting that the headline in the New York Times Was frankly was terrible because it said Studies shows no benefit to intermittent fasting But what the actual finding was is that the studies showed no additional benefit to fasting over caloric restriction for the trip for obesity For law right Fox News got it right in this case, and I have no bias. I don't subscribe to any of these things so canceled all my subscriptions the New York Times got it Fox News got it right and then that sort of a science Fox News label they said no additional benefit I believe or something like that to fasting over caloric restriction for weight loss or something like that something very true to the concluding arguments of the paper The other ones were really designed to like say fasting bad and you know like here You've got millions and millions of people have now figured out a way to control their appetite Because they're better at eating nothing for certain periods of day than eating like half the muffin because there's all these neural mechanisms When you start ingesting food, there's this desire to eat more food and for some people not eating for a period is better than eating and And then some of the smaller new sites got it somewhere in the middle But so I do I'll eat my first meal somewhere around 11 a.m. But occasionally I'll have like a protein drink at nine If I'm really starving when I wake up, but I do those things I do the red light therapist in front of the red light to get the eye benefits and I don't I'm not trying to heal acne or anything But I just kind of do it all over my body anyway Early in the day a few times a week. I Definitely have a what I call non-sleep depressed protocol so instead of naps and meditation I'll listen to like a yoga knee juriscript or I'll do some sort of hypnosis script three or four times a week to just do what I call Deliberate decompression to just take my mind to a space not unlike the one you were describing for cannabis for some people right I'm just like not thinking about anything to in order to reset There's an amazing study out of skin in avia Hospital in Denmark did the study in human showing that with positron emission tomography Imaging so brain imaging in human showed that a 30-minute yoga knee draw So just lying down and listening to this deep relaxation script increased dopamine Resting levels in an area of the brain called astrayatum by 65% Basically putting people into a state where they're ready for action again when they come out of it I find it incredibly rejuvenating the the CEO of Google has written about nsd are non-sleep depressed That's a acronym my coin because I didn't like the words yoga knee draw and meditation all sounds kind of magic Carpety and acts as a barrier for people so I'll do nsd are almost every day 10 to 30 minutes what else do I do I dim the lights at night? I make sure I get sunlight in the morning I'm I try to eat well good Minimally excuse me processed or Unprocessed foods What else I try and do some Stretching I try and stretch and do that sort of thing and I'm also really trying to avoid toxic people in interactions That helps a lot helps a lot. That's real. It's huge And I think one of the probably the biggest surprise in researching the podcast over the last 18 months because that's when we start Was the episode I do an episode in gratitude and I thought okay gratitude. We did for Thanksgiving I thought okay It's gonna be thanking people and things turns out that if you look at the research on gratitude first of all the increases in dopamine and serotonin and feelings of subjective well being from people that have a regular effective gratitude practice. We'll talk about what that is is immense it's immense these are these are sky rocket effects What is the most effective gratitude practice? It turns out it's not sitting there being thankful It's receiving gratitude or Observing someone else receiving gratitude. I thought the gratitude was all about being grateful It's actually receiving gratitude or observing some instance in which somebody is receiving genuine gratitude totally surprised me but and so this means give gratitude right give thanks but also be in a position to receive thanks and so It's these kind of nuanced things might seem small But one thing I try and do is you know I try and get since I can't walk around asking for gratitude That's not my style. I like to think my ears completely slightly more in check than that I try and really let people that I care about and I'm grateful to know that but I do that for them not for me and so That's that's something I pay a lot of attention to it feels kind of weak sauce It's kind of like people go that's kind of like we need stuff like gratitude The data show that gratitude and avoiding toxic people and focusing on good quality social interactions physical contact with animals kids and loved ones like you know Huge increases in serotonin oxytocin these are not these are no longer the kinds of things that are just talked about at the end of a yoga Class right this is real science with brain imaging and measurements of chemicals from the brain and blood and so I've tried to incorporate more of that stuff That isn't as kind of forward center of mass, you know like get after it kind of stuff I do that stuff, but I also try and you know have a good life and surround myself with good people Well, just think about the way it makes you feel when you're around good people and you enjoy your time You feel better while you're doing it. That's got to be good for you when you're depressed and things are bad You're lonely and you feel shitty like that doesn't feel good like that has to have some sort of a effect on your physiology Well, I think of it it absolutely does and I think of it as not just good in the present but it's also buffering me and everyone who does these sorts of things against the inevitable right? I mean Shit happens and people die and terrible things happen and and so in order to be in the best position to really see that stuff and React to it in the best possible way and also continue to move forward and do what's important to me in life I feel like all the stuff I'm doing is great in the day-to-day But it's also about the long term arc. I mean my parents are getting you the age look I hope they live to be another 20 you know 20 years more But chances are they're gonna go in the next 20 years I want to be in the best position to support them and I want to be able to be the best position to support me Frankly as well, so I think that doing all this stuff positions us to be You know like leaders and supporters of ourselves and of other people and I know that all sound kind of like you know word mumble jumbo, but It's the date you've talked about this before. It's the daily rituals like none of the things I described are something that you can just take and then It's all done and of course I do take supplements So you know we advertise these so it's sure but I take omega's and I take Athletic greens and I take some Tonga Ali and I do as many of the things as I possibly can I actually really enjoy that stuff and I think they're good data on all of it if your one is willing to look and be open-minded But even if you don't have access to those things There's so much that you can do with sunlight exercise gratitude hydration. Yeah, yoga needra 90% of the really effective things Don't cost anything except time. It's just time and discipline. Well when we're talking about There's another there's a benefit to what we're talking about with intermittent fasting is that you give yourself structure And that's very important for people even for people that are disciplined Like I find myself when I have a full day off and I have to do anything I find myself putting off my workout to later and later in the day and then I kind of like Lately get through my workout and I go oh my god like I'm better off when I'm busy because I'm busy putting off my workout later and later in the day and then I kind of like lazily get through my workout and I go, oh my god, like I'm better off when I'm busy because I'm busy I have a structure and I think there's a thing about like, like I used to think that or I do still think that about like sober October. Like when we do sober October, I'm not drinking or doing anything for one month and that structure helps me, you know? And I think when you say, oh, I'm going to cut back on my drinking, what does that even mean? Everybody knows that. Because I'm not a drinker, although these days I'm hearing a lot about all these delicious whiskies in Texas and I don't have a problem with alcohols. I'm always willing to try. Yeah, well they're not really delicious. They're delicious in comparison to whiskey. Coolly tastes way better. What alcohol do you actually enjoy? I've enjoyed whiskey but I wouldn't say it's delicious. Then why drink it? Because of the way it makes sense. I like the way it makes me feel. I like a little bit of the flavor. I do. It's a different thing. It's like a, it's a smooth weirdness to like a whiskey. You know, but it's not. Steak is delicious. Steak is delicious. There's a difference. And it wouldn't say a whiskey is delicious. Even if it's great whiskey. Yeah, and I don't smoke, but I have to say I used to smoke the occasional cigarette when I was in graduate school. And gosh, I miss nicotine. Nicotine's great. I love, I love the taste of tobacco. You're trying to vape pen? No, I'm afraid to do that. Why? Because I think I'll just attach that thing surgically to my mouth. I mean, I know where, where I know where that line is for me. It's a, a dread, clarity of mind, clarity and energy. I mean, adrenaline, nicotine, like those, those are vices for me. Cigarettes give you a wild head rush. I like that head rush. But I found that there's some really good vape pens to give you that head rush. And I don't feel like they're going to fuck your lungs up as bad. But, but kids are vaping like crazy now. And that's gotta be bad. It's not good. Well, they're also doing it all day long. And some of them are doing it with those lunchbox ones, those gigantic, those big vape boxes you ever see? They're huge. Some of these vape pens, they're not pens. They're calling vape pens. They're, it's big as a cell phone, but thicker. And they have like this big robot dick hanging off of it. And they're sucking on this thing and blowing giant clouds of, of vape smoke. A lot of things can be overdone, right? But that's also the case with fast food. If you want to eat fast food all day, good luck. You're going to have a fucking heart attack. It's going to be terrible for you. I don't think I've had a fast food in ages. I think I watched your election night episode and there were, and there was like all the comments coming through where about there were, there might have been a fast food hamburger on the day. No, play a fishes. We had a couple of, I love play a fishes. Are they, are they a little? Are they a fish? Oh, they're delicious. Terrible for you. But it was one of those things was like, I don't do that every day. I don't even do that every week. I don't even do that every month. Not clearly you take good care of yourself. I mean, for me, the vices that are, you know, croissants, pizza. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. But the, but the, the first drag off a freshly rolled cigarette is like nothing. It's crazy. It's, it's unbelievable. The clarity of mind and the taste and you know, cigarette smell disgusting. Why don't you just only have a first drag? Impossible. You might have a problem. It's like first drag is cigarette one tattoo. You know, it's like, come on, you know, it's impossible. You can't have one lays chips right in that. Yeah. One, one, yeah. One, uh, Pringle or whatever. What, what, what vices do you have? Do you have vices? Adrenaline used to be a vice, you know, I used to do risky behaviors. Not risky in the, you know, in the illegal sense. Fort stuff. Yeah. I mean, I went KJX at Shark Dive and loved every second of it. Great white sharks. You know, until I had an air failure down there. What happened? I had to call over another diver and do the share everything and holy shit. I was alone in the cage. Oh my God. I went with my buddy Michael Mueller, who's this fantastic photographer, like celebrity photographer, but he also takes pictures of sharks. We were studying fear. So we decided to go to VR of Great Wikes of Guadalupe. I went the first year, stayed in the cage, didn't exit. We got my scuba certification. Second year, this is 2017. Went out, bunch of friends, Brian McKenzie is kind of like a performance guy and former SEAL team guy. Anyway, we're out there. I'm in the cage. Three divers leave to do the KJX thing with their film, the VR. And I was just, I'm on the hooka line. And then at some point, what's a hooka? It's like a, it's a line up to the surface that you're breathing oxygen. Oh, but I was alone in the cage. I've been there the year before. So the sharks are coming in all over the place and they're huge. I mean, the girth is insane. But I'm in the cage and they're out of the cage. And then all of sudden, I got no air. I'm like, Jesus Christ. So I look up and the hose had kind of bow constricted up on itself. So I pop up. Remember, no scuba on me because I'm just in the cage. And the things like concrete, clank clank clank. And you're down 40 feet below the surface. It's like, oh, God, so I drop down to the corner. There's a spare tank down there. Open it up. Nothing. Nothing comes out. It's empty. It's empty. So I go to the other reserve tank. Open it up. Nothing. Okay. So now I'm, I'm screwed. So I'm getting real, I haven't had any air in a little bit, but probably only 10, 15 seconds, but freaking out. So I get up on top of the cage. I've got a weight belt on. And I'm like, okay, I guess I shoot for the surface because I can see the boat up there. Because if I stay down here, I'm clearly going to die. And then I'm thinking, okay, well, shooting for the surface is exactly what they like. Are they going to eat? You know, you're just kind of, I started to kind of panic about oh, geez. And at that point, one of the divers. Yeah. Oh, that's me there. That's why I'm in the cage. See, they're big. They're big animals. So how are they attracting these fish? We, you're not allowed to chum. So they just come in. They're super good. I mean, so yeah, well, you film that from the cage. So that was meat though. Yeah. So you can, you can keep tune up on the surface, but we're down in the deep cage. There's a surface cage and a deep cage. So then what happened? Yeah, molar shot that for our VR in the lab. So then what happened was this guy, Brock, who's one of the divers, that's molar, molar wears a yellow suit to look more like a tuna so they come closer. Oh, fuck. Yeah. Yeah, he's a, you guys are getting along. He's a long time Hollywood guy who's a kind of, you know, photographer who does these adventures. So then one of the divers saw me. And I was like, you know, like I need air and he kind of looked at me. But, and so he kicked his way back over, but that was a long wait. And then we did the share air thing, but now two divers are out. And we're there sharing air. And there's only so much air before you eventually run out and there's nothing in the reserves. Eventually they came back and then we, we pulled the rope and got out. And it was, yeah, it was enough of a scary experience for me that also like, oh god. So we, and actually I got out and guy from the SEAL teams came over to me super calm, typical of those guys. So what do you take away from that experience? And I was like, check the safety tanks. He was like, check the safety. But I will say this, I'm not tough. Like this is not to kind of, you know, inflate myself. But the next day I woke up and I was seriously freaked out. And so I actually went down the next day again. And I KJX it did. And the reason I did it is because first of all, this when I KJX it I was on scuba. So I felt totally contained. I knew I wasn't going to dive in air failure. And the other reason is everything we know about trauma and the treatment of trauma is that if you live with that bug in your brain about quote unquote, almost dying. In fact, I don't even like to say that. That's stuck in you. So I went down there in the cage and then I KJX it did. And what you keep saying cage, swim out in the cage with the sharks turns out when they're swimming at you. If you swim toward them, they bank off. If you don't, if you shoot for the surface or something, they go, oh, you're prey and they can go after you. But if you just swim toward them, then they bank off pretty early. So how do you get to the surface? Well, you get back in the cage to get back up. So that you get into the cage at the top, they lower it in crane, then you all go out on scuba. And then you're swimming around getting video, the sharks come at you, you go at them and then they bank off. Okay. So you're saying you cage exited meaning you swam around with them with the scuba. Do you not? You went to the surface. Correct. I, we, the next day I woke up and I was just so distraught about what had happened the day before. I decided there's only one way to deal with this. And that's to cage exit to go down there. But this time, leave the cage and this time, leave it on scuba. And then it felt like a victory, right? I'm here. But when you go up to the surface, do you go back in the cage to go back up to the surface? Yes. Yes. Because you don't want to just swim up to the top. Correct. Correct. But in the culture of cage exit, great white shark diving, there's an interesting twist. For years, guys have been going out to Guadalupe and doing this stuff. It's a real kind of machismo culture who can get closest, who can get the camera almost into the sharks mouth, and for years, there was a lot of kind of one-hopping and posting things online. And then a couple of years ago, out of what seemed like nowhere, ocean Ramsey, this female free diver shark expert shows on BBC video her swimming with no scuba with the biggest great white shark anyone's ever seen. I think they call it big blue. And she's holding on to the fins. So all these guys like almost testosterone of like, like, I k jags it in and I got this close and that close. And here comes this lady and she just demolishes the scene. Like no one has done what she's done. This shark is so big. This is this is her. This is insane. Her husband shot this footage from what I understand. Oh my God. Imagine your wife doing this and you go, baby, what are you doing? So she doesn't live in that fucking school, but she's holding on to this shark. So, you know, it seemed to mind either. I mean, when I look at this, I mean, I get nervous. I else, it's also beautiful. But what I love about it is, you know, there was so much pigeon-chesting around. She looks like a fish too. I would eat her. Fows the shark. Like doesn't like her, like even the way her legs are with the outfit on. It's so extra delicious. Put the size of that thing. Biggest one ever seen on record. Really? Yeah. How big is it? I don't know. I mean, a ten or two other so-and-all. So, ten or twelve foot shark is a big shark because the girth is what's freaky, right? That's probably a sixteen foot shark. I'm probably going to get this wrong. I'm sure that the shark and he's just so come on. All that. Look at all that. She's petting it or he's petting it. Yeah. It makes it. A few people out of their fucking minds. Yeah, they're other months. The, um, just lucky it's not hungry. Right. And there are other two notes there. So, Guadalupe is an amazing place. This is a big rock-jutting up out of the ocean. And I wanted to learn the history of this place. Turns out that if this is true, what I was told by one of the local officials is that some pollutants play in with them. There's dolphins are talking with them. Some politician in Mexico, his wife had an affair with some guy and apparently they put the guy out there on the island. But the island is known. Maybe that's just lore. But people were spearfishing out there and getting eaten. They were putting the, you know, bloody fish on their hip and getting munched. And so they realized this is filled with great whites. And when you, when you drop anchor there, it's like, I remember every time going out there and within their twice now, I was thinking, oh, we're not going to see any sharks. You drop anchor, a shark breaches. They're just, they're everywhere. It's just shark suit. Is it just because of the high amount of tuna? Tuna. And I think they probably breed near there. There's something called shark cafe, which is not far from there. The oceanographers like to study. Anyway, anyway, so that's one of your adrenaline things. Yeah, that's right. So you asked me, yeah, so I used to do stuff like that, which is frankly stupid, right? Because I make my living on land and I'd like to somebody have a family and all that kind of stuff. And that's not productive for that sort of thing. Right. So yeah, that sort of thing is the kind of thing that I should avoid if I'm going to have a long life. Jamie, who are you telling me to someone got their hand bitten off one of them jackass guys? Yeah, you didn't want to watch the video, but yeah. And jackass like the promo during shark week. Yeah, got it. Not off, not off. It got mangled bitten, I guess. And it was fucked up and had to have surgery. And I believe he still has his hands on him. Jamie. Those guys are crazy shooting cells out of cannons. That kind of thing never appealed to me. But, you know, I'm not a fighter. I've gotten fights when I was a kid. I'd loved the clarity of mine that came from that adrenaline. It was boxing in ring. So, you know, it's fun. I mean, but I think as a 46 year old, you know, and where my brain is my living this kind of of thing. Yeah, not good to get hit in the head. What are your vices? My life. Um, yeah, I do, I do like junk food occasionally. I do like to drink probably more than I should. And joy, I promise I do shows all the time. They're in nightclubs. And, you know, we have a couple of cocktails. And then next thing you know, a couple of me is three or four. And then we do podcast and podcast a lot of times will be drinking. If it's anything that I should do less of, it's definitely but all I'm around a very boozy culture. You know, a lot of my friends drink and drink pretty hard. And when it comes to how many of them are actually healthy? So, fucking small number. I always worry about the number of like suicides in among comedians or early deaths like the bolluschi thing. Now granted, I'm not really aware or um, but you're prior to say that seems like stuff hits early in that community. Well, the bolluschi thing in the prior thing are probably both related to drugs. You know, I was around prior and his dying days, unfortunately. Because he was when he was doing really poorly, he decided to go back on stage. And I think it's like, you know, try to try to recapture his loss love. You know, his body was failing him. And so the thing that excited him, got him at least to give him some sort of sense of purpose was to go back at the comedy store. And I worked with him for about five, maybe six weeks where he was going up all the time. And I was always going on after him. So it would be Richard prior than me. And so I got to see him. He had to carry him to the stage. And then they had to put him in the chair. And then they had to crank up the sound like, like, you know, he was really loud because his voice was, you know, he had no energy. And I remember thinking like, he's not old enough for this. Like, whatever this neural neurologically degenerative disease that he has, like, whether that happened because he was, you know, had a genetic propensity predisposition for this or whether it's because of a lot of cocaine. Because I know a lot of people, I don't know if there's, they're related. But I I know a lot of people that did a lot of cocaine in the 70s and the 80s. And they developed like some serious neurological problems as they got older. Sure. And what it's mixed in with, I mean, one thing we know for sure is that amphetamines kill neurons. Yeah. So no question with them. That's what cocaine have a similar effect. It seems likely seems very likely. I mean, the early studies of MDMA and whether or not it was neurotoxic actually had one of them had to be retracted because they accidentally used a amphetamine and cocaine like substance instead accidentally in these monkeys. And they showed neurodegeneration. How do they accidentally confuse MDMA with that? Laboratories or, you know, human, human error is a big thing. You mean COVID-19? Is that what you're saying? You're saying the Wuhan lab? You're saying that. That's another discussion. Although, you know, I mean, look, my lab works with pseudo rabies virus with different herpes viruses, with different adenoviruses. Humans pipette those viruses. It's their reason you have biosafety protocols. It's because people make errors and protocols prevent error. So these people accidentally gave these animals an amphetamine. Right. And then later they discovered that what they'd given them was not what they thought. And so they quite responsibly retracted that paper. There is evidence that high doses of any highly dopaminergic drug. So cocaine amphetamine, things of that sort can be neurotoxic. If you make neurons really, really active, exceedingly active, they will die. Right. They're electrical cells. They electrically active cells. They can die. Excited toxicity, excitotoxicity. There's also neurotoxicity. I mean, there's all sorts of ways that this can happen. And yeah, I'm not saying that Michael J. Fox as Parkinson's because he was a cocaine user. I mean, I saw the movie bright light to big city. I don't know if he was actually a cocaine user or not. He was in that movie. But we've seen, I mean, amazing talent. Like I'm a huge Joe Strummer fan clash. And that Strummer was an inmate, you know, died so young of a heart attack known amphetamine user. Right. Sadly, Michael J. Fox and Parkinson's is that related to recreational drug. I don't know if he did anything. I don't know. He never heard of any of these. I would think family ties. So I think of like this really conservative kid. So I'm not saying he did. But prior or John Candy, I don't know if candy was, candy was enormous. It was so that they help. And John Belushi died of a speedball. He died of mixing cocaine and heroin, the same thing the river Phoenix died from. Yeah. I mean, there's a susceptibility. Guys I grew up with these names won't mean anything to people, but guys kind of famous in the San Francisco skateboarding punk rock scene. A lot of them died young, died of heart attacks five or six years after they stopped doing a lot of cocaine. Because their body was still fucked. I think it can, I think there is evidence that it can adjust the function of calcium channels on the heart. And then later, you know, it takes a smaller insult to put them under. Anyway, that's it's sad. I mean, it's it's not as we were talking about with hormones and all the other things and light, etc. It's not just about the effect it has in the short term. Right. It's the long arc. And the long arc can be negative. Like we're talking about or the long arc can be positive. Yeah. Well, I mean, I'm almost 55. I'll be 55 in August. And I'm very happy that I can still use my body the way I can. Because I always assumed that when someone got to be 55, they were done. Like your body's going to fall apart. No, it turns out the measures and I know a teeah talks about this much more in a much more sophisticated way than I can. But one's ability to get up off the ground without assistance. One ability to jump in land, one's ability to hang from a bar for a minute. These are measures not unlike blood pressure and heart rate, resting heart rate and things like that. So about how well your nervous system can communicate to your musculature and whether or not your musculature and ligaments and bones can handle all that. And so I think being the one thing we know is that being physically active is superb at extending your life and improving your life. Yeah. You're improving your life is I mean, I don't know how much you can really extend. Here's the deals like we really don't have a lot of data on people that started working out when they were like in the early teens and kept going, supplementing their hormones, supplementing vitamin and supplement and then got into their 50s and 60s and 70s. We don't have a lot of those people. We do. Because first of all, people don't put in that kind of effort because it's not mandatory. Right. If you're a professional athlete, you don't put in that effort because you're not going to be a professional athlete when you're 60 and 70 years old. You're just not. So a lot of times in people that are professional athletes, they get to the point where they retire. One of the things they do is they get fat and they stop. I mean, it's really kind of bizarre. Well, this is the old thing about that they used to say, you know, you stop lifting weights. You'll quote-unquote turn to fat, which is impossible. It's because people kept eating and they stopped training. My role model and all this is actually very perhaps surprising to some people. Recently, I had Edo Pertal, you know, on the podcast. You know who my hero is? His mother. He has a video of his mother when she's in her 60s. She started training at 58. And this was like seven years ago doing pull-ups for reps, doing back bends, doing all the kind of stuff that, you know, Edo ish stuff. But in her 60s, which means that now she's in her early 70s and he told me that she's still doing five sets of five pull-ups, dips, like legitimate work. And so to me, if I can do that, if I'm dipping and I'm doing pull-ups and I'm running, then I'll consider myself a winner at that age. I'm going to send you something, Jamie, my friend Jesse. She's a stunt woman and she does Ninja Warrior. I'm going to sell send you her go to Jesse graph, G-R-A-F-F-P-W-R. She does a lot of wild shit. But you can find videos of her mom and her working out. So her mom does these Ninja Warrior workouts and her mom is doing chin-ups and all kinds of wild stuff. Her mom is super, super impressive. Like this is her mother. Oh, look, Ocean Ramsey commented the shark person. Ah, there you go. So they're all in a club of bad asses. So I met Jesse at a taren tactical where she was working on her gun skills. But look at her mom. Like swinging and catching chin-up bars and doing all this wild stuff. And Jesse, she does those Ninja Warrior competitions and like it said, a lot of stunt work as well. So super physically fit. But there's a bunch of videos of her mom and her going through these incredible workouts together. And her mom is just amazingly fit. That's awesome. It's like just keep going. The thing is like to keep using your body. If you stop, it's very difficult to sort of regain that kind of mobility and physical strength and coordination and your VO2 max and all that stuff. But if you don't stop and you just continue it long as you're smart about it and you don't push yourself too hard, you don't injure yourself and injuries are a big problem, right? Because injuries require a long time where you're not, you're going to have to at least be semi-sedentary your body relax. At the very least, you're not going to be able to go full, full bore. Which I think you kind of have to do. Your body has to know, hey, this crazy fuck wants to do this stuff all the time. We need to have that kind of mobility, that kind of physical strength, that kind of joint function. Well, I think that the transition from unfit to fit is where people see the most dramatic effects. And that should be encouraging. I have a colleague her name is Wendy Suzuki. For years, she studied memory. She's at NYU. Now she's the incoming dean of students at NYU. The reason I'm so happy about that is that she's talked about and published really good scientific studies on 30 minutes of cardiovascular exercise early in the day. And now she's a 10 minute cold shower person because she lives in New York hard to get access to ice tubs and things. Improving focus, stress resilience, cognitive function. I mean, finally there are data to point to the fact that doing cardiovascular or weight training exercise, if it's intense enough, and it comes early in the day especially, but also if you do it late in the day, they've also shown that people's cognitive function actually goes up. This was all correlative before. It was like, well, you exercise your heart, your cardiovascular system is better. Therefore, your brain is better. Therefore, there's this indirect effect on mood and performance. But now they know everything from grip strength to attention capacity to tasks, switching, they're all these measures of like the streep test of all these things of cognitive flexibility and all of that improved by physical exercise. Category, over and over, it doesn't matter if it's boys, girls, men, women, what age. And so now we no longer have to speculate as to whether or not exercise is good for the brain also. It absolutely is. And her work is now being transferred into basically curriculum for students. Her goal is that students are going to go through college not just getting their grades, but coming out healthier and hopefully that will wick out to everybody, not just people in college, obviously, but will wick out to everybody. So they're going to be running studies, getting data from these kids. I think it's really important because I think that everything is kind of murky and kind of indirect up to a point and now they're actually really solid data. Well, there's also this prejudice, unfortunately, that anything physical is not an intellectual pursuit, that it's almost the opposite. It's a vanity pursuit. That's ridiculous. But that is a prejudice that many really intelligent people otherwise intelligent people have. Yeah. Well, a colleague at Columbia has a Nobel Prize Richard Axel, plays squash like multiple times per week. He used to play basketball, though he says not very well. Eric Kendell Nobel Prize in research on memory, swam a mile three times a week now, it's half a mile because in late 90s, he still does it. Towards the results, Nobel Prize revision, my scientific great grandparents, 96 years old, still jogs every morning 45 minutes and still mentally sharp. So the smartest people, most accomplished scientists, I know, all extremely physically active for decades. So whatever smart people think that physical activity is just for me, ads and jocks, they're obviously not smart enough to know how it really works. It's just, it's not that they're not smart. It's just this unfortunate prejudice that people adopt and then have a very difficult time shedding. I think they associate physical fitness and physical activity with being a pursuit of people that are kind of like clod hoppers. Yeah. I think you're right. I think there's also a little bit of the tone that came back to me early on. Some colleagues have been really interested in like, oh, I'm really excited about eating more omega's or eating more fish or whatever, taking athletic greens, etc. And then some of them like, oh, it's all pills and powder kind of stuff. They don't, they see it as over there. And when they don't realize that sure, you don't need those things, but a general theme of taking care of one cell physically can translate does translate to taking care of one cell mentally. The reverse is not true. Plenty of intellectual smart people who look like melted candles, right? And who function like melting it? They sleep with their mouth open. They have sleep apnea. I mean, they're, they're a wreck. And that wreck shows up somewhere in their 60s. And I see this all the time because I've attended no fewer than 10 funerals for brilliant people. And those funerals with one or two exceptions were all because they took terrible care of themselves. Well, I in my world in the comedy world, obviously, I see that because most of my friends don't take care of themselves. You know, it's a good percentage of people in that world when they get to a certain age like there's friends that are my age and they look like they're my dad. Do you I almost wonder whether or not they somehow pair the idea that their talent and their ability is linked to their being unhealthy? Oh, yeah, there's magic crazy, but it's just an excuse. It's just an excuse. It really is. It's like a thing. I used to think that I shouldn't meditate and I, uh, because meditation and any sort of enlightenment would fuck with my comedy because it would somehow or another make me more peaceful and kind and that wouldn't be good for losing your edge. Yeah, but it's really just an excuse. It's just an excuse. Comedy is a totally different thing. It's an art form. It's I'm fuck your art form up. But I, you know, when you're young and insecure, you don't really understand why you're funny at all. So you're like, what if I fuck it up? What if I lose it? You know, it's a fleeting thing as it is. I'm only funny like five out of six times right now. But you know, but if you look at the top people, I say, you or you look at a Chappelle, you look like the people that are like I talked about no, like three Nobel prize winners that their work will carry on for health and science for thousands of years if we exist that long. Yeah. So in that top tier, they get it in the lower tier, I don't know. But in the middle tier is where I see a lot of the unfortunate behavior of not preserving oneself. So do you, if you look at like the best of the best, do you see good self care there? The most important thing is focus on your craft. That's the most important thing. There's a lot of great guys that don't, they're not taking care of themselves. But like like Chappelle, Chappelle smokes and he drinks. But my God, he, he focuses on his craft. He really cares about comedy and he cares a lot about it. And he's a really interesting, thoughtful person. He spends a lot of time thinking, you know, he's not flipping in his perceptions and his thoughts. That's the most important thing. That's the most important thing. Focus on your craft. You know, there is a great benefit to being healthy, great benefit in many, many, many ways in emotional stability and your ability to have energy to keep going. And that's one of the things that I try to relate to young people that aren't that healthy, but are young comics. I say, don't think of it as like, I don't want to be an athlete. I want to be a comic. Think of it as you, your vehicle for doing anything is your physical body. That's all you have. When you're tired, like you do two shows a night, you know, like two shows a night is weird because like it's not just you're doing two hours of comedy. You're doing two hours. It's like I have a seven o'clock show and maybe a nine, 30 show, right? So that means not only I'm doing an hour, but then I have to wait two and a half hours to do another hour. And then, you know, if you're not smart with you, I eat fruit in between, I make sure that I'm, you know, well hydrated. But I think of these things because I'm an athlete, whereas other guys, they're fucking off and they're just drinking and the second show rolls around and they're drunk and they're tired. I've been there before and I've had bad shows because of that. It's very embarrassing. And so you have to really be careful. Like when you're, you know, you're looking at your body, don't look at it as just, it's just life. I'm just living life. Like, no, no, there's a specific thing you're going to need. You're going to need to have a certain amount of energy. You're going to need to have a certain amount of tension and then you're going to need that in about two hours. So prepare, prepare wisely. I was thinking about two shows and I, we did some live shows recently and, uh, for later the podcast and it was, it was draining. Oh my goodness. I much prefer to be on the microphone. Well, it's draining if you're not accustomed to it, but if you're accustomed to it, it becomes invigorating. So like when I get home from a show, I'm not drained. I'm usually excited. I mean, I enjoyed it. It was nice to interact with people because podcasting a little bit like shouting into a tunnel, especially the solo episodes. It's nice to know that people out there was, yeah, you see them. Definitely. It was, it was nice and to get questions in person felt really good. And it's a lot like the classroom that I came up in, you know, lecturing as the little kid at the carnival. And then, you know, the carnivals makes that like I was like, the carnival. But, uh, to get questions in person felt really good. And it's a lot like the classroom that I came up in lecturing as the little kid at the carnivals. And then you know the carnivals makes that like I was like, Carnegie, but it wasn't a Carnegie. But as a tell me, well, glory, oh, like goodness, the glory. I could tell you more about Aquaria and fish tanks and everyone know I always say if nothing else, I'm going to cure insomnia. You know, well listen, man, I appreciate you very much and I appreciate your podcast and all the information that you put out there, you very, very much helped me. And I think people like you are a really valuable research and I'm a resource rather. And I'm really glad that you're not just contained the classrooms and that putting out that podcast and making it accessible to so many people, it's really, really valuable. So thank you. Thank you. My pleasure. Yeah, you've been a huge inspiration. You and Lax and few others have really paved this road and I'm very grateful. I do believe that people have should have access to information and education and so just trying to do it. We're super fortunate that we have these kind of platforms that this exists because this has never been a thing in history before. And it's a thing now. We're very lucky. Now they can't put the lid back on. Now they're parked. All right. Thank you, brother. Thank you. Bye, everybody.