So you get out of the military in 2011. This is how I understand the genesis of the book that comes out today, the Fort Brad cartel. You get out in 2011, you're a reporter. At some point, you start to understand that there are a lot of deaths at Fort Brad, which is America's biggest army base, some of this special forces. And you start to investigate those deaths. That's right. I first read about a double homicide on Fort Brad that took place at the tail end of 2020, just an ordinary article in the New York Times that said that these two veteran special operation soldiers, Billy Levine and Timothy Dumas have been found murdered on a remote training range of Fort Brad. They'd both been shot to death and their bodies have been dumped in the woods. I also read that Billy Levine was a Delta Force operator. And in all my time reporting on the military, working as a war reporter and then before that serving in the army myself, I had never heard of a Delta Force operator being in the news for any reason because it's the most secretive and elite unit in the entire military. The police were saying that this was believed to be a double homicide from a drug deal going wrong. And so I knew that there had to be more to the story because you can imagine if like, let's say a CIA agent was found shot to death and dumped in a park in Maryland or something like that. And the police were saying it was a drug deal. I mean, that's the level of secrecy and that's how elite Delta Force is. The military is Delta Force. Delta Force is what's called a special mission unit. It is an army unit. It's part of what's called the Joint Special Operations Command. It was created in the late 1970s to be an elite counter terrorism force for things like hostage rescue. For many years, they were obsessed with the problem or the danger of loose nuclear weapons and drilled constantly for scenarios in which they would be called upon to secure a loose nuclear weapon. This is all pre-9-11. After 2001, after the war started in Iraq and Afghanistan, Delta Force grew quite a bit and came to have a much more prominent role in U.S. military operations and what they primarily specialize in are clandestine operations, covert operations. What we might call black operations. That's Delta Force and it's headquartered at Fort Bragg. They get no publicity. None. I actually looked into this when I was writing the book to see if they had ever been talked about in the 20 years that the U.S. had been at war since 2001. I found that in fact, they were talked about in the context of the 2004 Abu Ghraib scandal and had been implicated in abuse of prisoners in Iraq. Other than that, for 20 years, they kept their name completely out of the news. So there are other units famously that have worked with Hollywood filmmakers, a lot whose members retire and go on talk shows, including this one. And you know, just sort of know quite a bit about the seals, for example, the various seal teams and their training, et cetera. But has there ever been a Delta operator in public talking about the training or the missions or anything like that? There are former Delta Force officers who I've seen occasionally talk on TV. But as far as the regular enlisted guys go, their culture really is. You know, the saying that they have that I've heard repeated is that, you know, seals right books, Delta guys, right history, something to that effect. It's very much part of their culture not to come on TV shows, not to talk and not to write books. Interesting. So they're by increasing the mystique. And I think the assumption that we all have is that they're, because they're the most secretive, they are the most impressive. They're very impressive in certain ways. You know, the level of physical fitness that you have to have to be selected to be an operator is very impressive. Marksmanship, you know, other skills that they have very tough, tough people for the most part. But as I talk about extensively in the book, the unit has, I think, declined in recent years in terms of its culture. So let's begin with the story of the Delta operator Billy Levine and the man with whom he was found dead. Who killed them and why? That's the question that animates this book from the beginning to the end. I mean, although I talk a lot about military history, I talk a lot about foreign policy. It really is a murder mystery. This book is at its heart. And the question is who killed those two guys? And the fact is that there are many, many possible suspects and that kind of is what made it such a rich topic for exploration. It turns out that Billy Levine, 18 months before he himself was found murdered, had killed a really guy at his house in Feitville. In fact, he had shot and killed his best friend in fellow Green Beret, a guy named Mark Leshaker, right in front of his Mark Leshaker's daughter, who was about six years old at the time. And the police, the local police, the sheriff's department, the district attorney of Cumberland County, North Carolina, and the U.S. Army criminal investigations division completely covered up that murder. And I use that word covered up advisedly. I'm actually an attorney myself, so I don't use it lightly. But I devote the first two chapters of the book to showing what the evidence was against Levine and how that case was adjudicated and how he was not even placed under arrest. He was just lightly questioned and let go that same night on the grounds that it had been supposedly a justifiable homicide when in fact that theory, that defense was definitively contradicted by the physical evidence. So Levine having previously killed a guy then goes on to commit. Three are, excuse me, I think four or five felony offenses in Feitville over the next 18 months, including aggravated assault with a deadly weapon for shooting at a guy in the streets of Feitville, manufacturing controlled substance for cooking crack in his house, lots of weapons charges. He'd even been arrested for harboring an escapee, which is a new one to me. And in every case, the DA dropped the charges against him. Who was Billy Levine? He was an, he was a Delta Force soldier. He had done about, he had done more than 12 deployments, more than a dozen deployments in his career. He wasn't a high level officer in the Delta Force, but he was a veteran operator who had deep experience in America's classified assassination programs in Iraq and Syria and Afghanistan. So that was the reason why I think he was dealt with with such leniency by the authorities. Why did he shoot his best friend to death? It's very mysterious why he did that. Both of them had severe drug problems. This is one thing. Levine was not a, he was not a one dimensional character by any means. He's someone who's military career and who's downward trajectory, I reconstruct in the book because I think it's so illustrative of what's happened to our military over the past 20 years. He was such a great example of what has happened. He developed very severe PTSD, moral injury. He came to believe that the wars in which he was participating were morally wrong. He had severe substance abuse issues, very severe. He was smoking crack every day and doing a lot of other drugs as well. Wait, while he was a Delta operator or smoking crack every day? Yes. And I learned that that's not that unusual to my surprise. My understanding was in your description suggests that these guys are like basically Olympic athletes whose physical condition is going to be monitored, right? Assume by by the unit doctor or somebody. When you know operators have a particular type of physical fitness that you really only find in the army, which is the kind of guy who can run a two mile run in 12 minutes, but also smoke a pack a day. And get drunk five times a week. Yeah. I mean, they're very, very savages. This is just savages. Yeah. That's impressive. Yeah. So, but this guy was maintaining his, you know, his training schedule while smoking crack every day. Yes. And I was shocked to the degree to which because not only, you know, I served in the conventional part of the military, not in the special forces. And I had also been out for more than 10 years. I was very, very surprised when I started investigating for bragging, learning the extent to which cocaine use is normalized in the greenberries, not just in Delta Force, but in all the army special forces, which is a much larger organization than Delta Force is pretty small. But the, but the greenberries, thousands of troops and people just, you know, people that live in this community live in Feyaville or live in Moore County, you know, to them. It's just understood that this is just part of the lifestyle. Hey, it's your brag. But we're pretty confident. This show is the most vehemently pro dog podcast you're ever going to see. We can take or leave some people, but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best. They really are our best friends. And so for that reason, we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch Pet. It's the fastest growing pet telehealth service. Dutch.com is on a mission to create what you need, what you actually need, affordable, quality, veterinary care, anytime no matter where you are. They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately. It's offering an exclusive discount dutches for our listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code Tucker for $50 off. That is an unlimited vet visit. $82 a year. 82 bucks a year. We actually use this. Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance in a 10 minute college. Pretty amazing. You never have to leave your house. You don't have to throw the dog in the truck. No wasted time waiting for appointments, no wasted money on clinics or visit fees, unlimited visits and follow-ups for an extra cost plus free shipping on all products from up to five pets. It sounds amazing. It couldn't be real, but it actually is real. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code Tucker for $50 off your veterinary care per year. Your dogs, your cats, and your wallet will thank you. Who is the man he shot his best friend? Mark Leshaker. He was a Greenberry in the 19th Special Forces group, but currently sharpened when he died. He was, so the 19th Special Forces group is actually a national guard unit. So he was a Greenberry. He was still serving in the national guard. I don't believe he was an active duty the day he died. I'm not sure if it makes much of a difference, but to be precise. Was Levine ever punished for killing him? No, he wasn't. In any way. Not in any way. He remained an active duty operator on Delta Force after killing a guy in his house when they were both completely out of their minds on drugs. Levine was not even given a toxicology test after he shot somebody completely crazy. The reason for that is because once you have done 10 deployments in service of covert operations, assassination operations. Unacceptable national security outcome from the perspective of authorities for you to go to prison for you to be in a courtroom for a new reason. Those guys, they are not supposed to exist and they just can't process them through the criminal justice system in ordinary ways. To me that's what made his death so intriguing because so many people alleged the sources that I quote, I want to be responsible about this and not say that it's what I believe, but the sort of conventional wisdom that when I first got into the case, people were saying that the military itself had killed Billy Levine because he had turned into such a problem and was messing up so badly. I don't want to derail your story, but you've referred twice to assassination programs. I wasn't aware that the United States admits it assassinates people. When did that start? That when did that become a feature of modern war or statecraft or whatever it is? What is that? What are you talking about? In 2001, President George W. Bush signed secret orders that essentially, and they're secret. So I haven't read them, but based on the best reporting that I've seen, he signed secret orders that essentially reversed the assassination ban that had been put in place decades earlier. Actually, the groundwork for that legal move had been laid under President Reagan. There were memos in place or certain authorities executive orders in place that did allow for assassination in the case when the target was deemed to be a terrorist. Those authorities actually weren't used to my understanding for decades, but when after September 11th attacks, Bush reversed that. You're saying that you haven't heard too much about it, but that's because we often hear about it by a certain euphemism, which is night raids. You may have heard, I'm sure you have heard that under President Obama, the war making all of the war effort in Afghanistan became about drone strikes and night raids. Will night raids is just euphemism for assassinations? Yes, if somebody comes out waving a white flag, I'll probably shot anyway. But under certain circumstances, they will take people prisoner. But for the most part, when they hit a target, every military age man, as they say on that target dies, whether or not he's guilty of a crime or even suspected of a crime. Will guilty of a crime? I mean, there's no accountability over this because it all depends upon the determinations of intelligence analysts and the Joint Special Operations Command and the CIA and what have you, the people that generate targets, you know, don't force us hits the targets. They may not necessarily generate them all, but they do have a substantial intelligence assets that develop targets. But there's no way to check their work and say, you know, who these people really were. But you know, as I talk about extensively in the book and trying to get some clarity around this, you know, the error rate is believed to be very high, you know, at least 50%. Is this a long-standing feature of American military policy? Have we been assassinating people for centuries? Is this an American thing to do? Absolutely not. And in fact, before the modern era, before the 21st century, assassination was not considered to be, you know, a valid or, you know, credit worthy tool of warmaking, it was considered to be something dirty and down low. I mean, and there also wasn't perceived to be a tactical advantage necessarily in assassinating enemy commanders in the enemy chain of command. There was more of a sense in fighting out, things out honestly on the battlefield. And it has, that has completely changed. And, you know, I think one big influence on American policy. Wait till up until 9-11. You're saying, so when you say modern area, you don't mean like the advent of electricity, you mean like 25 years ago. So I'm not a military historian by any means, but my understanding is that there was extensive assassination operations also in Vietnam. And we call that the, that's known as the Phoenix program where the CIA was using assassination system dismantle what was perceived as enemy command and control networks. Was it pretty effective? We won that war. You know, actually I think that a lot of people in the sort of national security set did, although it elicited a great deal of repugnance in the public. I think that my sense is that it was perceived as an effective way of waging war. Well, then why didn't we win? When we haven't won any wars since 1945, unless you count the Gulf War. So I don't think we're doing anything right basically, including assassinations. Yeah. I mean, that is a stat that kind of hard to argue with that you almost never hear in and around Washington like almost last time you won a war. Definitely you spend a trillion dollars a year and you can't want to freak in war. You can't beat the Houthis like maybe it's time for some reform or to rethink what we're doing. It's not working. It's even by their own measurement. Sure. I completely agree. And I think a lot of people, including people who are anti-war and who would prefer to see a more isolationist foreign policy, complacingly assume that because we spend ungodly amounts of money on our military, a trillion dollars this year on the national defense budget, that whatever else you think of our foreign policy, at least we have the world's most powerful military. That assumption goes largely unexamined and the reality is we don't. I was just a Trump's military parade in Washington, D.C., a magazine semi to cover that. And a lot of those troops were from Fort Bragg and you may have seen on TV what a joke the parade turned out to be how disorganized, how unimpressive it was. And the technology that was on display, you know, people expected to be this fishistic spectacle, this authoritarian spectacle, like you might see in North Korea or whatever. But I was looking at the troops going by, not even marching in step. You know, the Bradley fighting vehicles, which are 40 years old and performed very poorly, haven't been replaced with anything new or saying goes for the Abrams tank. It's been in service for more than 40 years. The Black Hawk helicopter just before the parade, a Black Hawk helicopter had crashed into a passenger plane over the batonic river unless we forget killed 68 people who were aviation disasters since 2001. I'm looking at all of this and I'm thinking, man, our army is in sorry, sorry shape. And that was the 250th anniversary of the US Army because the army actually predates the Constitution and predates the creation of our nation. And to me, it is very worrisome to see the state of decline and disrepair in which it's currently languishing. And I think the stuff that's going on in Fort Bragg is highly symptomatic of just that certainly is. So back to assassinations. So assassinations are it sounds by your description, like a big part of our foreign policy or our war making efforts. A central part of it, sure. And Delta is basically conducting a lot of these, some of these. Absolutely. Delta Force and then SEAL Team 6, which is Delta's Naval counterpart. Also part of the Joint Special Operations Command and you hear a lot more about them. Can I ask a dumb question? Why so if you're fighting a war where you're in some protracted struggle with violence or it's a war, but you're like fighting, why wouldn't if you could, why wouldn't you capture key players from the other side in order to extract intelligence from the usable intelligence from them? I thought that's what we used to do. I don't want to paint them in a cartoonish light by them. I mean, Delta and Json. Well, they're not making these to say. I mean, these are made, as you said, by the command structure. Often it's direct orders in the White House. And with also with input from certain congressional leaders are involved in these target and decisions to a degree that I was not aware. Congressional leaders? Apparently I've heard anecdotes about operators sitting on target and waiting for the go ahead from Congress. I'm not sure what to make of that because all of this is so classified, but that's what I've heard in any event there's no doubt. Why would it be classified? I'm sorry. Well, that's another big component of the evolution of the American way of making more and waiting more for the past 20 years is the increasing secrecy around all of this, which I think also has had an extremely deleterious effect. You're not able to complete a sentence without me interrupting you. I'm so sorry. No, it's your hey. Thanks so many things that are evocative and interesting. I'm trying to track them all that. Okay. I will stop interrupting you. So you said I don't want to paint a clownish picture of the Delta operators, but they do, they do capture people. They will abduct people. They will take them to like a ship that's in international waters and do God knows what to them to get information. But in most cases, they're just killing the person that they're targeting. Boy, there's a lot of lying and some of the worst deception surrounds your health. How come Washington never talks about the poison in your food supply? What about what's in your drugs? You have a right to know what goes into your mouth and the more you know, the more distressing it is. What's critical to seek out alternatives you can trust. Now, as an alternative to the garbage that you can pick up at an extraordinary strongly recommend are a fountain from peak. It's a clean electrolyte designed for rest. It's got triple biomass, magnesium and no sugar nor artificial sweeteners nor artificial flavors. Everything in it is real. And it's good because staying up all night, wrecks your ability to function. Ari Fountain can help. It's not a sleep bait. It's not an narcotic, a sedative. That's what your body actually needs to recover and thrive. People hear rave about it. We wake up feeling sharp and clear. Peak has really made a big difference. So if you care about actual health and peak is the way to go. PIQUE. And right now you can get up to 20% off for life when you start your first month with peak. Go to peaklife.com slash Tucker. This PIQUE. Life.com slash Tucker. You'll feel it the very first morning. It's just great. What kind of people are these? Like villagers and far away Middle Eastern countries or others? It all depends on the theater. It depends upon the time. I can tell you what they're doing right now because Trump made an interesting comment and one of his speeches earlier this year where he talked about. He said something to the effect of since my inauguration. It had been a few months since he was inaugurated. He said since my inauguration, we have eliminated 68 terrorists in Iraq, Syria and Somalia. He's all going to come home. We're going to have this kind of violence here. You can't commit violence without facing the effects of violence. It's just a principle of the universe. It'll live by this sort of diabothetist sort that never changes. And if we're running around and assassinating people, we will have Americans assassinated. Fact. Well, some of that blowback, I fully agree. Some of that blowback can be seen in cases like Billy Levine where he's someone who has since he was a very young man has been raised in this system of violence who comes back and is unable to control it. And when he perceives small threats like with his buddy Mark Leshikar, his house, bargion in his front door because they're both out of their head on drugs. He just as a reflexive mechanism pulls out his gun and shoots the other guy. So I think one of the first signs of his, and I'm tracking about 24 murders involving four brag soldiers. And then but worse since 2020 in which it was either a four brag soldier who was murdered, accused of murder or convicted of murder. 24, 24, that's my best count. It might be off by one or two on the margins. That's wild military base. Yes, I would imagine the murder rate in a military base would be zero. I think it should be if you're an employee of the government, if you're an actor, do you soldier or some of the most disciplined people in the world, right? I don't know if you can see that anymore. So Billy Levine, by the way, is he from a service family? How did he want all of this? No, he wasn't. He was a middle class guy from working class guy from Upper Peninsula of Michigan, who joined the army when he was 17 years old before 9-11 happened. And 9-11 took place while he was still in training. And he soon got taken up the pipeline of the first Special Forces group. And then from there, by 2009, it was a relatively young man of 26, I think, at the time that he was selected for Delta Force. So he was an extraordinary person in that he was clearly suited to the job. Well, very physically fit, very outdoorsy, very tough guy who had the self-confidence that is necessary for this type of work. On a journal in Junky, for sure, a lot of these guys are big time in journal in Junky. Jumping out of planes, parachuting is a big part of what they do. So he was like those guys in all these respects. But at his core, Billy Levine was somebody who also had a sense of ethics and right and wrong that his time in the service really degraded to tragic effect. So he murders his best friend in front of the daughter, gets away with it, no penalty, whatsoever. That's absolutely wild. And then some months later, he himself is found dead with another man on a remote training range of brag. Right, about 18 months later. 18 months later. What were they shot to death? Yes. And it appears that double murder appears to have been the work of people who knew what they were doing. Well, you've got about 50,000 potential suspects on the scene because it's a military base. And the other guy either was his name is Timothy Dumas, not to reduce them to their respective races, but to keep it clear that one was a white guy, one was a black guy, Levine's a white guy, Dumas is a black guy. He also was not someone who would have been easy to kill. He wasn't an operator. He was a supply officer who was attached to J. Sock. He served in the 95th Civil Affairs Brigade and had done many deployments to Afghanistan and service of the J. Sock led task force in Afghanistan. So he's a guy who gets the operators, all the stuff that they need in the field, including cash, weapons, ammunition, food, all the basics of gas. And he was deeply, he's a whole separate story that we could go into. But to come back to what we were saying about the murder itself, both of them were very, very tough guys who never went anywhere unarmed who kept their heads on a swivel and who had been to war repeatedly. So the fact that both of them were cleanly taken out and then dumped in this remote area and that the scene was free of any kind of, you know, I interviewed several Army CID agents who worked the scene of the murder. And by all accounts, they found no drugs, no guns, no money, and maybe a couple of the shell casings. But you know, there weren't even like footprints on the ground. We're going to shout with the rifle. No, I was never able to obtain ballistic evidence. I believed that Dumas, the black eye was shot in the head with a small caliber pistol. And I don't know what a type of weapon caused Levine's injuries, but he was shot multiple times in the torso and in the leg, maybe five times. I'm not quite sure. Any idea where they were killed? Dumas was killed on site. It seems he was killed execution style on site. Levine's body had been wrapped up in a sort of tarp or blanket, and placed in the back of his own truck. And then he somewhat had driven out there and abandoned the truck and it was with his body in the back. And so the Army, there's lots of theories of this murder. But the CID theory was that somebody, the third man, because there had to have been a third person there. These guys couldn't have shot each other because there were no guns. So someone left with the guns at a minimum. And so Army CID presumes that Dumas, who was a really bad guy, to be honest. He was a drug trafficker and by some accounts, a hitman. And so hitman, you said he was... He was a drug trafficker and By some accounts a hit man and I hit man. Yeah, you said he was an army officer. He was a warrant officer warrant officer. Okay. Yeah but yeah, I talked to a woman a police officer in fact who Demos had offered to kill her husband for money And so CID presumed active duty He was not actually due to the time as death. He had just been expelled from the military for his criminal behavior And that is actually a key fact that we can get into because The fact that he had been kicked out when he was a few months shy of his 19th year in service so our few a few months shy of his 20th 20th year in which case you would have been eligible for a lifetime pension You know if you serve 20 years in the period of pension So the fact that he had been kicked out and deprived of his pension Really is an operative fact in all of this because the story it goes on from here But what was I saying about the the murder itself that so he was killed. Jamas was killed on site right so So the theory I was I was trying to recapitulate CID's theory of the case very briefly Which is that they think that do moss was hired to kill Levine and did kill Levine with it with the cooperation of another person or persons They then put Levine's body in the back of the truck drive him out in the woods With the intention of throwing his body and a lake that's near there But the truck got stuck in the woods. I just got stuck in the mud because it wasn't on a road It was on a firebreak trail and at that point according to CID's theory of the case the other guy Decided to just abandon the situation and decided to kill do moss in order to get rid of any witnesses We thought this room we started this podcast a year ago We decided we're never advertising anything that we or people on our staff don't use period We're only partnering with companies that we agree with and endorse actually in our personal lives So we want to announce a new partnership with the survival company we trust most last Country supplies the name of our collaboration last country supply. I have a big surplus of survival food from that great company If you get a bucket of food with a 25 year shelf life 2000 calories a day potatoes rice bread drinks you feel a lot better Let's see there's an EMP attack or civil disturbance of you know what could happen in the future you are Prepared and you are protecting your family with last country supply products So heads to lastcountrysupply.com to shop for a new collection bulk up now There is no scenario where you will regret being prepared What's the theory as to why Dimas would have been hired to kill living? Why he would have been hired yes? So there's a lot of competing possibilities and as I said I think that's what makes the this murder mystery for me at least as a writer It was it was a productive narrative vehicle because there's lots of things to explore One is that Mark Leshaker the Greenberry who he killed You know his teammates by some accounts wanted revenge the fact that that murder went completely unpunished as you might imagine It leads to resentment in the community leads to a lot of whispers I mean, you know, you can't just kill somebody you maybe get off legally But there's gonna be repercussions. Yeah a lot of dangerous people around sure. Yeah, so that's one Okay, so that's a that's a more human. I'm not saying justifiable. I'm not as bothered by Leschger's buddies getting together and killing the guy who killed him that seems understandable I will say I found no evidence for that I also learned that Dumas and Levine were trafficking cocaine together at a high level and that I mean trafficking cocaine Not dealing cocaine, you know, and little baggies to want to their friends I'm talking about trafficking kilos of cocaine from Mexico up into the United States Distributing it in a large multi-level getting as they just once again an active duty. That's correct. Remember of Delta 4. That's correct. Yes So they had they had enemies in the drug world dangerous enemies people that will kill you if you don't pay for your product and finally Levine as I said before Was known to be going around telling people that he didn't believe in the mission anymore That what the what the United States was doing was wrong and was in the process of writing a book And we touched on this in the beginning of our conversation about how much the unit frowns on people writing books But you know possibly really frowns on it Levine's ex-wife told me that he was writing a book She showed me the text messages where he texted her and said I'm writing a book and he also said that someone already wanted to turn into a movie Now do moss at the so put a pin in that do moss Because he had been kicked out of the army Just shy of his pension eligibility date. He also was writing something variously described me as a book or a letter In which it wasn't a memoir. He was I was actually deliberately intended as a blackmail document He told people that he knew about a drug trafficking ring and the special forces involving special forces soldiers Who had gone over to the dark side in Afghanistan? Or there was a great deal of drug trafficking going on by the way by? Active duty US military by the Afghan client state that the US supportive for 20 years. Yeah So all these guys having served many times in Afghanistan would have been very close and in close proximity to working with warlords police chiefs militia commanders and so on Afghans who were some of the biggest drug traffickers in the world period So that context I think is important But in any event do moss had written this letter purporting to name all these individual members of this drug trafficking ring and the special forces and Was going around telling people that because of this leverage that he had over the special forces command He was going to get them to reinstate his pension So the fact that both of these guys are writing tell all documents and then both turn up murder and four brag is yet another potential You know theory for explaining their deaths You must have spoken to people. They knew their friends What is the prevailing theory among people who were there? I? Can't say that anybody reports to know for sure but I would say the most common reflexive answer that you get from folks is that they think that They were murdered by elements of Delta force either Rogue elements of the unit or the command itself. Now. I want to be very careful come on I want to be very careful and say that I don't have any evidence of that and I don't pretend to is that the opinion of any Delta operators Do you know? Funfully enough. Yeah One of the guys I'd talk to a former Delta operator Seemed to find that excuse me a former Delta officer Seemed to find that perfectly plausible which was disturbing to me, but it's bonkers again It's not it folks who read the book. They will they will see The direction in which I lean ultimately and I want to spoil you know the ending But bottom line no rest have been made. That's not true And so in so in a further complication comes in with regard to just that so in Recently, I don't want to spoil the last chapter of the book but Recently the Department of Justice accused someone of committing these murders and Let me just say that it is not at all who you would think and Virtually all I can just say all of the sources that I talked to about this either dismiss it out of hand and say there's no way or they just have a really hard time believing it and The person they've accused has pleaded not guilty and He is scheduled to go on trial in January 2026 So could I have not spoken to his father but not him and Delta operator? He's not he's not yeah He's someone who people struggle to understand how he could have how anyone could imagine that this person would Travel from where from where he lived which is not in the area Go into forebrag and murder these two guys who are you know one of them is like a real life Jason born And the other one you know also a very dangerous man and how he could have done that and Got no way with it and also the indictment is very strange that You know the victims are identified only by their initials a lot of the cases under seal The whole thing is very suspicious. I don't want to dance around it A lot of people that I've talked to you just say the government is framing this kid Maybe because he was 20 years old at the time 20 and Levine's 37 Dumas is 44, you know, these are mature men who The idea that a 20-year-old stick up kid could have killed them defies credibility and a lot of people's opinion now Personally, I have to think that the Department of Justice doesn't indict people for murder lightly. I hope not. I just I have trouble getting that far mentally so it seems like He must have had some involvement. I want to credit my government for being at least that minimum level of responsibility that they're not simply framing this kid but they haven't made any of their evidence public and As I said, he's pleaded not guilty so we'll just have to see how that how that trial goes Have they but they made the indictment public but none of the evidence the indictment is public, but you know like I said it Identify I only knew about it because I think someone sent it to me that it only identifies the victims by their initials W L and TD I've never seen that before In a diet on murder indictment where the where the victims are identified by their initials I don't even especially since their murder was public. I mean it was reported on at the time right it is a very very strange case Here's what we know we know that Levine murdered a guy got away with it obviously his superior officers knew that Command knew that Was it widely known that he was a drug trafficker It was widely known that he was a drug user and Yes, it was known that he was the guy that Delto drugs to his fellow operators. I mean I talked to uh Mark Leshekar's family so Mark and Billy they were best friends and so Mark's wife And his mom even they all knew Billy Levine they had all spent time at his house and They and many other witnesses interviewed lots of family members and friends in both of these men They said um that you know you go into Billy's house and there was just cocaine everywhere and All has a fellow operators from Delta Force for at his house to this much a coke on the table They're doing MDMA They're even smoking heroin, you know, and it's considered to be totally Normal in this community. That's what to me was the most shocking to hear again and again like Not only to be told that all these people these guys are using drugs, but that people just seem to think that that's kind of what they do Which I didn't know that there's so many threads. I mean the most obvious is the human Effect of 12 combat deployments, so that's that's too much Obviously and that will destroy you. It sounds like a destroyed Billy Levine The second is like where's the Pentagon in this? This is the premier unit in the United States military Mm-hmm and people are openly using cocaine. This is smoking crack and shooting their friends and no one's doing anything about it Like what is that? It's baffling to me. I would have never imagined I mean I remember when I was in the army one guy a sergeant in my company tested positive for cocaine An a pissed test and he was just gone after that. I mean he was just removed from the unit Well, that's a question that I should have asked you a half an hour ago What about drug testing? So all members of the military are subject to random drug testing But apparently they consider to joke. I mean there's a lot of reporting on this around the Navy Seals a lot of Navy Seals who have gone on the record to say that you know They were using constantly during their time in service and that the drug testing regimen was a complete joke Because there's ways to defeat it and particular you can get a tip off and when you and because it's supposed to be random It's not something they do regularly And maybe that's what they need to be doing But as the random I the randomized testing, you know, you can be told by someone in time Hey, your name is on the list and that gives you time to like suck down a bunch of water and suck doing drugs And and pass the test or buy your bike clean your own But you would imagine maybe that's something that's going on as well hadn't heard that in particular But I know that people can do that. Um, it's certainly can you gotta remember these guys are Intelligent highly trained There are spies just as much as they are assassins Many of them are there's various levels within Delta Force. There's compartmental elements There's the line squadrons etc. So it depends on the person, but you know these are people who are Their job is to do covert action So they're very good at getting away with things Um, when your job is to penetrate a foreign country that's guarded by paranoid counterintelligence officials to go into that country and I don't know bug and embassy or a kidnapping guy off the street A drug test isn't going to be something that you're too worried about. I think And you alluded to this earlier Their comes a point where You know the government is afraid of you because you know too much you've done too much Also performing what they think is a valuable service No one else can provide that service like you're too valuable to To expel over a failed pest test. That's a great point. That's absolutely part of it Which is that yeah after they spent millions of dollars training you They don't really care. I think they would put it as like if they were to come out and say it It's like big boy rules. I think it's how they look at it If you're going to do drugs then do it. Just don't get caught Right. Just don't get caught is the rule Well, it sounds like their work life is that it has the same rule Absolutely. Yeah So you said Billy Levine had decided that the missions he'd been sent on 12 times were um Not morally justifiable that the whole war on terror was a bad idea. Is that a common view? Do you think? You know It is the fact that combat veterans are One of the most reliable anti-war demographics in the country. No They don't know that in cable news. Oh, it's like oh combat veterans Support whatever mission this is that's the opposite of what I've noticed the opposite is true And there's there's that on this. There's polling super-matories of combat veterans say that the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan We're not worth I've noticed I'm one of them and so built to to me to learn that Billy Levine You know how elbows use is not surprising at all. When did that come to you by the way? What's your can tell us you take five minutes and tell us your story if that's all right? Sure You know, I'm not my story is really not part of the book but the relevant background would be that I actually deployed to Iraq at the same time as Levine's first tour in Iraq and You know I Before that deployment was over I had come to the firm Point of view that the war was not just a mistake but A crime to to carry out this invasion on the grounds that they were supposedly weapons in mass destruction in Iraq when there weren't And what was your role you're in the army? Yeah, you know, I was in I was in college I was a college student who joined Army Reserves I was a student at the University of Texas in order to pay for college. Oh, wow I Fell for the recruiter's pitch, which is that you know one weekend a month two weeks a year I was 19 years old and I was up that was in 2004 2003 excuse me that used to be real. Well, that was the year we invaded Arada yeah that used to be real. I mean the reserves served you know when we get a month two weeks Yeah, for a long long time and then the run terror Commence and those guys were dragged into real war. I don't think that had happened before had it well you would know you did it um No, it hadn't happened before uh, and in fact, you know, I sometimes in retrospect struggle to explain to folks how it could have been that I Opposed the Iraq war and had no interest in fighting in the Iraq war and yet still joined the army reserve at a time when it was clear that They were off always going to happen. Well because the reserves were not used in that way There's that and also even people who opposed the war had no idea that it was gonna last for years We forget about this completely, but even people who opposed the war assumed that it would be over pretty quickly Um, and I can remember even asking my recruiter naively. You sure I'm not gonna get sent to this war you rock I'm gonna talk it by Don't hurt about that But um, yeah, of course my deployment orders were cut even before I left basic training. They were sent to me While I was standing in formation in basic training is said to deploy to Iraq for five hundred and twenty eight days And you're a you-tee student. Yeah, sorry to laugh. It's okay. I'm so Larry It was it was two years before I went back to college after day. I signed that contract What did your girlfriend or parents or buddies say? I'm sorry I'm sorry Do you see the humor kind of the time? I do of course. Yeah, my parents were pretty resigned to it um, bless their hearts. They had to put up with a lot but You know before even deployed back to the United States I was writing editorials for the daily texting because I wrote for my student newspaper Um, you know talking about the Iraq war and using my perspective as a veteran to try to convince people that this was a mistake and at this whole Post 911 permanent war paradigm should reexamine Um, so that's kind of like my sort of origin story and how I came to wait to how long did you spend in Iraq? Five hundred and twenty eight days. Oh, you actually did. Oh, yeah. Yeah, every single one of those days. What was that like? Um, You know, I think a lot of people had certainly had rougher deployments than I did um, I've read Books about some of the units that had the toughest that had the most casualties Um, I don't want to you know exaggerate what my experience was like But at the same time it was It was pretty rough. It was pretty rough. I mean there were guys in my unit who were killed We were attacked on a fairly regular basis Um, nothing crazy, but you know getting shot at getting more was a continuous thing We were often outside the wire because we were although we were non combat troops We we built bridges and roads. It was our job. We did a lot of construction work and dirt work in war zones where You know areas where there have been fighting especially to repair roads that have been damaged by edes um, so a several of our convoys were ambushed um A lot of I think maybe five or six guys were shot and survived Uh, and then also there were other bad things that went on um You know, I uh And once a circumstance there was a soldier Who um shot up a car in front of me and another group of soldiers And killed the occupants of that car, but who were just a woman and her kid Oh, and you know, he said that he thought that uh, you know, they were approaching too fast I want to get in all the details of it, but the ugliness of it In savagery and how unnecessary it all was made a deep deep impression on me at that age um And I have dedicated all my work as a journalist and reporter ever since then to opposing You know the continuation of these wars What was you for that? Was it like coming back after 528 days? If you read your new fraternity or what I mean it must have been Um, the wilderness great coming back. It was good Um, you know, I didn't have like the sort of stereotypical hurt locker type of experience where you know I wasn't like a Samhoo vie Um, apocalypse now or I'm laying under the ceiling fans skin rats It wasn't like that. I mean I definitely I do remember having it's been a long time now But I do remember having nightmares for years Not necessarily a violence, but I would have this dream where I had lost my weapon And was unarmed. I was in a rock On the street or whatever and didn't have a weapon So yeah, there were some lingering effects, but you know I don't complain about my personal experience in this The US killed a million people in a rock maybe maybe the estimates vary, but hundreds of thousands possibly a million people They're the ones who are the victims of this not US soldiers like me who have hurt feelings when we come back You know, I want to be clear about that but it sounds like Your experience there affected your view of the broader mission For sure. Yes, profoundly. I would say what about the guys you served with? Um, my reaction was typical like I was saying before most uh There was a divide in the unit I can remember debating the 2004 election with the guys who were for carry and the guys who were for Bush You know the military is very reflective of our society. Maybe not the special forces, but the regular army is Um, and so the same divisions we see in society at large are reflected in the ranks So he's no different What do you think the prevailing view? Let me ask you again among the special operators is of the mission itself Like why are we doing this? Is that a question they discuss? I don't hear them talk about that sort of thing very much. Yeah They just say bad guys. We kill bad guys. We kill terrorists Um, I have to assume that in units like Delta Force the majority of the guys are able to compartmentalize the ethics of it and say and or the wisdom of it and say that that's simply not their job to think about and that they just Follow orders. Yeah Um, but as you can see in the case of a guy like building the v-in that only lasts for so long eventually It starts to dawn on you That this is not okay. And if you listen to operator type podcasts, you'll hear a lot of that. I mean Yeah, it's they're not the the most jingoistic and pro war people like you said before her cable news cable news anchors Not, you know soldiers the soldiers. I think have a more nuanced perspective almost as a rule. Did you ever run in to Um, any cable news anchors when you were over there No, no Mark Levin was not near unit. I didn't see him. No. I did see Joe millionaire once Yeah, millionaire whatever happened to him I don't know. I saw him in Iraq. I saw 50 cent gave a concert in Iraq. How was it? It was cool. Yeah It was a high point of the deployment So this is the coolest Christmas present. I'll get this here. This is a leather out pouch logo right there gets on your belt made in the United States out of actual leather If you carry you and put the firearm on one side and unloaded kind of help on the other It will never be far from you and it is legit I want to go back to the connection between Levine and His friends his colleagues the Delta operators, but also the other special forces Community members of Fort Bragg and drug use and drug trafficking. That's shocking But it doesn't seem to have shocked to their superiors To what extent is drug trafficking tolerated in the military? I can believe I'm asking this question But it sounds like it is it's hard to imagine that you would have to ask that question And yet from what I was able to learn it's not a nice lady case Levine and Dumas In fact, it seems that after 2020 These like the drug trafficking rings that permeate for Bragg only increase and you even had public statements from Fort Bragg officials acknowledging You know for example that they had a hundred percent increase in drug crime on base from 2020 to 2021 How could you have drug crime on a military base? It was very surprising to me as well But you even have cases of military police officers Dealing drugs out of their police cars on Fort Bragg Folks don't look that up. Look up the case of Jacob Dickerson. Dickerson Who was it MP on Fort Bragg who was busted for drug trafficking? In fact, I obtained the investigative files in that case and learned that There was actually four or five of these MPs on base. They were trafficking drugs And they dropped charges against all but one of the guys Because he had exacerbated the trouble he was in by getting into a drunk driving accident And even he was just given a slap on the wrist. I think he got you know a month or two in the stockade and a dishonorable discharge but there is a I would say pervasive practice of Are there's there's drug availability on Fort Bragg that's comparable to it to any you know dense urban city in the United States The military's an authoritarian structure. I don't need to tell you that since you served in it So it seems like you could prevent that if you really wanted to you could fix that problem you would think so you would think so and I'm at a loss to explain why So little has been done. I've talked to people who you know a CID sources who told me CID is what the army's criminal investigations division. Yes. It's a it's a quasi military quasi civilian Police agency that has jurisdiction to investigate crimes involving American soldiers So you have MPs who are the uniform officers And then above them you have CID so they're the ones who investigate, you know major crimes on bases And they told me about closed-door meetings in which the Fort Bragg brass mostly seemed concerned with you know Massaging the statistics that they kept just to make it seem like drug crime was under control when in fact it's not Who runs Fort Bragg? Well Fort Bragg is under the the largest umbrella formation there would be the 18th Airborne Corps So the commander the 18th Airborne Corps is going to be the highest ranking army officer on Fort Bragg Um, but you also have the joint special operations command there which is a very elite Formation in the military the most elite and so the commander of j-sock is also um a very important and powerful person who's a three-star general at from namasteken Who's on the on the base as well? So you have a collection of you know what people call the brass and then of course there's Subservient to the Pentagon and the secretary of the army and the secretary of defense One um connection that I've almost never heard anybody make, but I've thought about uh So the war in vietnam really starts in 1964 with the Gulf of Tonkin incident and Extends all the way really to the to the final end in April of 1975 That coincided almost exactly With the rise of a real drug epidemic in the United States Vietnam is in a drug is a poppy growing region you know the golden triangle and for a bunch of different reasons That war seemed to have had a material effect on drug use in the United States like and a lot of people died from drugs During the period of the Vietnam war and I think there must be a connection You see the exact same Phenomenon around the war in afghanistan starts in 2001 and three years ago and it coincides Precisely with this explosion in opioid drug use and the inevitable death toll from that is there a direct connection between those two things? Yes, there is and the US media's failure to connect those things is probably the biggest dereliction of duty on One part of the press score that that I've seen in my life Um the those are big things big things. Yeah, death toll from drugs during the Vietnam period and particularly during the afghanistan period Dwarfs the death toll in the war The most are big things. Big things. Yeah. Death toll from drugs during the Vietnam period, and particularly during the Afghanistan period, dwarfs the death toll in the war itself. Yeah. The number one cause of death for Americans, age 18 to 45, is spent in a overdose. And where does that comes directly out of the heroin crisis that afflicted this country from, let's say, the mid 2000s up until 2015, 16, 17, 18? And so it's very important to ask what were the causes of the heroin crisis. And it, I don't think I've ever heard anyone ask that question. Well, the conventional explanation, which is not wrong, is that the roots of it lie in the over prescription of opioid painkillers in the 1990s. Yes. That's very true. That happened. The Sackler family producer that created widespread dependence on opiates among a large number of people. You also saw at the same time to feed this demand increased heroin production in Mexico. However, more than 90% of all the world's heroin was produced in Afghanistan between 2001 and 2021. The 9% in fact, Afghanistan under US occupation produced more heroin than the whole world could absorb. So supply their outstripped global demand. And so for that reason, there are now believed to be large stockpiles of Afghan heroin in places like Pakistan and to see how could do you think heroin production went up under US occupation? I mean, it went up exponentially. So and as a direct result of the US invasion, and we should talk about the Taliban in this context because I'll try to keep it to brief to the essentials because it actually goes back to the 1980s. So in the 1980s, the CIA armed and funded Afghan resistance fighters in the Mujah had gained fight the Russians who had dated Afghanistan or occupying Afghanistan to prop up a communist government there. So and they won that war. That's what we call Charlie Wilson's war, the movie, of course. But after the CIA withdrew, those warlords that they had previously set up took over Afghanistan and ruled it in the 1990s. And they were all major drug traffickers. They're the ones who were responsible for turning Afghanistan into the narco state that it became. You know, Gulba Dean Hekmatyar, if I'm pronouncing that correctly, was the main recipient of CIA and he turned into the big by far the biggest drug lord in Afghanistan. There's also the clan of Nasim Akunzada and the Helmand province was another major recipient of CIA aid and who turned the Helmand into the world's most prolific opium poppy heroin morphine producing area in the world. The Taliban we hear so much about the Taliban's oppression of women and making musical legal and they do those things. The Taliban is an arch conservative movement whose ethics and morality I absolutely do not share. However, I never understood why I was supposed to give a shit about that. I mean, I want everyone to be free just as a matter of principle, but that didn't. But moving metric tons of heroin into my country, that seems like a real story. Whether people you know, girls can get PhDs and feminist studies or whatever is of less concern to me. Right. Right. Well, the Afghan people didn't like it either all the drug trafficking that was going on in their country. And what made the Taliban popular originally was their suppression of the drug industry in Afghanistan. They eliminated, they took over and eliminated all of the drug that was taking place there because you can see how it's ideologically consistent with their Sharia law. You know, they don't tolerate drugs. They don't tolerate alcohol either. So they get rid of all Sharia law is bad. Seth, I don't know if you've heard that. It's bad. It's worse than what's happening in New York and Detroit. It's just bad. I don't know why. It's just like years of brainwashing. I just like, I'm not Muslim. I'm not for Sharia law. On the other hand, compared to what? Compared to Baltimore, you know, shut up Sharia law. Well, sorry, Sharia law. In Afghanistan, the effect of implementing Sharia law was the total suppression of the heroin industry and the decimation of the world's supply of heroin. And a massive reduction in the rape of boys. They didn't like that. That's another subject that's absolutely part of this. And I almost hesitate to go there because it's a it's a parrot. Everything I'm saying about drugs could also be talked about. I can't believe I'm even saying this with child sex trafficking was something that took place. That was something that the US back client state was deeply implicated in child sex trafficking. Another thing that's falsely laid at the feet of the Taliban and said, this is just part of Afghan culture when that is not true. But the two return to the heroin thing, it was actually in the summer of 2001. I don't like your mind explodes with like when you start to understand what the truth is. Just in this case, it's propaganda that attached like barnacles to your brain when they come off. You're like, I don't even recognize this world. Do you feel that ever? In this case, yes, because although I had served in the military and worked as a war reporter, I'd actually never been to Afghanistan. So I had to educate myself when the Afghan war starting from scratch. And what I learned was that the Taliban eliminated the drug industry just months before the US invaded. The DEA and the UN certified, the eradication campaign that the Taliban had carried out. And when the US invaded in 2001, they teamed up with the exact same narco warlords that had previously ruled Afghanistan, what we call the Northern Alliance. And those people took over and Hamid Karzai was installed as CIA puppet president of Afghanistan and immediately legalized poppy production in Afghanistan. And within the span of let's say two years, maybe three years, heroin production increased something like seven or eight thousand percent in Afghanistan. And of course, a lot of it winds up in Europe and the United States, correct? Yes, you know, you have like I said, more heroin than the world can even absorb. Why would the US authorities, why would the CIA, why would the White House allow that? I my view, there's a paranoid point of view conspiracy, conspiratorial point of view among people who believe that this is some kind of, this is some kind of societal program, this some nefarious program that the US government wants the whole world to be inundated with heroin. I personally am more inclined to the view that they just don't care and that these type of mercenary drug traffickers make natural allies to a foreign power that's invading your country. Is there a difference between negligence and malice? Well, I leave my toddler in the car with the windows closed in a hot day to go gamble at casino and he suffocates. Does it matter if I wanted to kill him or if I just didn't care enough? No, I don't think it matters. It doesn't matter. And I'm not making an excuse. No, no, I know you're not. I'm just like the bottom line is that US authorities, the Bush administration and the Obama administration and then up until the end, up until the Biden administration, allowed the United States and its citizens to die of drug ODS because the country that they were running Afghanistan was producing all the heroin. Right? I mean, yes. The amount of heroin that was being produced was very potent, high quality and large amounts of it. So that obviously supply and demand depressed prices and you have ample reporting. It's not just Europe and Australia and Asia that's being flooded by heroin also at the United States in this time saw a massive increase in supply. Now here's where the cover up comes in because all of this was well reported up until the late 2000s, let's say, 2007 or so. That's when the DEA started putting out statements to the effect that not all, though there was rising heroin supplies in the United States, they claimed that none of it was coming from Afghanistan less than 1% as the official figure. And so in the process of writing this book, I spent a lot of time in the weeds trying to figure out how exactly the DEA made this determination because it's kind of like saying no oil from Saudi Arabia or its burning United States. You ask, how is that possible that the world's largest consumer of drugs is not importing any drugs from the world's largest producer of drugs, which by the way controls, which it controls. Yeah, that seems to defy a reason. That's why you're a good reporter chef. If you read the book out, you will see that I get deep in the nitty gritty of it down to the actual mathematics of it. But suffice it to say, I find that that statistic was totally bogus and invented as a way to cover up the fact this incredibly damaging effect of the war in Afghanistan had on US society. So I guess another way to say that would be in fact a lot of heroin from our client state of Afghanistan was winding up at American cities. Absolutely. Especially the China, what's called China white heroin, it's called China because of its color, not because it actually comes from China. Now, the picture is slightly confounded because there was also a lot of Mexican heroin coming to the United States States during the same time, but Mexican heroin is black in color and low in quality. It's called black tar heroin. It's usually smoked. Right. But it was the China white that really flooded the US during this time period and caused the most damage, especially in the northeast in an Appalachia and in the Midwest because that's where flights from Afghanistan come it's all traffic through airports on the eastern seaboard, whereas Mexico kind of supplies the west of the United States and the south. Right. That's why Jerry Garcia was a black tar addict in Marin County, California and all the junkies in Philadelphia are using China white. Right. Right. And the China white because it's so much more potent is what leads to all of the huge overdose crisis that we suffered during the city. It's hard to O.D. from smoking heroin possible, but it's my understanding. Yeah. So who profited from that? That's a very good question. Not the people of Afghanistan. The numbers that I've seen suggest that maybe a billion dollars a year was the profits that went to Afghans of one type or another. The majority of it went to drug supply chains outside of Afghanistan. And that's the most opaque aspect of all of this. And that's where I have the most unanswered questions who exactly was making all of this money. So the occupation of Afghanistan was a military occupation diplomatic as well until components. But basically we had our troops in Afghanistan therefore we controlled Afghanistan. So if there's an exponential rise by thousands percent rise in opium production, heroin manufacturing and export of heroin. It's kind of hard to believe the U.S. military didn't know all this certainly knew about it. And there's a agency called the Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction that although it's a U.S. government agency has done the most important retrospective work on this, including lots of interviews with key people who and all of them acknowledged that they knew that it was going on. And the Saigon is an agency. It's acronym. Um, discuss how the U.S. military didn't want anything to do with drug eradication because they saw it as detrimental to their mission because the people they were working with were drug traffickers. And the same story goes for the CIA except Saigon explicitly says in its 2018 report on counter narcotics that the CIA rather than cooperating with anti drug eradication measures prioritized its relationship with significant drug traffickers. That's the language of the U.S. government report. And it even names some of the major drug traffickers who worked with the CIA who were on the CIA's payroll. And let's not forget that the president of Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai and his brother, Ahmed Wally Karzai, were on the payroll of the CIA and when led this drug trafficking organization, which, you know, recently our government accused Nicholas Maduro of Venezuela of being the head of a drug cartel on some very, very flimsy evidence. And they make these organization charts where they purport to show Maduro at the top and other these other guys. If you were taking that same lens and trying to on Afghanistan, you could have very easily created an organization structure showing the world's biggest drug cartel with Hamid Karzai at the very top. And he's someone who, you know, is sitting down to dying with President Obama and all these other top U.S. officials. But if I'm a special operator in Afghanistan and I'm working with the local leaders who are also drug traffickers, I mean, it's not a huge step. And I'm buying heroin for, you know, $1,000 a pound when I can resell it for many, many times that it's going to be kind of tempting to bring some home, right? Timothy Dumas, who was found dead next to Billy Levine on Fort Bragg in 2020, had evidently written a letter in which he outlined exactly what you're talking about, a drug trafficking organization involving special forces soldiers who were trafficking heroin from Afghanistan to the United States on military planes. And he was killed before that letter was ever made public. Who do you write it to? He wrote it. It was addressed to a top ranking. I never read the letter, but I interviewed someone who did read the letter. I interviewed three people who knew about the letter, including two Moss's son and also his partner in crime. I very corrupt former North Carolina state trooper named Freddie Wayne Huff, who was entrusted with a copy of the letter and read it. He said that it was addressed to a high ranking general. As I said before, Dumas intended to use this blackmail letter to insert pressure on the special forces in order to get his pension reinstated. But it doesn't seem to have been a very wise maneuver on his part. No, no, you can push too hard. Anyone have executed? I'm coming around to your theory, by the way, that this may have been retaliatory. That's not my theory. Although I get what you're saying, but just to be super clear about it because these are not light allegations. So I just want to be as responsible as possible as your order and say that this is what people have alleged, it's what the evidence is. But we don't know for sure. And the reason we don't know is because our ignorance has been procured by the authorities who have the responsibility to investigate this stuff and are not doing it. Do you think, nicely put, and thank you for saying that, do you think the US people in the US military in this special forces committee did participate in drug trafficking? I find it hard to imagine that they weren't. I will say that there's other ways of making money, other types of crime that I discussed in the book. The book's not entirely about drug trafficking. There's also a lot of weapons trafficking, a lot of weapons theft from the military. For a brag, it would blow your mind if they ever disclose how many weapons and how much it explosives that they lose annually. It's really crazy. It's not a weapons. What kind of explosive? Military weapons and plastic explosives. They lose an incredible amount of weapons every year. And Timothy Dumas was a guy who was trafficking weapons besides trafficking drugs or masters. He was a quarter master. And so he was deeply involved in all of this. I mean, I read his separation packet. It's 128 pages. And it makes crystal clear that his entire career was characterized by stuff going missing, documents going missing. He was the, when he was in Afghanistan attached to J-SOC, all of the records for two years, 2012 and 2013, if I'm not mistaken, missing in their entirety. All the paperwork on all of the J-SOC supply chain for that battalion was just gone. But what do you do with military grade weapons, even small arms, fully automatic rifles? Like what do you do with something? You can't sell it in the United States. No, he sell to Mexican cartels. And then that's how they end up better armed than the Mexican government in states like Tamaleepas and Nova Leon and Coelvila. Yeah. Los Angeles, the Ukrainian military has been selling NATO weapons. Americans supplied weapons to the Mexican drug cartels. Fact, they hate it when you say that, but it's true. Well, I haven't seen that reporting, but I will tell you this about Ukraine. That agency I mentioned earlier, Saigon, there are provisions in the laws providing aid to a Ukraine that ensure that that type of accountability never takes place again, because Saigon turned into a real embarrassment for the war in Afghanistan because apparently they took their job seriously and did it correctly. So the aid to Ukraine can never be audited that's written in the law. What? Yeah. I always can't continue for too long. It's too out of control. You know, the Roman Empire declined for hundreds of years before it finally disintegrated. So well, that had just moved east and it lasted another thousand years. But amazingly, so you're of course you're right. You're absolutely right. But it is bewildering that this was even just 20 years ago, if you had done a poll of people I knew anyway, I lived in DC. I was around the government every day. Is this country corrupt? I would say not really. I mean, that was my view. I think most people felt that way. When you joined the army, did you think the people who ran the army were corrupt? No, the simple answer is no, but corruption takes many forms in the United States. If you get pulled over by a cop, you can't just bribe that cop to let you know. That's not going to happen. But the higher you go up and the power structures in this country, the more you find legal corruption. I mean, is it corruption for a corporation to give unlimited amounts of money to a politician to get elected? Because that's our Supreme Court says that's totally legal under citizens united. But in another context, in another country, in another time, that would just be considered the rankest sort of bribery. So a defense one how you define corrupt. But it obviously is bribery. I agree. Yeah. Well, obviously. Yeah. It's a complex question because like, do you have a right to tell people to what extent they can support a politician? I don't know. I mean, I think it is complicated. But the effect as it stands right now is politicians are bribed by donors. Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, that's how we got Ted Cruz. Totally corrupt human being. Yeah, he's unfortunately he's my senator. I hope that he has a primary challenger soon. Yeah, well, I think he just won. So probably not for a while. But anyway, sorry, not to get off on a Ted Cruz tanger. But I just want to say again, Ted Cruz is corrupt. His wife works for Goldman in Texas. And when she pitches clients, I happen to know very dead certain fact. He goes to dare with them. So that's that's corruption. He's gone. I'm sure he's looking forward to coming back on your show again. Yeah, the last time anyway, sorry. No, I'm being mean, but it's true. And there's a lot of it. But when it happens in the Senate, you're like, okay, of course, take Cruz is corrupt. Look at him. But when it happens among people, most civilians revere, like, you know, the most elite units in the US military, that's dispiriting among other things, right? I think it is. And I think my inclination is to think that it is a result of waging wars that nobody really believes in for years and years, because think about what that does to your psychology. When you're engaged in a righteous cause that has widespread societal buy-in, you're going to be constrained by your own sense of yourself as a virtuous actor. And you're going to know that when you're tempted to do things for money or for other motives, that that's not consistent with your self image. And so you don't do it. But when you're fighting for years in wars like Afghanistan and the public just doesn't even pay attention to, and you know all your allies are drug traffickers and they're raping little boys and they're trafficking sex slaves. But you're just doing it because you like your work and you like being an elite soldier, then it's easier to take a mercenary attitude towards this and just think it's not going to matter if I skim, you know, $100,000 off the top of the op fund that we have out here in the field, all this cash that we're given. Or it's no big deal for me to grab a couple bricks of this heroin and put it in my foot locker and then sell it for 50 grand when I go when I get back to Fayetteville. I hope what you just said is clipped because that's a perfect summation of what my instincts are that the more morally corrupt the enterprise is, the more morally corrupt the people participating in the enterprise become. And that's why I spent so much time in the book talking about the wars in which all of this the context and which this takes place because it doesn't take place in a vacuum. And you know the decisions of our leaders in this country trickle down to the lowest levels and have an influence on how people live their lives. That's right. Has anyone ever been held accountable? I mean, I think you've I think you've confirmed my instinct, which is that there was a connection between the war in this drug producing country and our occupation of this drug producing country and the drug epidemic in the United States. I mean, this clearly you have to be an idiot not to see the connection. But has anyone ever been indicted for resting convicted for participating in that? No, no, nobody. Nobody. Nobody knew. For the drug trafficking took place in Afghanistan. Yeah. No, that's never happened. And there's been there was total impunity around the entire enterprise. I think the United States government I don't think I know is doing things right now whose consequences cannot be foreseen, but they'll be profound. I agree. And I think the more rotten your behavior, you know, the bigger the consequences and you don't get away with it. No one gets away with it. I agree. And you know, you wonder what's going on now because Afghanistan is fading rapidly into the past. The war ended in 2021. And you know, is there massive drug trafficking taking place under the auspices of US military control right now, not that I know of, but there's other things. You know, Ukraine was the most corrupt country in Europe before the war there, before Russia invaded. And we've dumped so much money and so much equipment into that country with no oversight at all. And transferred it to a political class that we know is corrupt to the bone. So that would be the place to look now, in my opinion, for the contemporary examples of corrupt get assassinated if you tried to do that. You'd be assassinated by the Ukrainians perhaps, you know, with the help of US until agencies. Period. I feel like it would be very unsafe to look into that. It would be very unsafe. I can tell you first-hand it would be very unsafe to do that. But you couldn't do it. Whereas it's pretty crazy if you think about it. It is crazy. There's a lot of things that are crazy these days. I think that what made it possible to write what I wrote about Afghanistan was something that happened while I was writing the book, not too long ago in fact, which was that, you know, the Taliban took over after the US withdrew in 21. And then proceeded to do exactly what they had done in the year 2000, 2001, which was to completely eradicate all drugs from the country. And up until then, we had been told to the extent that drug production Afghanistan came up. We were always told that it was the Taliban and that the insurgency and the drug production were just two sides of the same coin. But the best lies are the ones that are 180 degree opposite of the truth. Exactly. And what made it what gave me the, I guess, what gave me the confidence to really to hit as hard as I could in this narrative was seeing the Taliban in 2023. They completed another eradication campaign where they once again totally eliminated heroin production and drug production from Afghanistan. So at that point, you know, I had doubts as a reporter because I'm not omniscient and, you know, it's always conflict, it's conflicting information. So I kind of doubt my own conclusions. I'm thinking, well, they must have been involved to some degree. We've here that said so often from the most prestigious institutions of media and government, there must be some truth to it. But seeing the Taliban totally eliminate drugs from their country, again, made me realize, okay, this was always a one sided thing. It wasn't that both sides were involved in it. And like I said, that didn't happen until 2023. And so and that's what I think makes it possible to tell the true story of Afghanistan for the first time. You want to get really red you want to make it almost hard to live here. Look up Taliban drug treatment. You know, you're in your early 40s, I think. So you've lived in this country a long time and you must know people who have been ensnared and drugs are died from drugs. I know, and you must, you live here. So you know, sure, you know, of course, become addicted to drugs and can't get off. Of course, a lot of them, most are dead. Ask yourself super simple question is the Taliban drug treatment program, you're going to be looking up their videos. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. I've seen it. Does it have, does it produce a higher or lower relapse rate than the American version in say, Delri Beach, Florida? You know, are the Taliban better at getting people off opioids than we are? And the answer is not just yes, but hell yes, way better because they don't wen them off with methadone. This whole thing is a freaking lie. By the way, a lot of people get rich off that. You know, you are, if you're listening, some of them are big political donors get rich on drug treatment programs disgusting and doesn't work. It works for some small percentage, but it doesn't work for most. That's for sure. And a lot of them die and they never lead productive, joyful lives. And the Taliban have a faith based. I know I'm probably get pulled off YouTube for saying this, but it's true. We're saying this is a Christian on a Muslim. They have a faith based, no nonsense, zero in toxic and policy in their rehab. And it works and ours doesn't. Well, it's a really good point because I've gained some drugs for a serious problem and I do because I've lived it and seen it. Yeah, it's a serious point. It's a serious point that we should think about. What is that? Well, Afghanistan came to have the highest rates of drug use in the world, highest dictionary in the world, which is a tragedy and something that was that was foisted on them. And it's a source of profound misery and blight. And the Taliban's way of dealing with it once the US left was to simply round up addicts if they found them on the street. They would just put them on to buses and it was involuntary. Take them to these detox wards where they're not given any kind of methadets or medication. They're just given, food, water, and a place to stay. And then they just waited out. They're basically locked in there. And they suffered through withdrawals. And then once they're sober, they're allowed to leave at that point. And it was amazing to me to see the hostility and the Western reaction to the drug, to the Taliban's drug detox program. I mean, you can read all of these think tank pieces, all these NGOs where they're talking about how inhumane this is. And I've been through withdrawal from alcohol and it was so unpleasant. And I did it alone. I'm not, you know, I'm not done anything extraordinary. But the one extraordinary thing I did go through that, and I never drank a giga through that. I mean, I know people relapse after going through withdrawals for sure. But I can just speak for myself. And I know I've done it. That's a pretty powerful incentive not to do it again. It is. And I do think there's a cost to sort of easing people out of some, I mean, some withdrawal is life threatening. Of course, you don't want to kill people. But opiate withdrawal is not life threatening. It's just you to shit yourself a lot. I don't know. There is, I can speak from experience. There's there's value in that. You'll never have another glass of vodka if you gone through something like that. That was my feeling. So let me ask you, would you like to see, you know, police officers tomorrow around tomorrow? You're standing leaning against a trash can in the fentanyl haze if you're. be police officers. Tomorrow. You're standing leaning against a trash can in the fentanyl haze. If you're tweaking your brains out and picking open wounds on your face from meth, that is it you're in hell. You're dying. You're a fellow American. I have an obligation to help you beyond helping yourself in the way that a child, a toddler is beyond helping himself in the way that it gets a friend, it gets beyond helping himself. You don't have a reason. You don't have free will. And it's incumbent on me to love you through action. And we can argue about the details of treatment. I personally shank that when possible and not physically dangerous, total withdrawal is the best way, you know, having done it. But I also think more bigger than that is you can't allow this and call yourself a decent society. You cannot allow this. This is hell. And anyone who doesn't think it's hell doesn't know anything about it. What if that was your daughter getting pimped out? You know what I mean? Like it's that ugly and you're from a city where it's just totally destroyed your downtown. But most American cities can say that and no one does anything. So yeah, tomorrow, tomorrow, this is a country where we force people to see the COVID vax. There's no extra me about civil liberties, asshole. Sorry. Yeah, I do feel that way strongly in how many addicts do I know personally who got sober in jail? Yeah. And they're grateful for that. So when Nancy Pelosi starts talking about compassion, the partial birth of abortion ladies talking to me about compassion, fuck you actually. Compassion, look at your city. There's no compassion there. That's hate. Hate for your fellow citizens allowing this stuff. Sorry. Drugs are destroying America. I, and I said as a former user of drugs and like it was very liberal on drugs, but I was wrong. You know, I should say I'm not a drug warrior. I don't believe in the war on drugs. I don't think drugs should be illegal. I think that they should be regulated rather than controlled as rather than being a controlled substance that's totally illegal. But I'm inclined to your point of view about the rehabilitation of large numbers of drug people of drug users. I think that drugs are one of the most salient features of American society or the worse. And that we have a just, as a country, we have a big, big drug problem. And you see that affecting the military, you know, more than ever. And yeah, I guess I shouldn't be, well, of course you're absolutely right. It's like the thing about getting older is it's like it's so hard to readjust your previous perceptions of things. But you're right. Of course you shouldn't be, I should not be shocked that there's a drug problem in the military. There's drug problem, every browser is drug problem in suburbia. There's a drug problem in the inner city. There's drug problem in rural America. We just have drug problems in America. There's a lot of money. Let me say this in response to what you're saying about rounding people up and putting them into detox wards. I think that's better than arresting them and putting them in prison for using drugs. Of course. Well, of course. And probably cheaper too. It's not even like compared to what? How much aid have we sent to Israel to people in Gaza? Yeah. I don't know. Money's not an issue. Well, I mean, on some level, it is an issue, but it's also, it's an expression of your priorities. What I spend money on in my family is an expression of what I care about. What I mean is you care about your own people and the kids who are literally standing there like this. Like, how can you allow that or people lying in their own feces on the sidewalk? Like, that's so shameful. It's a marker shaming against all of us. Those are Americans. And I don't think we should put them in jail. I completely agree with you. That's not a crime as much as it's a tragedy. So crime against them, their community of crime against themselves. Yeah. Don't allow that. Would you allow your child? If you, if you would have child who was addicted to fentanyl, like standing like this, you'd be like, I'm going to chain you to the freakin' radiator until you get better. I love you that much. Would you? Yes. Yes. We should love our fellow citizens that much. But we hate them. And we call it compassion. That's hate. It's not compassion. Sorry. Oh, nothing bothers me more than that. It is upsetting to see the degree of degradation. Yes, that's the word. As a result of the drug industry. There's human beings. And they've been reduced to something less than human beings. Yes. And there's a lot of factors that go into that. There's a lot of causes. And one of them is something we're really not here to talk about today, but it's the downward mobility that we see in our society and the lack of economic prospects that people have are strongly agreed, especially if they don't have an elite education. Yep. The cost of housing. There's a lot of reasons why you totally agree into Plagzambis. But you could also, I mean, yes, I say that often. I mean it sincerely. And we're a tiny number of the worst people are taking all the money. I totally agree with that. Oh, you're a socialist. No, I'm not. I'm an American who remembers a middle class country and I would like to have that again. That's it. Even though I'm not in a class. Whatever. Leaving that aside, you can say there are a lot of reasons your house is on fire. But the first response is to put it out. We probably should upgrade the electrical after this or put a lightning rod on the roof or whatever. We can take steps to prevent it happening again. But right now you need hoses and water. And if you see Americans dying of drugs on the street, you have to stop that immediately. Those are human beings with souls. They're your countrymen. And I think that the government now under Trump, what they're trying to do is declare war on Mexican drug cartels or on the Venezuelan government. And this I think is totally misguided and will be ineffectual if they actually go through with it because certainly the Venezuelan thing is a product of, yeah. The thing is it really. We're talking about the complicity of the US government and the international drug trade. And I think that's real. I definitely think that's real. And it's again, it's not what I was saying before. It's not a top-down conspiracy where it's actually the purpose. It's a side effect of our imperialism and the permanent war paradigm. And in Mexico, I've spent a lot of time in Mexico before I was working on this book as a reporter reporting on the drug wars there, the cartel wars there. And it's one thing. Trump can tell people he can tell his voters, we're going to declare war on Mexican drug cartels and people will buy into that because they see them, you know, they as vicious criminals and murderers who are pumping drugs into this country. So it's easy to see why they would be for that. But I feel that way. I see them. Well, the reality is that Mexican drug cartels don't really exist in the same way that we've been taught to believe in them by Netflix and Hollywood. In fact, there's a recent book. It's an academic book. It's not the easiest to read, but I think it has an important thesis. It's by a Mexican academic name as well as Zvala. And it's called drug cartels do not exist. What he means by that provocative thesis is that there are not the type of organizations that we see represented in shows like Narcos. Take El Chapo Guzman, for example, the famous drug lord who was captured, I guess, 2015-60. The US government to date has seized no assets belonging to him. None. Why is that? I thought he was one of the world's richest men. He's on Forbes list. He was one of the world's richest men. No assets, not in zero. Reserve that only for Russian oligarchs. Well, I don't think they can find any. They can't find any because the drug industry in Mexico is incredibly complex. The first thing to understand is that it's not a collection of organizations. It's a market. And the demand component of that market is in the United States. So people in this country wanting drugs is the battery that's running this whole thing. Because once there's that demand supply and never suppliers inevitably arise to feed it. In Mexico, those suppliers, yes, there are low-level traffickers. The people, the disposable people who are bringing the drugs across the border. The disposable hitmen who are 14 years old and carry out hits. But the real power behind the drug industry in Mexico is the military and the police, politicians, lawyers, depocketed investors. They're the ones that are going in on drug trafficking ventures, essentially as joint ventures. as investments. It's much more organic and spontaneous than we're led to believe. The organization to the extent that it exists can be found in high-level, you know, army generals or high-level police officers who are taking a cut from all the little fish or swimming through certain drug trafficking routes. So the sort of idea that we have of a cartel where it's just bad guys hiding out in their lair, having meetings with the bosses, that just simply doesn't exist in Mexico. So El Chapo, just to get back to the originally sample, was described as a billionaire. We got a pretty, what seemed like a pretty detailed accounting of the revenue. Well, no, we didn't. I mean, you're talking about the DEA and the DOJ. I mean, they are capable of manufacturing narratives. They're lawyers. Prosecutors, you know, they can put this stuff together and make this case. Look, I'm not saying that El Chapo wasn't a drug trafficker. He was, he was. But he consistently acclaimed that he was a small fry. And he had like four guys with him at the time that he was arrested. I thought he had like a private zoo with white lions and where is that? I haven't seen that. I've seen his pictures of his mom's house in St. Aloha, but there was that time that Sean Pen went to go visit him. Did that look like the lair of a drug trafficker? He looked like an ignorant, comfy, you know, up there. He had like chickens and cages and stuff. And he was clearly a very naive person when when Sean, Pen interviewed him. Like he wanted, he was entrapped into this by desire to give flowers to Kate Del Castillo, the Mexican actress who was with Sean Pen. I digress to some degree. The point is, bottom line is they, I just want you to say, again, the US government, or the Mexican members never confiscated any of this wealth. That's right. We were told he had. That's right. Because the real power behind the drug industry in Mexico is the political class that's like this with the United States security state that is fun. They get all of their, you know, the Mexican army that makes things have changed in Mexico by the way. This is a moving target to discuss because Mexico starting in 2018 has gone through profound political changes for sure. That'll be the beginning of. I'm a little sure of the. Yeah. I'm low in the success of Claudia Shiong. But at the bottom, especially in the northern states of Mexico, along the Texas border, yep, I don't think so much has changed there. And if you look, just say, go say like time on leap, which is just south of Texas, which has probably the highest intensity of drug trafficking anywhere in the world, bringing it to the United States. Who are the real powers there? I mean, you could say it's the Gulf cartel or you could say it's a little set as these are the organizations that we've been trained by the media to believe are the sort of puppet masters that they're making all this happen. By the way, I bought that storyline totally. Okay. I mean, I have no weather information. I don't speak Spanish. I don't know. But I mean, I just sort of assume that was true. The real drug traffickers there, the real power, the idea that we often also hear that the Mexican state is outgunned by drug traffickers. Yes, I'm glad that too. I made a comment about that earlier about how the high power weapons that they have. There's some element of truth to that. But the reality is that the cartels are not a threat to the Mexican state. In fact, they're in a pendant of the Mexican state in a certain way. And the elite class in Mexico, the kind of a shadow paramilitary structure of, let's say, a state government like the state government of Tamalepos and the police forces there and the military divisions that are stationed there. And we're not going to go to war with those people because there are allies. I mean, people may not realize this, but there's close security cooperation between the US and Mexico. Yes. I mean, the Mexican army, we armed them. We give them their black-aw-calic operators and their armored vehicles and also the state police forces in the North America. We arm all of them and they get training from the state department and from American police officers and so on. And they're the real cartel to the extent a cartel exists. And you can see that in other places in the world, notably in Colombia, where, again, it's changing there because they also have a new president. Latin America is changing rapidly in recent years. But for in the past for many years in Colombia, that Colombian federal government and the Colombian military have been the biggest drug most responsible for moving the most weight and drugs, I would say. And once again, they're closely backed by the US government. So to bring it home and wrap up this point, you can say we're going to target drug cartels in Mexico. But the fact is, one, they have no idea who these people are, that people that they're setting up as drug traffickers. They may have developed some targets. To fight a war, you need not only political will, you need targets. That was a problem incidentally, parenthetically in Afghanistan. It was hard for them to develop targets there because it's such a big remote country. Anyway, in Mexico, they're not going to be able to find those targets. And to the extent that they are, there are going to be people that are protected by the State Department and the CIA. And so it's just not going to happen. This is this drug war, this war on Mexican drug cartels. I don't see it happening. And if it does, it'll be in the nature of very isolated strikes. So what is the answer? You have to address the demand. The demand is what's causing all this. So long as you do it. And just why, here's where I understand. Sobriety is good. Okay. Sobriety is the key to joy and productivity and like having a useful life, making it worth being here. I agree with short period that we are. I believe that through a much experience. I've never heard any leader in our country say that. No, I'm saying about Mexico. No, about sobriety. About the right. It's a role ought to be clear thinking, you know, whatever. within the bounds of human nature, but like virtuous life. I don't know. Try to be clear eyed, hardworking, decent and sober. Like I don't know what, there's no kind of goal set by our leaders. Like maybe you shouldn't be wasted all the time. Maybe you should offer a freaking SSRIs, which make you impotent by the way. You know, where your benzodiazepines or your beer or your weed. Like no one even says that. I mean, I think they're all on drugs. I never- I think the whole US government's on drugs. I totally agree. I mean, look at the people at the highest level. I mean, don't want to cast just reckless aspersions. But here's something that's concrete. Rolling Stone, mags never written for for many years, reported on drug use in Trump's first White House. And in fact, Trump's personal doctor, Ronnie the Candyman Jackson, they called him. He was an admiral from Namasteken in the Navy, a physician who was demoted by the Navy for running an unlicensed pharmacy in the White House because he was giving Trump's people prescription drugs without a prescription and for free. And even if you're the president's personal physician, that's illegal. So there's evidence that all of those people were- and you see it in their behavior as well. And I'm not just picking on the Republican Center because look at- look at Kamala Harris, for example. I don't know her personally and I can't say for sure. But did she seem like someone who was taking a lot of prescription pills? Well, I worked for someone like that in television. It was the head of a network who I mean, we used to joke this person's on Benzos. Like, you just dead-eyed. I mean, you see that so much. Talking nonsenseically like weird, you know, lack of weird reactions. Yeah. Who just are not quite there in a certain way. Yes. And it seemed kind of zonked out in a certain way. Yes. That's the whole country. Seems like a lot of our top leaders. So my question is, why does no one ever mention that? And just say, like, here's what the- you know, we all fall short of the goal. It's not even judging- I'm not judging anybody. I'm not qualified to judge anybody. But like, I do think it's important to articulate the goal and why shouldn't someone say the goal is so bright? You know, again, I'm not here to be a drug warrior or paternalistic or to a lecture people who struggle with substance abuse, but I certainly agree with you that we should, that that should be a value. You should know, Seth, that the real danger is Sharia law. Sharia law. And you can tell when you go to a place like Abu Dhabi or Riyadh, like, oh man, I hope we don't ever wind up with a society like this. The rate rate of zero where you leave your keys in your Lamborghini and don't ever worry about it being stolen. You know, if people want to get wasted, they do it at home. You know what I mean? Yeah. I don't- I don't- I hope we don't wind up with that. Yeah. I think the- I mean, Sharia law is obviously just a punchline. I don't know that too many people actually believe in the reality of that. And I mean, I like I said, you know, I'm a lawyer. I actually studied legal philosophy. But Sharia is not that different from other legal codes. A lot of our own legal code, the Anglo-Saxon common law, angle American common law derives ultimately from religious authorities. Hope so. There's a lot of universal values in homorobbies code. It's recognized why I wouldn't want to live under it. It's kind of punitive, but it's not like from another planet. The oldest legal code that we have, homorobbies code, it's like it's not- You sort of know what he's talking about, right? Look, they- I agree. Yeah. And look, they put up Tim Commandments in front of the- I live in Austin, Texas, and they put up the Tim Commandments in front of the state capital. And that's controversial among, you know, religious libertarians. But I'm of the view that they- I'm happy to see them put the Tim Commandments up there if they would just follow them. Why? You know. I agree. Starting with thou shalt not kill. I couldn't agree more. So let me just put a bow on this really super interesting conversation. Thank you. With the question like how were your interactions during the two and a half years you were writing this or more? With the- with like DOD for example, with the Pentagon. Like you must have called over there to the PIOs and said, you know, I have the list of following questions. Like how did they respond to you? In general they just didn't respond. And I wasn't touched with them just yesterday because political is published and excerpt of the book. And so we had to go back to them again for comment. And the fact that it involves Delta Force, the fact that it involves a special mission unit, you know, they said that explicitly in the response that I got from use of Salk yesterday. They said because your question implicates a special mission unit, you know, our policy is to not comment. So for the most part they didn't give me anything. I was on my own. But so here you have a documented case of one of their guys murdering someone in this house. Mm-hmm. Obviously there was drug trafficking. There was indisputably drug use in our coty cues by federal employees. And they don't have to answer any of your questions because the missions are shrouded in secrecy. Um, yes, that's right. In general, that's right. I will say, you know, I try not to be, um, I try to be fair when possible or to give credit what credit is due. There was a case where the Senate Armed Services Committee questioned the commander of Salkom, which is an umbrella formation above J. Salk and above all these units. Question to him in a committee, a Senate committee about my reporting for Rolling Stone. And asked him to address, you know, the cases of drug trafficking and unsolved murders. And, um, General Brian Fenton, who at that time was the commander of Salkom, said that he was concerned about it and said that it was unacceptable, said that there were laser focus on eradicating it. But whether those, uh, sentiments that they expressed to, to members of Congress was actually backed up with real action, I don't know. I don't know. Hmm. Do you see the possibility of reform? I don't think that I'm very critical of in this book of every single presidential administration since 2001, Bush, Obama, Trump and Biden. None of them I give a pass to any of them, but I do see, uh, Trump's influence here to be uniquely negative because of the way that he surrounds himself with some of the craziest people in the special operations community, elevates these people who are, who among their own colleagues are considered, um, loose cans, not credible. You know, there's the case of Eddie Gallagher, where Trump made it such a big part of his brand to defend this disgrace to the Navy SEALs, who was turned in by his own teammates for killing a bunch of people for no reason. I mean, you're talking about guys who are not bleeding hard liberals by any stretch of the imagination. They're there with Chief Gallagher next to him, seeing what he's doing and they're not okay with it. They turn him in to command what's nothing to do with Gallagher. They also think that he's an embarrassment and a disgrace and a murderer, but Trump intervenes to prevent him from, from losing his, uh, trident, um, and Trump, uh, touts him and he becomes this big influencer and so forth. So that type of incredible irresponsibility and malignancy on Trump's part, his, his uniquely malignant influences commander and chief, I think augers very poorly for the possibility of reform and at least in the next three years. Well you want, uh, honest, competent, um, decent military because, you know, it's the purest expression of power that a government has, the power to kill people. And you have to think that they're operating on a different and elevated moral plane. They can't just be like an outlaw state. You know what I mean? Yes, that's what I was saying before about the founding of the US Army 250 years ago. It is a core institution in a far country for our nation. Um, so to see the degree of decline, um, it's everywhere, um, you know, possible to observe. It's very concerning. And I really don't think people are aware of the degree to which the military is incapable of fulfilling its functions. Um, I don't know that you can say that the US has the most powerful military in the world anymore. Uh, I think that you, a strong case could be made that China has a more competent military, even though they, they have never been in combat. They have totally untested. So there's a big caveat there because, but just looking out on the surface, like I don't think Chinese soldiers are trafficking drugs and killing each other. I don't think Chinese soldiers are, are dropping dead from fentanyl overdoses right and left. And also China has a much bigger army than us while our army is shrinking to a degree that's really shocking. I mean, they're really running out of people. Uh, this year recruiting was a little bit better, but you're still talking about, you know, a long, long deficit in recruiting. The army has never been smaller than it is right now. They can't get qualified, uh, helicopter pilots, let's say, as we saw. So, um, you know, tragically demonstrated over the batomic river in January. So I think that it, you know, beyond just the drugs, um, there's a lot of reasons to be concerned, you know, about the, the health and viability of the US military in general. Wait, that's a sad story. Sad throat. Thank you very much for that. Thanks for having me. Appreciate it. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. It's not surprising. That's what they do. On another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. But we did do that on YouTube. We think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.