Boom and we're live. What's happening baby? What's up Joe? How are you brother? I'm feeling great man. Thanks for having me. You're looking great. Thanks. You're looking around the large. I threatened Joe before the show. I said you need to start off and tell me how beautiful I am. Strong and pretty. Yeah. Was that your t-shirt company? Yeah that's my clothing company. It's also bunker branding and basically that's basically where I'm at. Trying to keep this like a fist from your face. No you're not. I'm just afraid everyone's gonna hear me breathe like a fake girl. How much did you do any cardio? I do most definitely. Yeah yeah. If you watch strong men on ESPN. So like when you pull a truck at 70,000 pounds you pull it for 100 feet with a harness restraining your chest like not expulsion but your chest expansion. That's the hardest cardio I've ever done. I played football for long time so I mean. Yeah I can only imagine. But I was thinking that like you have to have some cardiovascular strength to do some of of those routines, some of the different challenges that you guys have to do. For sure. Normally like worlds will start with like what we call load medley. So you'll have normally like four implements like you'll have two kegs and two sandbags. And the kegs will both weigh 265 pounds and the sandbags will be 330. That's what we did last year which was fucking brutal. But you'll have to load each one of them onto a platform that's about 60 feet away. If you get going you're not just cardio you have to have diaphragm strength too. Like if you've got a weak diaphragm you're just going to fold. I've seen guys block out and I've seen guys block out at world's longest man. So how does one strengthen their diaphragm? What we do the normal exercise we did it doesn't really have a name. It's just kind of something we made up. You'll lay on your back and you take like a sandbag and put it over your upper abdomen and you'll expand, you'll push out really hard. And you try and hold it for like say like two minutes. And you learn to take tight little breaths while flexing your upper abdominal abdominals. Whoa I can spoke. So you've got the weight on you? Right. And you just, and you stay flexed. And it's like you know how you see fighters taking punches like just to keep tight. Same similar thing. And so like me. I have a big barrel gut like a big chest and gut but like it's solid. I literally get like a brag a little bit. I've got side abs in the morning sometimes. You know, actually I got to say this. The best compliment I was ever given. I put up a post and it was me drinking coffee in the morning just naked but like from like the hip up. And somebody gave me a compliment that actually comes from something you said. They said damn Roberts got a really good dick root. I think I invented dick root. Dick roots when those dudes, I don't understand why dudes do that. They wear their shorts so low that you basically see the top of their cock. They've got nothing else to show so that's a weird, weird move. If you do a dick root that's all it comes up is just, I think I invented it. I appreciate it. It was a very nice compliment. Could have got some of the dick root bro. It's just a weird thing that gun. I mean when did guys start doing it? I get girls doing it. I get it. Don't get guys pulling their shorts all the way down low like that. No. Seems like you just ask him to get pants. Like I don't understand like sagging. I guess it comes out of prison culture. From what I heard. But I hate it now but I feel like a old man because I used to do it as a kid. You sag? Well I grew up in an area it was like, it was a very low income area. I don't know how to say that politically correct. That's what it's for. There you go. There you go. Everybody was sagging. Do you have like boxer shorts on their neck? Oh, that's right. You learn. See when you start off with tidy wideies and then everyone makes plenty of them. You're like, oh right where I say you switch to boxes. What weird style? Yeah. I ran out of that by the time I was like 12 though. I was like, this is ridiculous. Well my problem is like if somebody grabs your pants, like you're done. You're going to have to reach for your pants and then they're going to punch you in the face. You're like asking to, you're like at a handicap. Yeah. You sound exactly like my father right now. Exactly what do you want to say? You're going to get your ass kicked. Yeah. I have friends that tried it like even 10, 15 years ago. Like guys my age I was like what in the fuck are you doing? It's too late. The thing now is skinny jeans and sagging which is like a counterproductive way. It just doesn't seem like it goes together. Right. They're trying to combine styles and understand what they're doing. Right. And if they've got a good enough dick root, then they maybe that's what it is. Like they just got to show the quad like do you wear regular jeans or do you wear like them the stretchy type jeans? These are straight down jeans. Yeah. These are straight down. I love those man. I can't go back to regular jeans. Once you wear like rev towns or barbells or any of those kind of things, you fuck all those regular jeans. You can man. I mean I've ripped so many jeans just sitting down you know. Well I think with your size like it must be fucking so hard to just find clothes. And I'm built differently. My waist is like a 40 but my end seems like a 34. And so normally like if you find a 40 waist it's like a 28 or a 30 leg. So it's like for a shorter like try to get guys. So you can still say fat guys and no one gets mad. If you say fat girls people like hey. Yeah. I'm so insensitive. But fat guys you don't catch a break. You can just fuck about fat guys. Deal with it fat guys. Fuck deal with it. Fat guys are happy they're fat sometimes. That's it. Fat girls will pretend they're happy they're fat but they're really sad on the inside. So there you go. But fat guys if they especially if they drink they're like ahhh. Like per pressure. Burcristor does not seem to give a fuck that he's fat. No he does not have a problem with it. No. Takes a shirt off the moment he gets on stage. Doesn't care. He's a little on daytime TV. Yes. If he doesn't people get mad at him. If he doesn't take a shirt off people like hey. Come on. Fat guys they get naked. Get naked. Where's your shirt? Dance monkey. Yeah. Take it off. That's part of your gig. It's like what's his name? Gallagher without a watermelon. No sledgehammer get the fuck out of there. Speaking of him what are you guys thinking for a sober October? We really haven't decided yet. The burnt one has to do some dance contests so he could suck my dick. Because he wanted to do that so he could just win without working hard. I can just take his clothes off. I'm getting crazy. I'm gonna win. Oh. Right. No chance. I'm gonna say a little bit about this. What if they found a way to like score a dance thing in a, you know, like so there is no judgment and it was like points based on athletic types of movements or something like that. I'm sure like the internet could come up with a way that it's like because I understand what you're saying and what you're saying makes total sense about how like you earn that shit. You want it to be regulated. Not so in the past year. Because last year we literally were killing ourselves. We were working out seven hours a day and I was just trying to grind those guys in the ground. I'm just gonna take you to deep water and see it was awesome man. I love it. I fucking love that I couldn't stop watching. Well, part was talking shit and that's when I was like, oh, I cannot have this guy win. This is not going to happen. That's what you fuck up. I knew Ari was going to be a problem because he's crazy. Ari tried really hard but he doesn't have a lot of experience grinding like that. Right. He did his best. Yeah. He hung in there. But you're a vet with that shit. Yeah. Burt's trying to win this with fucking style points. He can fuck off. No. I think if somebody can come up with a way that dancing is like regulated in a point system that does nothing to do with people's opinion to where like it's I don't know even how you would do that where it's like there's an athletic type of movement that's required for this. So learning that takes this and gives you that gives you points. That's the only way it would even work where it wasn't based on someone's opinion. It's too much time too. That's the part of the problem. It's like learning how to dance. I did a movie once a zookeeper and I had to learn how to do this elaborate dance with Leslie Bibb. That shit took forever. It took weeks and we and you're like constantly training and drilling and going over the movements and I don't even like that kind of stuff. It's not like like if I'm doing martial arts and I'm training I'm interested. That's like I love that. I want to I want to get better at it. I didn't want to get better at dancing. I just wanted to be over. Right. It's one of the film the scene so I could fucking relax. Yeah. Yeah. Move on. Yeah. So I don't know what we're going to do. We haven't decided. We're all waiting. Yeah. I said we should have a hold your breath competition. Oh that'd be cool. Yeah. On the water. Yeah. That takes practice. I mean I think you guys have to add something in. My favorite part of it was seeing you be like no fuck this like we'll all go to the gates of hell. Yeah. That's me. Like if someone if someone I love talking trash right. Yeah. And strong man it's not very popular. Like when I got in. Oh no they don't it's very old school like you're supposed to do your work not act like you're supposed to get paid not act like you're supposed to want any attention not drawing the attention towards yourself. Really? It's like it's like karate in like 1960. Like it's full school. You know be respectful of the way and I totally get that. I understand that and I mean I don't think anyone can get to the top echelon without having that respect. It's it's it's a ridiculous for for people who've never been at that on that on that level to tell other people how they're supposed to behave. Right. If I want to talk shit I'm going to talk shit. I do. Like I was talking shit to you. We're starting to come out. Yeah. That's just what we do. Yeah. It's fun. It's talking shit is fun. And also it's like I feel like that makes it more entertaining and we want more eyes on the sport. Exactly. I mean that's what I might argue about the UFC. I always like it when people talk some shit. Right. And when they lose sometimes you have to eat that. Like what's that? The Ben Askeran. Exactly a flat line. Yeah. That was brutal. But I mean he also took that on the chin. He put up a post like right after that. Like well that sucked. Yeah. He takes it on a chin better than anybody. He's got a great personality. Yeah. And massive. It's all said it's not even over. But I said listening to goes I don't like that dude. He goes if I see him at Whole Foods he's getting smacked up. Oh shit. I can't imagine the guy flat lines you with the fucking fastest ever KO in UFC history and he's promising you that if you're looking for Brussels sprouts. He's smacking the face. Yeah. Oh man. He already gave him two extra shots to the face. Which by the way people are giving him shit for it. That's his job. Yes. It's go to the referee's stop show. Well especially when there's a heated contest like that where you talk so much shit and he insulted Mazvid al's manhood he talked about his nessidy talk. He said a lot of shit that really pissed Mazvid al off. Right. And he's like why didn't he had a statement of us like why is it okay to talk all this shit online about me before the fight. But then after I knock him out I'm not supposed to show about I'm not supposed to celebrate with the fuck out of here. If you got a problem with it stop him. Winners get to do what they want. He's ice cold man when he said and it's not over if I see his head smacked up like oh my god. He's a very so intense savage savage. I moved though it was so brilliant because Askren always grabs your legs and if you get that close to him he's going to think like almost like he has to grab you. It's his instinct. And you saw him like I saw somebody put a video in practice and he would he rounded it like out to the outside and then acted as if it was going to be just a normal step and then it's two quick steps in the knee. Oh and you see how stiff he was before you. I'm sure you saw but damn he was stiff. Yeah. What his head was up and one leg was up. I mean he was stiff. That was a rut here. Here he is practicing. Yeah. That was an absolutely normal, endless KO. And it's the fastest ever UFC KO at five seconds but really he was out cold at two. Oh yeah. Yeah. I mean he just took the ref in a few seconds to get there. Yeah. Whatever. Maybe three I guess maybe I mean whatever it took for him to run over there. It seems like two seconds. Yeah. It was like one one thousand two. It's over. Yeah. Well fuck. Well he's really got a lot of FaceTime before he got in the ring. Yeah. Have you ever thought about fighting as big as you are? I mean I messed around with wrestling and stuff like that. I worked with John Jones with the supplement company for a while. Oh really? Yeah. And I know a lot of fighters. I know a lot of old school wrestlers. I've got a lot of like friends in the industry but I'm fucking. Both school wrestler wrestlers are pro wrestlers. Yeah. They're totally different thing. Yeah. But that would be a great avenue for you too right? I did think about that for a while too. It's just a contractually. It's a shit show. I'm sure. I'm not doing injuries and all that stuff too. It would take you out of competition. Plus they want that. Why am I now? I started and worked my ass off just to get like a little piece of that pie. And when you go to the WWE or something like that, you have to step back all the way to the ground level. You have to earn your stripes and I understand that but like I have a son, I have a family, I take care of people. I can't give up everything that I've earned like basically breaking myself for five years. I have to crawl back up and hopefully end up where I am. But it's a cool thing. I was a big fan of wrestling when I was a kid back in the day and I love watching it. One of my buddies right now, a guy who was a strong man with me, his name's Braun Strowman and he's in the WWE. He's a badass. I love watching him do it sometimes. Do you follow Puyjay Nowski fighting an MMA? I haven't seen a lot of his MMA stuff. I know him and he's a lot of them. He's freaking crazy. He's fucking people up too man. He's really getting better. Like when he first started fighting, he was just this giant dude who was just swinging arm punches and if he hit you, he would fuck you up. But he got crazy and he decided to fight Tim Sylvia, who was a former UFC player. He had a very champion and Tim beat the shit out of him. He was horrible. Like I don't know why he thought he could beat Tim Sylvia. He thought that Tim was washed up or older. How old is Tim now? How long has he been out of the game? He's definitely in his 40s. I don't know. How old is Tim? Tim's giant now. He thought it for a pound. I'm fooling in pounds. I can't. I don't cut both my legs off to make 265. Well I think that's so weird that they have a 265 cut off because heavyweight is supposed to be the biggest guy. Like in boxing, you remember that dude Valuev who fought, who did he fight? He fight Holyfield. He was like seven feet tall as giant ass Russian dude. He was fucking enormous as boxer but he was well over 300 pounds. Seven feet tall would be skinny at three. But he was big man. He had gigantic Titus or whatever. That's when you put to a Terry Glenn tumor. Yeah. What does that, see if you find that guy Valuev? I think he fought Holyfield. I think Holyfield beat him for the title, which is even crazier when you think that Holyfield started his career, he started his career as a cruiserweight. Really? 95 pounds. Yeah. Yeah. That's it. Here's the guy. A van der holyfield and Valuev. And this is in 2008. Look at the size of that guy man. I mean, get the fuck out of here. He's so big man. But I think when guys of that big, like with that giant Titus or Jai can't tie to say that they're always hurting. Everything hurts. You're these hurt, you're elbows. It's like you can't really move that good. I knew a lot of guys, Andre the Giant was my hero growing up, but he was like my first real hero. And I knew a lot of guys who had known him. I actually met a riding riding Piper like three weeks before he passed and it was one of the main men, Andre the Giant shirt. We got to sit in a VIP section at a baseball game when he was badass man. He was so cool. I wanted to get that guy in the podcast and Tony Henskopf is actually trying to set it up but then he died. Yeah. He used to go to the college store a lot. Yeah. Yeah. He was one on stage a couple times there. Yeah. He would just tell stories, man. He was awesome. He was like one of the first guys also to cross over in the movies. Obviously, Andre was first. He did a few guest possibilities. Yeah. Yeah. But he was the star of They Live. Remember that? Which is the John Carpenter movie? That's a great fucking movie. Huge. Yeah. So he was in that too. He was a fun diamond. Yeah. We're actually what I was, what we're doing the whole basically is now. I'll see you talk about TV show. This next season, season two, we're going to do it. We'll start over. The whole TV show is based on us doing acts of strength throughout, for strong men throughout history. What is the Nate and the show called? History, Strongest Man and Strongest Man and History. This is an ESPN show? It's on history. It's on history. Oh, it's on history, champ. Oh, that's awesome. So one of the episodes next season we're hoping to do is under the giant, which is what we're going to talk about. What we do is we travel to where a historical strong man lives or where he did this famous feed of strength. And we recreate those feeds of strength and we kind of talk about who they are as people and stuff and bring the light like a lot of the cool aspects that most people lose. So I get it be cool to take somebody like Andre the giant and meet with his daughter and figure out little parts that people haven't really paid attention to and bring that to light. We did one of my favorite episodes we did was this guy Peter Francisco who was born in, I think it was Columbia. I'm on my mind mistaken, Peter Francisco. There we go. The Virginia giant in Portugal. There you go. So he was born to like a wealthy family and was kidnapped and sold as a slave. And he ended up in America and at 16 he signed up to fight in the Revolutionary War. He was six foot seven six foot eight just this giant of a man especially 17 seven six. Yeah, there was nobody that big back then. You know, like a lot of people don't realize Jack Johnson, former heavyweight champion who they called the Galveston giant, I think he was only six three or six two or put up Jack Johnson. So he'll be you was powered over everybody else he fought. Yeah. Like Rocky Marciana was 185 pounds, 189 pounds like somewhere around there. That's fair. Says he was only six foot tall. What? That's what Google puts popped up from his like Wikipedia. Hmm. I think he was a little taller than that. But he was a giant back then. Right. They called him the Galveston giant. Well, everybody was so poor then they didn't have any food. Right. You know, the turn of the century. Yeah, everybody struggles. Six foot tall is whatever. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's was six two Jack Dempsey six one. Wow. And Marciana I think was five ten. Five times, I believe is five. I think Marciana was five ten, 185 pounds. It's crazy because Jack Johnson towered over everybody was fucking everybody up. I mean, it's a food thing, man. No one had any fucking food back then. If you look at the size of the people that fought during the Civil War, they were tiny ass people. Right. Like really tiny like 125 pound men. I don't even go back further all the skeletons. Look at that picture. I like to make it out like he's giant. Like look at the picture on the right. Look at his back. Look at his back. He is pretty dracked. But yeah, sure. I mean, he's definitely jacked for, I mean, look. He's big. But I mean, in comparison to a real heavyweight today, like if you put him next to Anthony Joshua, you know, like Joshua would be towering over John T. Wilder was six, was he six seven? Yeah. Yeah. Or Francis and Gano, you know, big giant dudes, real legit giant dudes. People are more of that big back then. So that guy, the wrestler, the Portuguese guy, you know, how much to be non believable to see someone that big back then? And saying, yeah. And what was cool is like there's a lot of cool things that you find out. Like George Washington had a quote on his gravestone that was said that there were several battles that we would not have had go the same way. And we don't know if we would have even been able to win the war if it wasn't for him. Why? He was a one man army. And for George Washington to say that, that's huge. That's crazy. So it was cool to get to talk about him and all the things he had done and bring, you know, show a little love for a guy who I'd never even heard of. Yeah. And it's like there was the story. He was on the battlefield. And he was pulling people off of horses and like basically beating them to death because we ran out of bullets. And then as he goes marching up towards the sky, who pulls his musket out to shoot at him and the musket misfires, he takes the musket from him and beats him to death with his own musket. Oh my God. Stuff like that. Or when the battle was over, they had a cannon stuck in the mud. And this is one of the feats of strength we did. They had a cannon stuck in the mud and he didn't want the British to end up with it. So he just yanks the thing off of the wheels, puts it on a shoulder and marches off with it. How much does it weigh? It depends. Depends on the story that you believe. When we went, I don't want to get too much into it. But when we went, that's the biggest question was because anybody who's ever lifted a bunch of weight and thrown things around, it's like, that sounds pretty crazy. Because cannons can go from anywhere of like a normal field cannon will be like 300 pounds. But they've got field cannons from that era that are a thousand pounds. And depending on who tells the story, that's what you found, which we try and figure out with it. What the fuck would you even get that on your shoulder? It's in the mud. Exactly. So you're standing the mud, so you don't have a firm ground to push off against. Right. So we're in the, squashing around the mud and you got this giant cannon, you're trying to throw in your shoulders. No handles. Fuckin' A man. Right after battle too. The guy was a savage. It was really cool. Afterwards, he ended up a wealthy man and was taken care of. And it was a really cool story. So I was, I was like, actually pretty proud to get to tell that one. That's awesome. A lot of them are like that. How did you get involved with doing strong line competitions? I played football. I played football for a long time. And then football was done with me. And basically I was just, I didn't want to have a real job. Just to be totally honest. I'm not, I'm not a nine to five sitting on office guy. I don't think anybody is. I don't think so either. I really don't. No, it's terrible way to live. And so, and there's people listening right now that like, that's what I'm going to fuck this place. Get out. Get out where you can. Get out of the, some telling you, I convinced one of my best friends to quit his job and come with me to China for a week. And then of course you have to struggle and find your way. But then after that, it was the best thing you've ever done. Yeah. Definitely better off being in no mad. Yeah. It's something. You feel better, you know? Exactly. Like I was talking to a friend of mine today about Thailand about, like when I went to Thailand last year kind of like reshaped my idea of like what makes people happy. Because everybody over there is wearing flip flops and fucking shorts. Everything is real cheap, foods real cheap. There's no extravagance. And everybody's happy. And like my friend John Wayne Parris says it's the land of smiles. That's what he calls it. And I was like, okay, he lived there in train there for a long time. And like, well, I didn't get it until I went there. And I'm like, God damn it, everybody's happy. But you'll drive by. You'll see like a fucking kid, a baby sitting on the gas tank of a motorcycle while guys driving and the ladies behind them. And she's holding onto the guys' waist. And he's like got one hand on the handlebars and one hand on a baby. And I'm like, what in the fuck am I saying? They're wearing flip flops. Yeah. And they're just, everyone's happy. No. I haven't been to Thailand, but it's like that in parts of China. Like rural parts of China. It's a lot like that. I've seen like people tied to each other on a motorcycle. So I'm being one for a lot. Oh, Jesus. What a terrible idea. I'm still bad. Bill Burris sent me a fucking horrible video yesterday. I have this guy. These two guys are riding like assholes on a bridge. Like with motorcycles, weaving in that traffic. And one guy loses control of the bike and he hits the cement barrier on the edge of the bridge and then goes off the edge. Oh my God. Yeah, just watch it bang. When he flies off. Oh, it's like all I've been seeing in the last week too. We just did this. Here it is. Jamie got it ready. Jamie's the fastest guru in the West. They're on it. See, these guys are funny. Look at this. Oh, he touched too. Oh, yeah. You see him put his foot down and trying to collect himself? Watch. Yeah. And watch when you see when they pull over and you get to look at how far this motherfucker dropped. Like he's done. Oh, shit. That is. That is. That's like guys got it. It's hand on his pockets. Of course it's Florida. It looks like it. Sure. It's Florida. It's got to be Florida. Probably land it right on an alligator. Oh, he would have been fine. Yeah. But now he's shoot up. I read a story in Florida, but it's Tampa. Tampa, Florida. Of course. Call it. Of course, man. It's a fucking mass man. I was there for two weeks. I was scared shit list the whole time. I've been everywhere. It's Florida. I was like paying attention to everyone walking around. Speaking of bad saws eating people's faces. Everything fucked up happens there. They just issued a shoot to kill on iguanas. They're trying to get people to kill as many iguanas. Apparently there's so many iguanas there that their digging holes under bridges and roads and roads are collapsing. Yeah. Buildings are collapsing because they're digging trenches under the foundations. That's so crazy. And they're big. Like five feet long. What do you got? What's this? Florida iguanas hunter mistakes pool boy for you. I want to shoot them. Florida, you got to get your shit together, guys. Come on. Not going to happen. My sister lives in Florida. She's probably listening to this. Florida get out of there. Run for your lives. It's a fucking goofy place to live, man. It really is. It's so crazy. It's a goofy place to live. But for people like chaos and party and it's fun. That's what it's all about. My friend Billy Corbin, he made cocaine cowboys one and two. He's fucking loves it down there. And he's a smart guy. And he lives in Miami and he's just fucking loves it. He enjoys the chaos. I mean, I guess if you can separate yourself enough that you don't feel crazy on the inside. I don't know how you can. I couldn't do that here in LA. LA is not even a quarter of that. But I lived in Playa del Rey and Sherman Oaks for two, two and a half years. No, it was like, I got to get the fucking out of it. The problem with this place is there's so much instability because there's so many people that want to be something other than what they are. That's a big part of this place. Whereas are you living Texas now? Yeah. Those are just, those are people. Those are real people. I fucking love Texas. They are people. They don't have any illusions of becoming famous from some fucking reality show. Or if they do, they're the anomaly. They're not the norm out here. It seems like everybody, not everybody, but a giant percentage of the people that came here here with some dream. They came with some dream of being an actor or some dream of being famous, some dream of, you know, of making it. And then they got jobs. And so there's this like weird instability and this need for acceptance and this need for recognition. And you know, you go to Montana. You don't get any of that. You get regular people. You go to Colorado. Well, Colorado is now Phil was toners. Colorado is crazy. Yeah. It's getting really little different. Yeah. But now that the shrooms are all legal there, yeah, I'm on there and what's going to take a try to bring in wolves. My friend Johnny Hamilton told me they're trying to bring it. They're trying to stop mountain lion hunting and trying to bring in wolves. Really? Yeah. What? Yeah. Well, they brought in wolves in the 90s to Yellowstone. I remember and that went really badly, right? Well, it depends on who you ask. The wildlife people thinking it went really well because it did a lot of great things in terms of like it preserved a lot of plant species that were getting decimated by elk and deer. The problem is like it happened so quickly that the elk and deer really didn't understand what was going on until they were decimated. And they, you know, in some places they've lost more than 50% of their populations. But then other people say that they really should have never been that high in the first place. It's hard to understand who's because like you try to be objective, but you know, I hunt and I eat a lot of elk and deer. So for me, I hear it from hunters that it's a terrible thing. But then you hear it from people that are concerned with balance and wildlife ecology and a balanced ecosystem. They think it's a good thing. And so it's a very, it's very controversial. They don't think there ever should have been these giant herds of elk, you know, like a thousand elk in a field. They think that's on, that's unnatural. And that's akin to what apparently what they experienced when a lot of the Native Americans were wiped out by plague when the European soldiers arrived. When they talk about these great herds of buffalo, like millions of buffalo, they think that the reason why there were so many buffaloes was because like literally 90% of the Native Americans were killed by European disease. And so these buffalo for that during that time period that happened, they just bread, my friend Dan Flores wrote a book on it. Really, really interesting shit because most people just assume that that's just how it was back then the buffalo were everywhere. And then the white man came shot all the buffalo. But apparently the buffalo were only all over the place because the white man came and gave diseases to the Native Americans. Right. It's fucking nuts man. That's a balance issue. So I don't know if it's a good idea to bring wolves around people that are on mushrooms either. That, that too. It fills me out trying to pet it, you know. We're good buddy, you know. I'm reaching out to the forest. Our friend of mine, she lives in a place in the mountains above Boulder. And there's mountain lines. I'm reaching out to the forest. I have a friend of mine. She lives in a place in the mountains above Boulder. And there's mountain lines in my neighborhood. When I was living up there, my mountain line ain't my fucking dog. And she was like, well, I just set my intention when I go into the forest. And I let the forest know, I am brave, I'm here for you. She was a yoga instructor. She might be a little crazy. Rest in peace. She's still alive. Apparently. Still alive. Yeah. Sotnong. Namaste mountain line. Yeah. That worked out great for sick reading right, right? There's already, Colorado already has some wolves that have been in Colorado. They're entering in the fringes and from other areas where they're present, like my oaming, you know, an Idaho. There's wolves that are neighboring Colorado that will eventually make their way in the Colorado if they give it enough time. Introductory, the introduction of wolves, the issue with that is like it's abrupt and the animals might not know what's going on. And they also make a lot of money off of their hunting, like the tags and all the economy that comes from people that hunt their Colorado's a big hunting state. So it was the last I heard it was those, it was the big Arctic wolves that were bringing in to Montana, right? Yeah. The giant ones. They're bringing in from Canada into Montana. Right. But they're just wolves. Like it's weird, it's a gray wolf or it's a gray wolf. You know, it's just a wolf. It's like, but they are bigger when they live in colder climates because it's a mammal thing like mammals, like deers. If you look at deer in Texas, South Texas, a deer, a big deer is like a hundred plus pounds, 150 pounds. Whereas if you go to Saskatchewan, if it's cold as fuck, those deer like 300 pounds when they're fully grown. Like a big male, it's like a 300 pound deer, which is crazy. Yeah. It's because of the cold. Right. I never thought about it. That makes sense. I love Texas. Well, part of you live in. I'm a new brownfels, which is right outside of San Antonio. Oh, nice. I've never been to San Antonio. It's nice, man. San Antonio is a cool city. We're actually right between Austin and San Antonio. Oh, that's great. Oh, it's perfect. Are there's like that river walk area supposed to be dope? That's cool. I mean, that's like the tourist thing, you know. It's like, it's what they do. It's like going to see the Hollywood sign. But like, there's, if you want to have a good time, just let me know when you come and text us. and we're going to do some redneck shit. Well, my friend John Dudley was just there with the black rifle coffee guys. Yeah. And they went to some ranch that's just outside of San Antonio that the fucking astronauts used to go to. He said there's these photos of Neil Armstrong with a fucking deer. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Texas is a, that is a uniquely American place. Like when other, I think when other people think of America, they really think of Texas. Most people. I mean, if they're thinking America, they'll say that it'll be Texas. But if it's like Hollywood, they'll say California, you know. Right. Those are the two. Some people like every once in a while think New York. But I think when people think about like crazy gun-toting, screaming at football, you know, that's Texas. Yeah. Yeah. One hundred percent. Drive out of the box. Yeah. That's true. Well, it's a fun place. Yeah. You know, a lot of fun. A lot of us regulations, a lot more self-countability. Yeah. Well, they have fucking zebras and giraffes and shit everywhere. Yeah. They're loose. Running around. I work with, with a, a, a, a, a, a, but just became a credit at zoo that works a lot with confiscated animals. Like, they've got hundreds of animals that basically some redneck was like, oh, I'm going to have a white line. Like, they can't take care of it. So they, they take it. These folks who, they got high in this abandoned house and they were in the house in Texas. And they're wandering around this house smoking weed and they walked into a room with a fucking tiger in a cage. Oh my God. They called the police. And they had a police coming and rescue this fucking tiger. But this was in an abandoned house. Oh shit. Oh my God. Yeah. There's a, just a, I mean, they weren't sure like here, you find it there. Oh, you got these goddamn pop-up ads. They get in craftier and craftier with these pop-ups. And then you don't know if like clicking exits, it's going to download something. Texas man, look at this. Texas man enters a abandoned home to smoke weed, finds tiger and started. That's fucked up. Yeah. He thought he was hallucinating. Oh man. He said it was in a raky, dink cage in the home's garage. But it's weird when you treat animals like property, you know, and you can just do whatever you want with them. And that's how Texas. That's how Texas views exotics. Anything that's not like if you're, if you have white-tailed deer in Texas, they have pretty liberal tags like you can shoot a good number of them. But you have to get tags. But if you have like a black buck, which is an African animal or a Neil Guy or something like that, you choose many you want. Right. Yeah. Yeah. They just, you do whatever you want. You sell them to your friends. What does it say? It was secured only with a screwdriver and a nylon strap. He's crazy. I hope this guy got some kind of fucking punishment. Look, I'm on the fucking house. Yeah. That's a dick move, man. Yeah. That's a beautiful tiger. Yeah. Something really fucked up about seeing tigers locked up. I don't even like the fact that they feed them. I mean, I feel like they just let some loose in there. Yeah. That's what I was saying. Yeah. That's what I was saying. But from what I was rolling. Yeah, exactly. What I was told was that that was just not a PC like it wasn't acceptable. I'm sure. Do you ever see the footage of when the US soldiers overtook Baghdad? They had, they had zoos and Baghdad. And what they would do is that the lions knew it was happening. So they would let these goats out and these goats would be wandering around and then they would open the door and the lions would sprint because they knew exactly what because it was feeding time. So these goats had no idea. They let the goats out and the goats would be like, Oh, just hanging out being a goat. And then they would open up this fucking door and US soldiers filmed it. And these lions just make this fucking mad sprint to these goats and just maul them. And that's how they ate. Uh huh. People got pissed people shouldn't be pissed. That's what it is. If you watch a fucking you want you go and see a parrot eaten seeds. That's what it eats. Right. You know, maybe really identify with seeds and you feel like it's brutal murder of seeds. Yeah. And once to do that, that's what makes them a lion and makes them happy. And it's what they have to do. You know, it's like there's a lot more people getting publicity, but there's a lot more people showing that side of things at least. I was we were talking about right before we came on. There's this Instagram page called nature is metal. Yeah, it's a love campaign. Bad ass. He's going to take him down for a while. He had a he got back up, but he's he has one of the very best pages. You take it down. That's all he did. He did. He had nothing to do with any of those situations. It's not like he like had some kind of ulterior motive and came in and put these animals in the situation. That's just reality. To the Instagram is cracking down hard lately. I don't understand it. They take all kinds of stuff down for virtually no reason. It's weird. I think all these someone has to just complain enough and they'll take it down. Yeah. They need to get that fixed way. It's instead of like a computer. I understand it's a lot. It's a lot of people. So having a computer regulate that just doesn't work. No. It's not just a computer regulate that. If someone could target you like say maybe you could be doing something and they just decide you're offensive and then just start like make a targeted campaign to complain about your content. Yeah. Yeah. So one of those tattoo girls. She got her her her post remove just having her hand above above a crotch covering her crotch her legs spread and showing all her tattoos and they they took down her page like she's but she's covered up makes no sense. I mean shows that pants on but you can't see anything. All right. Fuck we doing this is this a marinade. Centering legs. Fuck. Texas needs to open the new Instagram. What's that? That's different than what nature is metal is though. He might have gotten trouble for taking like photographers copy written works and reopening it. It's not different because she's wildlife. She's being white. Exactly. And that's her natural habitat. Yeah. She's gone. I was talking about this with a friend of mine yesterday. What do you like? I like it. It's like the one that was elected and forced in this copyright law is at what point. If it's like you know YouTube some stuff is good even on Instagram some stuff they let go some stuff they don't at what point are people supposed to understand what is okay and what is not okay. Yeah. It's hard. Well you also have to think of it how many people are on Instagram. Let's just guess. I don't know. Let's guess. How many people do you think? I'm not either but fuck. Let's see. We think a hundred million. A hundred and fifty. Where am I? More than probably close to a billion. Maybe a hundred million like somewhere in that range I would say. All right. I'm going to go with three hundred million. Uh three hundred million and one please. Jim you going to billion? Yeah. How many people are on Instagram? One billion people use Instagram every month. Jesus crap. But that's one billion you use. Yeah. But what about the people that are on that don't even use it? Yeah. So it could be like two. Does that include the Russians? One billion. Yeah. That's a lot. Jesus Christ. That's crazy. Well Twitter still lets porn happen. You can still have porn on Twitter. What do I say? It's just because it has a 18 plus like warning or something like that. That doesn't even. My feed. I'll be scrolling through my feed like I got to make sure my kids don't ever grab my phone because they're looking through my phone. I've been saying the age thing might be in there though because when you sign your account you say how old you are. Oh. My students. I'm a system. That makes sense. A lot of those things are protections for people that are under 13. I don't know why there's that internet rule but like there is some government protection as they need to be watching out for the miners that are online and that makes sense. But is that the case with like you porn or places like that? You just go there. I don't know. But come on. Do you know? I don't know where that like if the kid like a kid knows what it is. Yeah. I don't know the line. I don't know the line. I missed the Q porn which is because this is porn. Yeah. How do you get there? What? There's a browser. You know what a browser is? Yes. No. Well when the virtual porn fucking world opens up that's when things are going to get very squirrely. Duncan said it's too real. Duncan had a HTC vibe and he was watching porn with the the the helmet on which I only want to be a fly on the wall watching Stan. That's what I was looking to say. Stan they have beaten off. Look at that. 17 foot tall vagina in front of him. Oh my God. That would be the next step and those are here. So I don't know what that's like if they've synced it up. Yeah. Those that mean I've done that the place we talked about the void ever do a virtual reality place. It's pretty dope. They have a new one that I just saw in Vegas that some new one that was looked like you go in a warehouse and you're shooting at things but you put on this helmet and you enter into this room. And there was two different ones that I went on. One was a Star Wars one and one was a wreck at Ralph one. And it's crazy. You look around. I mean the entire thing is animated like you're above you below you. You see the ground. You see stormtroopers. They shoot at you. You feel the laser beams hit your chest because you're wearing a vass that vibrates when you get hit. You walk into a room where there's fire and you feel the heat. It's getting really interesting. When you're in that like say this room was empty. Did you walk around as if it was like an entirety of the room? Yeah. You can walk or they have it set up so that they have rooms that you go into where you open doors or doors open for you. And you see the door open like in virtual reality but a real door does open while that fake door that you're seeing opens and then you go into it and then they have these plastic guns that you pick up. So you actually pick up the gun. When you're holding it it looks like a stormtrooper weapon. Star Wars weapon. That's cool man. It's getting weird. It's going to be weird. But I think what's interesting is that kind of stuff is so much less satisfying to bring it back to what you do than something that you have to really work for. And it's really difficult and it's a very visceral real feel. The feeling of accomplishment you get when you do something virtual will never be able to compare. With the feeling that you do when you do a physical visceral thing when you're feeling your fucking bones. Yeah, you feel it. When I was doing World Strongers Man in Botswana Africa I told my bicep and I just was getting beat up over and over again. I was just so wrecked. My body wasn't accepting because I went from football to strong man and in football we've never done deadlifts. It was all hangings and power cleans which by the way just quick little tip. lifts. If you're deadlifting to be about a deadlift or fine. If you're not doing that for a deadlift's sake then don't fucking do it. The risk to reward ratio is a joke. For deadlift? For deadlift. A lot of people aren't going to like that. I'm saying that. But if you go into any NFL gym in any division one college football gym in any athletics where people are actually getting paid and it matters what they're doing, they're not deadlifting. Really? They're hangings in and power cleaning. Why is that? Because the risk to reward ratio. It's so hard to be a great deadlifter and to not risk your low back and to be using your upper back properly. And there's so many little chances for you to get hurt. Hamstrings to have left. That was me. My first world-stungers man. I was the only rookie in the finals. Bro. China. How much weed is that? That was 880 pounds for all kids. Me and my pink chucks. I weigh less than that now. I'm less of a bowling ball though. Really? Yeah. Wow. Well, they made those weights ridiculous looking too. Right. Well, that right there is something we overhead press too. So they'll take some of the weights out of it and it's so flimsy when you clean it. It's like basically like holding that earthquake bar that you have out there. Oh, really? It's just like that. And it's fucking brutal. So they take weight out of that round thing. What is in that round thing? Well, there's several different attachments to it. So maybe some of them weigh different. I've never been a part of that. But either that or unscrews at the end and they take weights out of it. And I'm not positive. So you leave the NFL or you leave playing football and you, were you in the NFL? No. I had a brief shot at it. Never actually got to do it now. So what kind of transition, like what is the transition to get into strong man? Went from that to I was security guard. They have in Santa Cruz, they're just placed called the catalyst, which is where I worked for like six years. It's a really cool bar slash concert venue. So I was like spoiled. I got to hang out with Rob Zombie and Willie. Really? Yeah. It was cool. Rob Zombie, I geeked out really hard for it. That's dope. Yeah. We're working on getting him here. Dude, he'd be awesome. Yeah, I'm sure he would be. He was really cool. I'm sure he is. He's really in a horror movies, man. Dude, and he does the best ones. Yeah. I love his horror movies, man. They're wild. I'm a huge fan. He's like the Quentin Tarantino horror. Yeah. Awesome. He's a transition. Yeah. I'd go from being a rock star to a horror film director. He's just crazy in the head. And his brother is actually the lead singer of Powerman 5,000. Really? Oh, wow. It's a family. So I went to security and I was working there. And a buddy of mine who I played junior college ball with was just obsessive strongman. And I'd never heard of it. I never watched it. Like when I was growing up, we were poor. Like there was 10 of us in a three bedroom house. And from high school on, like we didn't have electricity. So like we didn't watch TV. We would play outside. We had a trampoline. You didn't have electricity in high school. On the weekends, my dad worked for Caterpillar, a cashman equipment. So on the weekends, he'd bring home a little generator. And he'd plug that in. And we'd have like three things we could use. But that was that the hot water heater would work for the weekend. And then like maybe the TV on Saturday night or something. Like the TGI for some. But I mean, it wasn't, it was a kid. It's not that big of a deal. You know, like you just go play with your brother's outside. Right. So but like I never knew what strong man was because of that. I mean, I had no idea. So he was obsessed with it. And he kept trying to get me to do it. And then went home and googled it, checked it out. Actually, I don't know if it was Google. I'm out of YouTube. In fact, then, who knows what we had. But you know, I was excited and went and tried it out. And first day, the amateur world record at logpress was like 320 pounds at the time. And I, I had no idea. But the first day I hit 330 pounds. And just put it down. And I looked over my buddy and I was like, you know, how'd that look? And he's like, get the fuck out of here. And I like, he's been trying his whole life to do this. Just came in and took it. And then eight months later, I mean, six months later, I was competing in England and I had my pro card. Two months after that, I was in China at that photo right there, well, it's wrong. It's man. That was the only rookie in the finals. So is it the log things, the awkwardness of like holding on into a log and getting it under your hands? Yeah. And it's actually, it's a lot healthier for your shoulders. Instead of being, how would you call that with your hands right there instead of pronating it or something? Yeah. Yeah. We got which one is what is. We're the worst. I like it when trainers use that though. I know what you're talking about. This guy's got to sit together. It's fat, dude eating french fries. So yeah, I mean, so it's better for you to do that. It's much better for your wrists and your shoulders. Makes sense. And also like, that's what my hair goes. Jamie Shonas pronated grip, supinated grip. So yeah, neutral grip is much better for your wrists and shoulders. Okay. Like, so handles like this. They say that with bench press as well. Yeah. Like those benches, they have new bars that have a whole bars from work. Yeah. Those are awesome. Yeah. Rogue makes good equipment. Yeah, I use all their shit. My house in here. I know. And then they don't pay me. It's not free. I buy all of it. They're in here. They're the worst. They're the best. Yeah. It's the best shit. So we went to Worlds and then, oh, yeah, I totally lost the whole game. First of all, you beat the fucking world record log press to fast- What is that? Fuckin 468. Fuckin 468. Fuckin 468. This is you here. Yeah, this is an Australia in front of Arnold. Jesus Christ. That's it. That's it. That's his competition. This is my competition. So this is a log press right here. Yep. That's a skinny log too. This was a hard log to use. But this was a buddy of mine had that record and he passed away. And I wanted to be the one to take it from him after he had died. And that was this moment. Jesus Christ. He showed me show off a little bit too. I like to do this after I get it out. Wow. So that's the world record. I'm my American record. Who's the world record? The world record. I like to hold it up there and talk to you. Every time we see a record broken, the guy gets it to here and then he just throws it down. Right. Well, I don't count. The world record is 219 kilos, I believe. Something like that. Something right around there. It might have been 220. How closely are you to that? I can break it right now. Yeah. Well, in January. Great, that shit. Robert. I'm going to London. I'm going to give London a little introduction to Texas. What do you call Texas pride and Texas power lens in for sure. Wow. I'm excited. So you go and you break the American amateur record right away. Right. First attempt out. And is that when you felt like fuck, I could do this shit. Yeah. I went home and I told my fiance at the time. We were living in a studio and we were just broke. And I was volunteer coaching and I was for high school, which is my passion high school football. And then I was working at that club at night. So I didn't have a lot of time, but I was like, I can make this happen. With my personality and this is a platform, I can do this. And everybody kept telling me there's no money in strong man. There isn't any. And there really wasn't. There wasn't like there was no money in strong man until I made money in strong man. Like really brought it into there was seven. other people. But like what we did was we cultivated a whole new era of strong man. Whereas before like even like Pujinowski was a guy who got a lot of attention because he looked just shredded. Yeah. Jack. But I mean, if you, he's got like a cribs episode that they did in Poland. And he's got this tiny little house with like little knickknacks and stuff he's so proud of. It's really weird. It's crazy. But like even then he's five time world strongest man winner. There's really no money in that. I know what I thought he would have been balling out of control. You would think so. Because I know who he is. I feel like if I know who you are and you do something on TV, you must be rich. Yeah. Exactly. That's the rapper's the display. Yeah. Exactly. I'm flying in first class and then you catch a little bylaw in the back. Well, I'm ever one of the weird things that I read about Pujinowski is how much candy he eats. Huh. Yeah. And that he really likes candy in between workouts because he's blowing out so much sugar that he would eat chaka bars. I'm an instance. Yeah. We do a lot of like I do peanut butter and honey. So like that during competition peanut butter and honey or Snickers. Bars. Really. Yeah. And when you peanut butter and honey you eat with a spoon like what do you usually make the sandwiches? I see guys just point honey in their mouth like brushing guys. There's a Russian guy who was Russian Secret Service for a while. Oh, yeah. Like you look in his eyes, you know like this. My fucker has done some bad things. But he's the nicest dude in the world. He's like the sweetest guy. He always comes over and talks to me and my family and he doesn't speak good English. But he's really nice about trying to get his point across and everything. Yeah, that guy's done probably scary shit. Yeah, I'm sure. There's a lot of that because we compete with people from all around the world. You know, and we tend to forget that everywhere else there's a lot of it's normal. It must be like that in some places. Right. To survive. And if you're a giant dude it's probably the best way to make a living. Exactly. Yeah. And so they just squirt honey in their mouth. Yeah, they'll just pour like a whole little canister of honey and just take that. You see guys do that right before they go lift and stuff. I mean, the way I grew up and the way I did things like I was always taught and it kind of worked with being broke. But like a warrior goes to war hungry. That's like in football I would never eat before a game ever. And then got in a strong man and I did that for a long time. And I got up to 440 pounds and I would I would do an entire show like five, six hours without eating. But then during that I would snack a little bit. But I would never eat a meal. Right. But then the resources it eats up your resources right. Right. And see for me it felt like anything in my stomach just made me feel like slow. Yeah. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. That's the same with comedy too. I learned that from Cat Williams watching an interview with him. Stone eat before you go on stage. I'm like that makes sense. Yeah. You better off being hungry. Right. And you do that too. The best hunters. See, but what happened to me was I lost 80 pounds. That was 440. I lost 80 pounds. And when I got hurt in Botswana, I lost all that way. And just because of the biceps. Yeah. No, I chose to do that. See, I graduated high school. I was 370 pounds. So I've always been a big dude. But I got up to 440 and just walking around was laborious. You know, just I felt like fucking horrible. How big were you when you did that log press? That was like 425ish 430. When I ran that. So like I gained a little bit more after that. I just everyone tells you in the sport, the bigger you are, the stronger you are. And that kind of holds true to static lifting. Like kind of it's not necessary all the time. But it kind of holds true. But we got to move, man. Like we're talking about pulling a truck and doing those events and all that stuff. When when you're 440 and your body's not agreeing with that 440, it just it holds you back. You want to imagine the load on your joints too. Yeah. Particularly lower back. Yeah. My low body was bad. Yeah. So that's what happened. I got hurt and I felt like I was done. Cause my low back I'd have to take me like 45 minutes to get out of bed in the morning. Really? Oh, yeah. I was messed up, man. Really bad. I'm getting in my eye. I never got in my eye. And didn't I'm scared to that. I get it. Exactly. Just fucking wrong. You fix it. Uh, when I lost weight, it got better. And it's core strength for me now. core strength and stretching. And also I smoke weed. Like a lot of athletes are against it. And a lot of people think that there's some like negative connotation with being like someone who smokes weed. But I mean, I'm watching guys take Viking and like his skittles. I'm watching guys throw away their lives, their families, their career over a bunch of pills because they didn't want to smoke. And it's crazy. You know, and we actually officially got world strongest man to take marijuana off of the drug testing. Wait, wait, wait, wait. There's drug testing and world strongest man. Yeah, every year. Are they making sure your on steroids? I love to test you though. Make sure you're strong. They test those. What kind of bitch answer can you take it? You see, not enough drugs in the sky system. Do you know who Robert Frank is? The sound familiar. He's hilarious Instagram guy. I can't recall, but it sounds really familiar. He's really funny, man. He's like, he talks like this. Yeah. He's really fast. Yes, yes. He's got this fucking hilarious rant about someone getting the girl pregnant and taking responsibility. And he goes, he goes, I have to ask you. He goes, if you're trying to get checked and tan, what kind of gear are you on? I have to question your gear if you're getting your girl pregnant. What kind of swears do you have? That guy's got so much energy. I know he's got so much. He's another one. He gets censored off of Instagram all the time. They pull his posts. And he's got a million followers and they won't give him a fucking blue check mark. That's ridiculous. Because people understand that's our livelihood. A lot of people, that social media is as well as feed our fucking family. Well, also he's fucking funny. But he's funny with toxic masculinity. Right. He's toxic. Because his opinions different. Well, I love it. He's chucked and tan. That's it right there. He's not tan. He's red. Play this. Play this. He's funny, man. He's funny. I'm gonna tell you, the most glorious day of the week. Cheers, day. That's the flow. Every check on the party of death. We want a piece of my pole. I want to tell you a story. We've got a bro. Who can I ruin his life? He sent my videos, given the motivation. To get juicy as fuck. And he shows up to the bar every weekend. We're just going to talk to the sleeves on this medium deep. Feed that piece. And he's going to hold us from different area clothes. Like a fucking boss. Problem is, we'll have him call them up. He's crazy. Now he's blaming me. French adduce him to the game. First of all, we're the fuck soldier to go rob Doggin. And if that's how you roll, there's plenty of other techniques. For when you get the French in the sheets. Like the sticky belly. Or sticky lower back. Perfect methods. For when you get the hose on the sack. There's all the dough. That was four years old. There you go, the legs were bold. And kind of blurtted method. They caught a sock around the car. And babies were prevented. And to this day, I still carried out for sock. And my back pocket. Because you never know which is going to want the rocket. But what you does, I'm going to blast off on that ass. Because I'm Robert fucking frick. And I'm the winded spitt. And I'm a man's biggest threat. And what I know is I had the store. It gets a big bully whore. I know I fucking force. Winter chick pressed up. I bet you floor. Oh, you bet. You think he right now. You know what I think so? I think so. Oh my god. So it's the price. It's going to come over. This. Yeah. It's funny shit, man. Yeah. It's fucking funny shit. And he can't get approved. And they've gone through publicists. They've tried to get him. What is it recognized? What is it called? Verified. Verified. I'm going to get it. Try to get that blue check mark next to his name. It's silly, man. I mean, I don't know how that even works. Somebody's too big. Too big. Too much muscle. Yeah. Well, you can do it because you're not making fun of things. You're making fun of things to talk about getting this car truck pretty. You are. And strong. Goddamn it. It's Johnny. It's perfect. No. It's silly that they do that, though. You know, it almost. I mean, if you look historically back every time they've done that, those people have got more power. Yeah. All you're doing is feeding that guy. So in 10 years, when you look like the asshole that sends it, he's going to be 10 times that. Well, especially now that we're talking about him. Yeah. Which is good. Yeah. It's good that this exists. Yeah. It's fucking good. I think so. A lot of people appreciate it. Well, I think this is a weird time where you can't, you're having people dictate what you can and can't see or what isn't valid. It just seems like nonsense to me. Like we're moving backwards. Especially with something like that. He's being funny. Like he's funny. He makes me laugh. Without me jokes. Yeah. What the fuck man? Even bad jokes, man. Even bad jokes by juice heads. Yes. Like it's fun. Exactly. Me talks about being a juice head. It's hilarious. I'm my first introduction to comedy. I loved growing up. I was a huge fan of Richard Pryor and all that stuff. A huge fan of Carlin. I just, big fan of, I even liked what was his name Jeff Foxworthy. I love Fox, which is great. And my first time I ever got to see a show, I came in. I moved into LA and a buddy of mine brought me to see you and Uncle Joey. And I was like, holy fuck. I couldn't, first Joe comes out there and you can't even breathe. When Joe's gone, you don't give a second. And Uncle Joey and I was like holy fuck I couldn't first Joe comes out there and you can't even breathe What just got you don't give a second is like that he's an animal he's got some shit right now Like if you get a chance while you're in town you got he's got some new shit that we were falling on the ground crying the other night Oh, yeah, I'll come check them out. He's the best ever he crushes he crushes no and no one's like funnier and burst You might get you know guys who are really good joke riders guys who are really funny guys who are like They're valid in terms of our culture, but no one's funny than Joey right no No, no the whole room like it was like we were uncomfortable. We couldn't stop off You know so damn good Where then when you went up it was like so it was it's a whole different style But it's like super like along the way that I think about how like your introspective and comparative with different things and stuff in the way you make people like look at something in a different angle And then you poke fun of the way that you originally thought about it, you know That's at least how that set was but it was I mean I'd Being in a live audience is so different than watching a special on TV. Oh, yeah It's way better Well, I met you in the belly room which is one of the best places to do stand up right last tiny room Yeah, yeah, I did a set on belly I've been on stage once and I did not in the yeah the belly room yeah, I went up there and did it was story time and tape Fletcher and Man, I can't remember who also a bunch of people just kept telling me like just go tell story Just go tell story and I was like all right. There's no cameras in here, right? I can tell a real story or But um, they got me up there and I did six minutes they gave me four and I ran out for six I didn't know what the lights meant. I was just talking, you know I didn't know and I told a story about being in China and we thought we were gonna go to jail in China and stuff And it was fucking hilarious what happened in China That that year you saw me in the picture we we got done with World Strongers man And we do like a celebration. We all go to dinner and all that stuff and I was I was fucking excited Because I was the only rookie in the finals. I was super excited. So I'm hammered drunk You're in China and then little things start to click you see people all wearing like the the communist uniform Like that they have they were celebrating. I don't know if it's called communism day or whatever But they celebrate that and and like almost the entire city We were in saunya, which is a little island, which is like their kind of vacation island and But they were almost everybody was dressed in those uniforms and I'm drunk and like I'm looking around I'm starting to feel uncomfortable and we finally we get up to go and we all get on this bus and the guy who runs world Strongers man is a very old man. He's he's got to be like in his 90s, right? But he's he's a needs help moving around all that kind of stuff we get on the bus and We're setting up in the camera crew left all that stuff on the front seat, which is which is the the older guy's seat You know, we make sure that he has that seat, you know, and we get in and we're trying to have a finagle like the We're nothing. I go we're trying to be assertive But nice to the the camera crew that they have to move back and they were they didn't speak English at the moment You know, and they were they were acting like they just didn't understand there were being really rude about it and Nick best who's actually on the TV show with me He came over and he picked up the camera and he was like you're moving and started walking back with the camera case And then the guy got up and started yelling at us in English and he's totally new exactly We were saying the whole time and he's yelling at us and freaking out and Nick puts the camera down like towards the middle of the bus and Then sits back down the guy marches off the bus comes back on the bus with three cops three police like officers and Chinese uniforms and I'm fucking scared shitless like I've heard horror stories about Chinese prison, you know, it does not sound like the place to be and the guy The guy and the cops are getting really worked up about the fact that he touches equipment and that that makes a Called him an air-gint American all this stuff like freaking out and police officer literally Exactly nobody ever believes this but it was like in 300 is almost fucking exactly he goes This is China. He's screaming at a bus full of the world's strongest men He's he's fucking scared all of us and the thinking we were gonna go to jail This is China He's screaming at him and Nick best like kind of sits back in a seat and puts his head down and he realizes like you know We better shut the fuck up So we all like kind of tucked our tails in and sat there and then the older guy got on the bus took a seat Then the camera guy kind of pretended like it didn't happen when the setback down the police officers left But in the entirety of that that situation like I fucking I could have swore I was going to prison Like scared to death You do not want to get locked up in an Asian prison. No, especially China right? No, no, no, not there Especially that spot because like it was it was their vacation island, but it's fucking dirty like the stories you hear About kids sitting in the streets and stuff. It's not everywhere in China But on that island it was everywhere like the kids just stopped pull open their little shorts and take a shit Are you told me saw that in the mall? Inside just in the mall walking they just stopped pull their pants down shit on the ground. Yeah, and I went what? On the floor Yeah, nope. That's what they do man. It's crazy. It's so crazy. So who comes and cleans up the shit I don't know. I don't think anybody when it's outside because there's just everywhere We really need to see human shit everywhere all over the place in the smells like it and we almost I think there was 30 of us like 26 of us all got stomach flu our stomach Uh and intestinal parasites. Oh, but everything has got shit on it Yeah, if people are just sitting on the street there's probably shit everywhere you touch. No They were burning tires for their streetlights. It was nasty man. What? Now the island it's it's gorgeous, too I'm telling you like the photos the pictures Sony Island is gorgeous They were burning tires for streetlights. Nope. That's and these motherfuckers want us to switch to electric cars. Yeah They're over there burning tires in China Well at least in 2013 they were rock man. That is crazy crazy We're also yet travel for strong man. Um, I did have done Africa Dubai is one of my favorites. It's it's it's creepy sometimes like just realizing I don't like not feeling like I'm in control of What happens to me my destiny? Like when I'm in Texas. I feel great. You know like 90% of the people around you are armed if some shit happens They got it right girl actually like she rides horses and she manages a gun chops like I'm straight You know, I don't have shit to worry about but like when you're when you're in like the Middle East or when you're in China Or anything like that you just have this feeling inside you like it could fucking go wrong, right? But when we go to Dubai we actually do worlds ultimate strong man in Dubai and we're gonna do another competition There October 25th, which is the highest paid strong man show that exists. It's it's a really big show It's a lot of fun. We go out there and They fucked up they gave me the keys to Ferrari and I just fucking went crazy I went too downtown going like 120 There's also no cops too. So there's do why doesn't have any cops no They might have a few like in certain areas, but it's it's basically they use cameras everywhere So if you if you speed or if anything happens or you steal or anything like that It's all on camera like there's literally cameras everywhere That's how they're they're just judicial system works. They don't use place. They just say oh well Let's look at the camera footage exactly lock that motherfucker out forever. Yep. Yep And when we were there like it was craziness going on with the royal family and stuff like it was it was pretty tight I'm going back in October Fuck out yeah, Google it's crazy. You look at that place like what it was like in 1970 versus what it is now Right like it did some of the before and after footage is it's insane. There's so much wealth there Yeah, I mean they have built the biggest building in the world there the tall building in the world Or is it for I ship my pants at the top of that building not literally but like I hate heights And I went up there and like I couldn't walk how are you? Like 130 I don't know man We get on them we get in the bottom of the elevator and Eddie Hall who's who's also in the in the shows me it's me Eddie Hall Nick Best in Brian Shaw first of all how the fuck is that elevator gonna carry all you assholes? Yeah exactly we get in they closed the door to go up and Eddie Farts motherfucker No 130 something for smelling this guy's ass, you know It was horrible and Eddie's the worst he's English so he's eating like porridge Drink a tea and farting I will put tape Fletcher's farts up against any man who's ever lived really oh my god The worst back in the day when he was fighting he's to I think he just over consumed protein But he was legendary legendary he would laugh he would laugh and he'd be like oh we got a run Because you know the fog was coming he would laugh first and then it would come oh Jesus that's the worst when they enjoy the fact that you know He doesn't do it anymore though he must have cleaned his diet up. He's never got me You know I love I loved going out with tape because like normally when I go out Especially in LA or something. I just draw way too many weird eyes I feel like I just like need to like hide in the corner, right but with tape. It's like the bash brothers walked in right Right right right right stop as big as me, but he totally normalizes me right right right right It's so awesome. We still going into the comedy store is my favorite man I used to go in there actually I saw a lot of the transition from when you started coming back and I saw the culture Change man you you did a lot for that so that place you fucking changed the entire culture of the back room That's crazy. It was awesome. Well, that's my spot. You know wasn't there for seven years. Yeah Yeah, yeah, and you and I was there just before and then just after and I used to go in there a lot I used to go hang out a lot and I'm telling you just just the way the comedians interact with each other It's totally different when I first went there. It was very like like oh well I've had this and I can do this and it was basically like Hollywood at the comedy store You know so like if you're like waiting to audition for a commercial and these these people are a bit telling each other how cool they are That's what it felt like then now now I mean not now haven't been there for like maybe a year to but then after that It became more like like what we do like we're talking shit to each other and it's like it's a camaraderie thing Yeah, it's not like I'm better than you. It's like we can all talk shit. We're all on the same level, you know That's very important to me that I think that that it probably comes from martial arts But it's also just my my own philosophies like I want everybody to do good I don't want to be the only one doing good. I don't understand that. I've never understood that. I want I Want like when I go on? Like go on the road. I try to bring the best people alive I want everybody to have fun. I want the audience to have a great show I want people to kill and I try to help comedians. I really want to support them Try to get them all on my podcast. I try to tell everybody they're great try to tell everybody to go see them And well, you see what that cultivates too. Yeah, everybody got better. Yeah, I mean Joey probably exactly the same Not even better than I'm always but the same a part of when Joey became a monster is because he got all this love, you know And realize he could just be himself up there. Yeah like when he stopped taking and cooking all this stuff Yeah, that helped but even he was doing coke. He's fucking amazing. Yeah, I can't imagine him not being funny I can I can hear him tell the same story five different times and still crack up every fucking time He's an American original. It's not a whole lot of people like that guy So that place you had it's you know, it's just insecurity When people realize they're loved and that there's real camaraderie and a brotherhood and sisterhoods and that you really do care about each other Yeah, everybody like that place is all hugs man. Yeah, everybody's hugging. Yeah, and it wasn't that way I know I know every time I give you a compliment I see you kind of like wins a little bit you there's when people like like like yourself or I'm the same way Like whenever I do something well and someone tells me I'm like nah I mean I should have done this this way or this I'm always that I should one up myself guy Yeah, but you really change the fucking culture there, man And you've made a lot of people better the same with the podcast big up plan. Oh, thanks brother. Thank you. Yeah Well, I feel very lucky, you know, I'm very fortunate person So I like to spread it fucking from from where you started to where you are now the hustle man That's inspiring. I always feel like I need to do more and I need to like extend myself in different areas and stuff I look at like So many people at the now we actually have access to and you can see like Jaco like yeah, this do's up at 4 30 in the morning and I'm like complaining the fact that I only got six hours with this guy You know like you really learn your level of hustle in reality versus where you put yourself in your head You like I'm killing and I'm working so hard. There's nothing more I could be doing and then this motherfuckers up four hours before you Killing it, but those guys they're fuel, you know guys like Goggins him Jaco those camera hands those guys are fuel. Yeah, like if you ever start thinking maybe I'll slack off People take a day off. That's you look at jocko fucking hairy gorilla arm That 4 30 on his iron man watch and it just says attack I was showing something that today this just later that at the the clinic that I go to she was Talking about her boyfriends into jock all he goes. She'd go to his fucking Instagram page every morning And you see you see that 4 30 watch. You know like fuck gotta go I think it go in there. What am I doing? Yeah? Yeah, it's just it's but it really is fuel like you feel charged up When I when I listen to like Goggins talk it's like a lot of soft motherfuckers want you stay in bed Fuck that shit fuck that shit you got to get up and go attack Stay hard and you're like I'm gonna stay hard David Oh, yeah, yeah, I love it. I love it. It's nice man. It's cool that we actually have that nowadays Yeah, man. This didn't exist before me. You think about before the internet and podcast and social media and stuff like those You had to find that inspiration right hard to find yeah, and sometimes you'd think you'd have an inspiring person in your life But really out in reality. It was just some ship bag. It was like just close enough that it looked like that Right when you step back as an adult you're like, okay. Yeah, there's a lot of fake in it. Yeah, I'll be fake like they work hard Right Actually somebody was trying to tell me the story. I've heard you talk about it on here about that guy who pretended to be a An MMA like goo or whatever and ended up murdering his girlfriend. Yeah. Well, no, he murdered his girlfriends husband. Okay. Yeah Someone was pretending to be a black belt and Eddie rolled with them and you know like when you roll with someone there's no fake in it like with karate You can kind of fake it like there's guys that like art athletic and they can throw some kicks Like just like learning on the streets just hanging out with their friends They know how to throw some kicks There's people that know how to throw a wheel kick that have never taken a martial arts class in their life And if you see him throw a kicks like wow, guys legit and but you don't know Unless you see him actually fight so the problem with that is inspiring a lot of karate sparring You're kind of polite and you're not trying to hurt each other He does like and you could kind of fake it a little bit you could throw some shit in the air and fake it and touch each other But in jiu-jitsu you have to roll it's it's you know the guy's grabbing your arm He's armed dragging you taking your back you got a defend correctly and Eddie was like man I don't know what the fuck is going on but that dude is not a black belt And I'm like really I go like what do you think he is like he's terrible? He's like he has nothing Eddie said he was a CIA before Eddie is Deep deep deep deep into conspiracies back then it was like he was barely he was like in the UFOs and shit It was barely in a conspiracy. He's way off the deep See you got me and you are frozen I was gone down Well, maybe it is true. I'm I'm scheduled to have a phone call today this afternoon with George nap He wants to breach me all the shit George nap is the guy that broke the Bob Bazaar story in the 1990s Yeah, and you know, and he shares my opinion. He's like most of this is bullshit Most these people are liars most these people are crazy But there's some real shit out there too like a lot of these air force pilots that they have eyes on this fucking thing That's going 600 miles away in a second like dropping down from 60,000 feet to 10 feet like in a second Yeah, and they're like I don't know. We don't know what the fuck this is We have no idea how these things are doing right and that's not something I hope Billy like just no talking about Exactly now yeah, it's air force pilots people who they're trained to fly jets and have gunfights in the Fucking sky right these are exceptional human beings. Yeah, when they see things like that. You got to go They know what the fuck they're seeing. That's so crazy. Yeah, who knows the thing is like every day You can go out there and look in the sky. You don't see shit. You go there's nothing up there because you're not seeing it But if you go to a fucking lake, you're never gonna see a shark you know what I'm saying right like it doesn't mean sharks aren't real It's like you're looking in the wrong spot or you won't you aren't there when they show up But they're real so we have enough accumulated data to know that there are sharks You know they are real, but they're not in lakes. They're in the ocean. Here's where they are. This is how you find them Go to South Africa. Oh look there's a shark. Yeah, go to Santa. Yeah, yeah, oh yeah Or um fucking Catalina of Catalina. I did I do I worked at a Boy Scout camp in Catalina I'm teaching snorkeling and that was like the whole time I was shitting myself Oh my god, it's the nicest water in the world though. It's so warm and salty. It's yeah You just float you know we did fear factor out there a couple times really yeah We did a couple of stunts nice a couple of water stunts. It's a cool spot We stayed on the other side like the there's the hotels on the one side and everything we were on the other side The campsite it was awesome awesome. I was like 13 and I got so roasted my entire body became one blister. Oh Stupid no sunscreen none out there all day long So I don't know if you know UFOs are real, but it's it's certainly believable enough It's not like the the sky's empty. It's filled with stars. So do you think now after speaking with them that do you think we've Had contact by the way, it's hard to tell yeah, they can't be flying on a pin enough for the listeners Not for anybody else just you when you're at home and you're chilling. Do you think it? I don't know I really honestly don't know I couldn't say yes or no I'm more inclined now to think there's something going on than I was before I met Lazar and watched that documentary Because I was on that not that I was saying that aliens are not real I think there I think there's a hundred percent life out there for sure to say that it's too big right It just doesn't make any sense that there isn't it's the question of whether or not it ever has gotten here before is the weird question and It's also the problem is that you feel foolish Talking about it because so many people who believe in it are foolish and so many people who tell stories There's their stories are foolish so you feel foolish kind of going along with it right But I'm very careful about stuff like that because I'm like just because something makes you feel foolish doesn't mean it's true You know like oh, does it mean it isn't true? Yeah, so I definitely think there's a very high likelihood that there's life out there And it's entirely possible that something's gotten here before but as to whether or not something really has made Contact with people. I don't know. I'm in If I would say like where's my scale it's like probably 65% believe 35% going Especially after talking like that. Yeah But what he could have he could have experienced something that was an experimental aircraft that they didn't want to tell him Right you never know man. I mean I just don't know what the tech look I'm a moron like I don't understand physics at all have no knowledge of Propulsion systems or mathematics and I don't know what the top of the field in propulsion experts are capable of today I don't know there might be some shit that they're working on that they've never really perfected So they've never actually implemented it in the battlefield or something like that But they have some sort of a drone that looks like it would be filled with three foot tall people like these aliens that they described I don't know. I'm not gonna fill you on on that if you think it's alien fine. It's fucking alien exactly I mean who knows what that was I mean they're taking this guy who was a physicist from Los Alamos labs who went to Caltech And they sent him to these classes in MIT to learn Fucking nuclear shit and then they try to see if he can figure out how to back engineer something They tried to say that doesn't mean it comes from another world right? It could have been a Russian thing it could have been something that the Germans figured out I don't know But I'm more inclined to believe him than not believe him. Yeah He didn't seem like he was full of it exactly and just looking at him He also didn't seem like he wanted to be here. He was just like I'm done with this He was getting migraines talking about a buffet we even got out here It's like I just kind of tell you I'm getting a migraine. Yeah, and like you know Jeremy was trying to talk him into doing it like we're gonna be fine George I mean Bob is important. It's really good to do this and we're gonna be able to really get the story out But I think more more people told me that they got more out of the conversation because it's just him talking not No spooky music no edits right and you get to see like he's honest about what he knows and doesn't know and when he would say like What do you think about this? He's like maybe I don't know right? It wasn't a bullshit. He didn't seem rehearsed Right for the shit nothing. No what he was saying if if he didn't believe in that Well at least himself what he was saying I'd be fucking amazed and his story has not deviated in 30 plus years which you can't I've Try to have me tell a story of something that actually really did happen from 30 years ago And I probably told it a bunch of different times. I don't know what we started the podcast It's hard to remember especially when you by memory varies day to day like some days It's awesome and some days dog shit. Yeah, it's crazy how that works. Yeah, you've had a few concussions, right? Oh, yeah Sure same hair. Yeah, I have horrible memory But from football it's like probably the worst thing ever for concussions because You're getting them even from body hits when dudes as big as you are clashing into each other You're fucking brains getting rattled around in there even if your head doesn't get hit right and I played rough like I didn't avoid anything I'm sure yeah Well, that's a strength of yours a guy as big as you I mean I would imagine you would impose that yeah exactly Yeah paid for college I Was the history history. Oh, that's cool. You're in the history channel. No, it is awesome It's actually the only thing I ever liked about them. I have a liked in school like science and math didn't really click but history It was all special to me. You listen to Dan Carlin. Oh, yeah. Yeah, of course the best hardcore history He needs I wish you would just do more. I think it was so hard. I know the research. That's what you have to appreciate You know, I'm embarrassed to call what I do a podcast and person what he does Yeah, he does is like a lecture what yours is a podcast though. He needs to call his That's what it is. It's way more in depth his his hardcore history on World War II and World War one and the one on the Mongols. Oh, so good the greatest fucking shit I've ever heard the Mongol one I've listened to like four or five times the wrath of the cons. Mm-hmm. Fuck it's good He's so good. He's so entertaining too. It's like if history was out entertaining We'd have a fucking world full of history scholars, right? And we wouldn't be censoring Instagram right now But yeah, that works Then it be chocolate Put a sock on your car Yeah, Dan Carlin is he's a fucking man he really is his podcast is incredible and the fact that he only charges a dollar for them You know, no, he did that while he's there free and then when you go deep into the archives He charges a dollar a podcast which is fucking nothing either an hour and a half long It takes a month and months to do and he's really just trying to make up for production costs He's not trying to get rich right. He would recharge him much more and they're worth more man Yeah, I've learned more from that than I did from college, you know Yeah, no, he retained it because he's entertaining. He's the man and he's a great guy too. I really love that guy Yeah, and his story is interesting too. He's a old-time radio guy, you know And did radio and then was always a history buff and he even says he's not a historian is like very self-deprecating But damn you part of the most important historian of our time exactly Yeah, I forgot guys like me. Yeah, I've learned more about history from that guy than probably from anybody Yeah, I'm sorry. I mean probably this moment now technically is a historian. I think yes We should at least give him that I mean we got him. Yeah, I mean I don't know what you have to be to be to be I guess a practicing scholar is like I think if you say it on this show, it's official He's a he's absolutely historian boom Dan Carlin. You are a historian give that man a plaque Giving a plaque give him a piece of paper some bullshit group of dudes That's one of my favorite things about the TV show is being able to like dive into the history of this stuff like We did a show an episode in England. We were in London for most of it and this guy Thomas Topham and he was a fucking psychopath person like just a crazy person like he He owned a pub and his way of getting people in was doing these crazy feats of strength And he would he would go out there and one of the biggest feed of strength which we challenged ourselves to do and we Actually attempted a world record. I can't say if we broke it or not But we took these giant barrels of whiskey out in front of this pub downtown London and we were picking them up on like a yolk You know the yolk is like a yolk walk. Yes. Yes. Yeah, so like that So the crossbar goes across your back and you pick up basically we went though the world record we were attempting was I Think it was like 17 190 pounds something like that It was big it was big And that's a crowd that's over. That's a car 1968 911 yeah Exactly engine and everything. Yeah. It was awesome Man, that's great when we get to tell his story and talk about like that my favorite I'm my favorite thing We did for the whole season was probably his episode There's an old tale that he got drunk one night and back in the day London police officers had these little huts they would stand in so they could be out of the weather They were like on the side of the road almost like like on an out house, but a little bit smaller And they'd stand in there and and they'd basically keep watch on the street being so the rain didn't get on them There was the story that he got drunk with his buddies and just to fuck around with his cop He picked one of those up with them inside carried it down the street and threw him into an open grave at the graveyard So we did that it was awesome And we're running down these back cobblest room streets with this like we didn't use the real police officer Obviously, but well like with the whole set up on our some of us tried to do it on our backs And we'll start to do it other ways, you know, but like we're running down and all these people are cheering us on as we're Like celebrating this guy basically like dragged a cop down the street The window graveyard is hilarious now when you do something like that say a stunt like that How much of a consideration is like when do you look at it? You go okay? I think I can do this but fuck I might get hurt doing this right almost everything everything's like that like We were with the day that was last night and uh for the chair devil the evil life Evil life we did a premiere where um like it was an homage to evil can evil The guy was gonna jump a world record jump, but he actually broke his ankles doing the testing for it So this this woman came out and she she broke a world record driving through they have these platforms set up with like boards on fire and Then she did 13 boards that were all on fire. She wrote face first to him. Why she was a fucking savage And she was the baddest I'm so sorry. I can't remember her name right now But um she came over and spoke to me and like I'm from Santa Cruz like you hear the way I'm talking right now. This is how I talk like I'm not like super official or anything like that and she came over and I was like So what are you thinking? She's like, oh no bro. Probably dry like sturdy put my face to the motherfucker I don't know like that. Oh like this girl's fucking savage. I love this. You know it was so awesome fighter Jamie What's her name? Gold and Vicki Golden she looks like a regular girl. She's not even a giant. She's very pretty. She's normal like just Yeah, she's putting her face through boards. Yeah Jesus crushed it was so oh my god. Look at that Fuck man. So that's that's the boards there. That's that's like I have a Jesus. Yeah. Oh my god So she's just accelerating through these flaming boards. No Fuck in 13 of them and that's the kid that broke his ankle. I actually just he he uh He got hurt like just like four days before the live show Well, evil can evil man. They put him back together again back when they didn't even know how to put peck people back together Yeah, yeah, he was glue and shit screws and rubber bands crazy You just help come back you ever see like the X-rays of evil can you lose body? I saw from the show I saw a little bit of it I or the the videos of him like flopping as he's rolling And you see his ankle go one way in his arm go the other way and I'm just That should creeps me out man. It's out with an animal He just didn't I wonder if he was I wonder if it would take something before we go Jumped everybody was on code back. Thanks. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. I make sense. Yeah. Yeah. What year was that? I'm talking shit Sevenies in the years before 95 Everybody was on code back then. Thanks. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I make sense. Yeah. Yeah. What year was that on talking shit? Sevenies in the years. It was before 95 everybody was on I mean that would be the thing do you fucking giant Bob? Right like something some meth type substance. Yeah, that's what I was talking to them about is basically the same way They look at a stunt is the way we look at a lift. It's like This this could possibly cripple me this could finish my career all that stuff. Oh What do you got Jamie when he jumped the Caesar's fountains in 1967? he crush pelvis and femur fractures to his hip wrist and both ankles can cushion that kept him in the hospital and rumors that he was in a coma for 29 days From jut-out and kept jumping came back. I think was six months right like that when they talked about this I can't remember how long it was but he was right back out on it See even if I had a picture of his ex-ray I did it's not at their super old So it's not clear out like what it was I looked for that first and I was just kidding You probably wasn't doing any drugs just making a joke. Oh, I'll say he's doing code Right drinking doing coke having a great time. Why not fuck it everybody else did Yeah It was it was for that for that specific lift that we did. I didn't really that's him as he's a son Hmm Jesus Christ look how fucking fuck is actually a son there. That's like too clear to be nice Oh, I met a son I met a son on the set of fear of fact. I made it. Yeah. Yeah, son made it. Yeah. Oh What the the friend in that high yeah, that's Robbie. Wow Fucking crazy. Oh, don't show me how Jesus Christ is gonna die He goes little man that stuff creeps me out. Yeah Well, it's just weird that that was a thing like when we were kids evil Can evil was like the daredevil guy like you know like what do you think are evil can evil right the toys and everything man Yeah, yeah, they had that wind up back in but would just shoot him forward So you have to look at a Lift similar to the way they would look at a stunt like it's it there's a high possibility Right and in everything from where you step those cobblestone streets. That was the sky It's partly yeah, because the thing itself was I think it was like like 400 something something like that It wasn't like crazy heavy. It was around 400 pounds So for us that's not that big of a deal unless you put your foot wrong with 400 pounds Yeah, then all of a sudden there goes your ankle there goes your knee there goes your Achilles and And the other thing is once once the whistle blows and it's on and we're racing or you're Playing in a sport and then like the fight starts are like the game starts when the whistle blows all that shit's gone like The fear's gone the hesitation's gone. I'm gonna fucking win, you know That's what I'm here for so that that's when you really have to like worry about that So like beforehand I'll always walk the course and just like look like okay I want to I want to hug this corner even if it's gonna take me a little bit longer I'll be loose on this corner because it's a little bit of a dip, you know stuff like that But you know I mean it doesn't always turn out right first world's longest man. Frank O'Klambo just destroyed his knee carrying a fridge There you go. Yeah, which actually changed a lot of the structure of a contract that we sign now Franco Columbo was in the world's the first world's strongest man. Yeah, I believe it was Franco Columbo Yeah, it was there was Lou for Rigno Franco Columbo and I could and Franco was this the shorter guy who's turned on right Yeah, yeah, he's the guy who used to blow up hot water bottles with his lungs and make him explode right yeah Yeah, yeah, which is crazy fucking insane about a lung power. Yeah, that's like longevity power too That's the kind of stuff I really like I can't wait till like I'm done with the sport and I can actually do stuff That'll make me feel good like you know instead of like waking up broken every day I feel like oh I can do a little bit of yoga. I like to hike that kind of stuff Yeah, you're looking forward to a normal life. Yes exactly what injuries have you had? I my first The amateur show I was doing actually I competed Brian Shaw who was on the TV show with us He's four-time world's strongest man went out of Colorado He was hosting an amateur show in Colorado and I was in Santa Cruz training ocean sea level went up to outside of Denver to compete at the show and fucking had a heart attack It was so so hard, but it was the deadlift is it was like maybe Two two months after I started deadlifting maybe three months So I'd never really dead lifted and we were deadlifting the car The back end of a car and they made it heavy so it was probably for amateur's heavy is about like eight hundred eight hundred and forty pounds something like that So I'm winning the show and and I'm doing it in front of four-time world's longest man winner who already I had my sights on him like I was coming for him, you know like I that's like when I first started I was like okay this guy's the best this guy's the best. I'm coming for that guy So I wanted I wanted to show out, you know, so I go out and I pull the car up I do the first rap and I was like basically it took 90% of everything I had for that first rep But like a meat head. I was like I'll pull the second one, you know It's four reps, so I go pull the second one about halfway up my lower back pops And I just let go my both my legs went stiff and then they went numb completely I fall forward into Brian's arms actually as these judging me and my legs were numb Like maybe two months straight and then off and on for like two years They were just so bad. I feel that for that first two months I actually ended up inside I convinced I show ended up in second place Qualified for nationals which was my goal so I could get my pro card I went home started training for nationals with numb legs and had to sleep in my pickup truck because I wouldn't I couldn't lay down And we had we had a studio at the time no chairs We just had a bed and so I would sleep in my pickup truck get up drive to the gym go train and looking back Like yeah, that was stupid. It was really stupid, but That's once I failed it football in my eyes I'd failed once once I kind of painted myself in this corner I was like I'm just I'm just not gonna lose and you never go to them. I know I Didn't have insurance But now you don't want to get a look see I kind of do I mean it feels good now. I mean I should take a peek I'm I'm my I need it I'm gonna go get my Achilles checked out because of this current this last world strongest man I had a decent pop in my Achilles and so I'm I'm gonna get that checked out But I've been been really careful about how I Rehab stuff like that But you're right. Yes, I should check out my body. It's crazy though that your legs were numb for two years Yeah, off and on there were straight numb for about two months straight numb like you'd someone could stab you in the leg Like like a sleep. Oh like that. Yeah, and it was sciatic. It was I pinch my sciatic as well I was told and so you know I figured that I wasn't then after that I was in Africa and I ripped my bicep off the tendon and I'd been getting beaten up a lot at that point and like my first year world strongest man It was so easy for me to get to the finals. I kind of just was like, you know Fucking you know, it's whatever. I don't have to work for this I am the strongest man without having to work for it and then Got into Africa after being beaten up a lot and kind of getting my head pushed down in the sand for two years in a row and Rip that off and I was just like I'm done like I in my head like I just I thought I was done I remember walking out by the river and sitting there and just feeling like broken just like I didn't know what I was gonna do with myself or anything like that and I walked back to the tent and the The referees were telling me like you know get your stuff. They don't they don't want you that once you get hurt You have to fly you home that way. They don't let you stay and watch the finish or anything that shit They leave yeah, I think it's a liability thing. I don't know basically they just got to get rid of you but the the the the judge for the show was like hey We're doing the what's called the Hercules hold and in your up. Are you gonna do it? And the Hercules hold means you reach you reach out with both arms here like this and You have like a handle like basically like Like in the gym, you know the row handles like that attached to a tower that's falling and you hold it as long as you possibly can and In my mind I was like this is the last time I've ever gonna be here So I might as well leave some fucking blood on the bar. So I've walked out and did it and I've been so inspired by set off the bone. Yeah Ten the tendon So I went over there and I was just like fuck it like let's let's at least leave a mom You know like I had to do something did you tape it up or anything? But what are you gonna tape up? Like it's not I mean like it's like fully extended your arm It's basically just taking weight pulling you and it's so it's not direct like curling hurting right but it's Yanking a tendon further in up into your bicep and I felt it creeping up into my shoulder As I was doing it and I did great actually I was the best of him. I'd had that year You know I crossed it and I remember just closing my eyes and being gone and just if when I let go It was almost like being baptized man like I felt like all the pain and all the stress everything I felt like build up once I got in hurt. I just dumped it all and then it took me it took me I think it was two more years. I finally fought back. I thought I was done and then last year I made it back into the finals I was I'm now again top 10 strongest man in the world So is it was because of surgery and rehab surgery and then everything else was so beat up once I once I finally stepped back I was like like there's no reason I should have to take an hour to be able to walk in the morning Yeah, and I don't like there's no reason why my back should hurt from walking from the front door to the car You know like it was so wrecked and so I just started working on different things trying to take care of myself And I got back to worlds With that next year actually I got back and I just didn't do well I because I hadn't been able to do anything and then Came back the following year which was just this last year and You know, I Basically I've been written off it was it was I was told it was my last time I was getting invited because at this point like you're done You know like it's time for you to find something else and I came out I've had the show my life. I've been working so hard But you never know how strong you are until you line up You never know like what kind of athlete you are until you get tested right so I got I lined up and I got done I just crushed when I'm when I finished I loaded that list stone and I knew I was in the finals like dude I did emotional just thinking about it right now like it just felt like somebody had just washed all that away No, I remember ripping my shirt off I am a fucking showman. I'll tell you that I had my strong and pretty shirt underneath and I ripped my world strong as man's shirt and showed my strong and pretty shirt And I was just roaring we were in Malaysia and like everybody just kind of like It was awesome You do to try to rehab your body to try to get your body back into condition tons of coke work tons of stretching and like Basically just digging out scar tissue is huge. It's huge like a lot of people use like a Thera gun and stuff like that I went to cheaper out. I took a black and Decker skillsaw and I got the stuff attachments put it all together cost me like 65 bucks You know but like Stuff like that. I kind of figured it all out as I was going, you know, I just I There's people out there that were telling you stuff, but it wasn't as easily accessible when I was when I was first going and now like Literally now we have a website called starting strong man So like people who want to train and figure out like what's the safe way to start out or like if I want to train like this But I don't want to don't want to buy all the equipment or if I just or if I do want to be the strongest man in the world Or if I just want to know what kind of type of lifts to use to to like keep your back healthy To help you use your upper back instead of your lower back when you're pulling that kind of stuff I mean it's all there now like literally that did not exist and you just have to like listen to like the Sock on the cock guy in the gym telling you what to do, you know Right. That's what it was for me like it was a bunch of older lifters And I remember just you know warming up is for pussies and all that kind of shit. Oh, yeah Old school lifting man. Oh, we're gonna listen pussies Yeah, you ever see a lion warm up before it chases a gazelle. I've heard that nonsense before it's ridiculous Hamilton was talking that crazy. It's crazy. Yeah, it's crazy. I'm not a lion and I'm not going after the gazelle Yeah, if you have to it's there, but if you want to take care of your body It's definitely better to warm up. Yes Exactly. Yeah, if you watch like a guy like Manny Pacquiao train like Dean I watched him work out once with Freddy Roach and He he warms up for a long time It's like 15 20 minutes of warming up They said that about Ali that Ali would warm up for one hour Yeah, so an hour of his workout was him just warming up his body just moving moving along and getting Stretching and rolling his arms and his legs rolling his hips and then once that blood's flowing that and he starts shuffling Right starts hitting the bag and then he starts hitting the pads That's more the older I get the more I realize how important that is and like how important it is to teach the the next generation How to warm up even just rowing your hips? I only started doing that in the last year and a half. That's crazy It's crazy. It's crazy like I put all that strain on my hips and low back My I'm telling you forever and didn't even move my hips in the circle Like figure back do you ever use a reverse hyper? I do I use a reverse hyper I like to do a lot of stiff leg stuff I avoid dead lifts as much as possible, but I mean I still compete. I can't right and what I did now was what a lot of guys do is They use a suit. I didn't know like everyone was using deadlift suits and it was actually protecting their low back That's a lot of what a deadlift suit does is transfer it to your upper back Which is like I went to worlds this year and it was the first time I didn't zero the deadlift at world strongest man I pulled it up and it was it was fucking easy It was always in my groups and I was cruising zero the deadlift like didn't get a zero like a no rep like I was the first time I actually pulled the deadlift rep at world strongest man every year I've been fighting to get the finals and doing my best with one I'm tied behind my back because when this event comes I get zero points But like I finally figured that out. That's what I was I was still thinking that I was close to retiring even though I was feeling better, but then I realized that I'm so much stronger now and I don't have all the pain So like I'm almost like a peak age for strength to so I I've got to give it a couple more years Like what's a peak age for strength? They say but for at least for when I've been told they say it's like between 34 and 36 is for strong men. This is what I've always been told but honestly, I think that the the longer we study the stuff The more realizing it's like if you treat your body right you can keep getting stronger as long as you don't break things That's the big issue right people break things and they have to work around those things and they break something else And they're compensating because one needs fucked up and then the other knee blows out because it's compensating for the bad name Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. I was always tell people like I know a lot of people that have had ACL surgeries and they try or ACL injuries They try to not have surgery. They try to just rehab it and I'm like god damn it just get the fucking Surgery right you're yeah, you're gonna be out for six months, but at least you'll have a fixed knee right and a year You'll be great like and years can happen whether you like it or not Right and this way that year happens and while it's happening, you know, you'll realize okay I got to I gotta keep my fucking legs strong I gotta keep all those stabilizer muscles strong right and then everything else doesn't fall hamstrings strength is big huge huge And but strength a lot of guys don't like to do like but exercises It's huge man. It saves you a little back It makes you feel better and also stretching out the front end of your hips and your abdominals Stretching that stuff that company you've spoke about him so right. Yeah, so actually just they hit me up the other day And they were like we got we really want to send you one of these and I was like fuck you have him here Do you want no? No, well, they're sending me one. So we got to give you right now nice Yeah, give us a box of them. I give them to people Fuckin believe in them. They're not expensive. It's real simple super easy to use I put them down the ground and lie on it. It's just like kids in there Dig and it's not just for the saw us muscle. It's for your whole back right. I use it on everything I use it on my shoulders. I use it on my legs Yeah, I saw a video where this guy was doing the outside of his legs Never seen with it fucking brutal. Yeah, but you know what my favorite is that Tim Tam thing that thing right there You see that that jackhammer motherfucker. Yeah, yeah, that's like a upgraded deragon. Yeah Even more power new ones. Yeah, that thing's amazing and they don't die as quick to a lot of the guys that world used this Was it good? They're so good. Yeah, although all that kind of recovery stuff is so important guys I think they could just work out and and not take that time and recover right I was that guy though. I was I mean you learn I mean I when when I needed when this ripped We this it was the full tear finally like my my tendon exploded. It didn't rip actually it exploded So there was still that when you were doing the Hercules thing no no that that was after that was after so that when that happened It wasn't it didn't fully separate so but when when I went home and I was training down the road This was like a little while later. So you didn't even get surgery immediately You couldn't you can't why because first off if it's muscle or if it's not completely separated You can't get surgery but this basically what I'm saying is exactly what you same just a different time I This exploded off the Tendon when I was doing a world record attempt for an axle and training and That I was like I knew it was tore right away But we had the pilot for the TV show We're supposed to film a Nova Scotia Canada this next day and I knew what an opportunity it was So I said fuck it I went took a shower and got out of plane and I flew to Canada and in Canada with with it completely torn Knowing that I needed surgery and it hurting like like the worst pain ever We had to flip a boat so like one of those little row boats. We had to flip it like a tire Then we carried 300 pound water drugs up a hill We did like all the stuff with that separated and the entire time it just felt like someone was stabbing me with a cattle prod But that one that was meathead, but But where are you doing more permanent damage though not on the bicep no once once the bicep goes The only thing worse you can really do is shove it up higher so they have to play you deeper when they pull it down and plays a hard I'm taking some fucking inquisition type torture device right but I had a great surgeon. I was I was taking care of man And it was it wasn't too bad along the rehab two mill no no three weeks in a cast and then like he gave me this like an Armbrace that would like I'd adjust it every week or so to where go more and more straight and then that was maybe three months before I could use it and At that point it's not like I could go do what I was doing. It's at that point you start over Wow, yeah, and it was my arm was like tiny. Oh, it was pretty pissed off Well even you're on tiny Yeah, yeah, but how weird is that I'm walking around like with what I'm like this to me other arm would you like it works? That like some ID company well, you know boss rootin Do you know yeah? Yeah, I've met him a few times last has what he calls baby arm is one arm that's Small because of atrophy because of pinched nerves, right? This is really it's really kind of fucked up. Yeah, like to this day He I don't think he can hold up a jug of milk Oh, shit, well like he couldn't like hold a jug of milk and so arm and extend his arm Yeah, that's a guy that for some reason didn't get a lot of the love that he's so deserves He was pioneer savage. Yeah, and one of the most like one of their original technical strikers Right taken on dudes way bigger than him and still had them like hoist gracies amazing and Savage, but he was doing the exact same thing. Oh, yeah, yeah, he was just years later But if hoist had to fight boss rootin it would have been ugly But no the thing is like in the early days boss didn't understand submissions either so hoist would have probably got him if it was like You have see one right? You know, it's um, it's a crazy sport and the people that have been able to You know like paved the way like a guy like boss rootin. They were he's such a savage He's so nice. He's such a savage. He would just shoot cortisol into everything All his joints are all fucked up because he would just take cortisol shots to shoot it into everything Light a cane shoot light a cane into a shins. Oh my god. So you can fucking blast people not feeling anything He was such an animal yet amazing stories though. We went to his gym We did I did Moss rest Moss resting is like an old Russian style wrestling Why you have like a stick and you each hold the ends of the stick and try and take it from each other and we actually I did it twice Two tournaments and I was the undefeated American champion for a year and a half after doing it twice But we went to his gym to do the qualifiers to go to the world championship in Dubai And he came out there and he was judging and stuff and I remember like I basically I was way bigger than most people And I'm like upper body heavy so I just lean back and take it and at the end of it He walked over and he goes like the force is strong with you I love this guy. Yeah, he's got a great personality. He's a great commentator, too It's great. It's fun. Yeah, he makes it fun. Yeah, he seems like cool What's the what's the average lifespan in terms of like how much time you can compete at the highest level for strong man? It seems like Your everything is just so fucking heavy. It's everything's gonna almost blow out Right like how many years can a guy expect to compete at the highest level? Depending on my guy depending we're getting better at holding on to that kind of stuff and if you make it to the top Ashline so that you're saying at the top level I'd say the average the average is low. It's probably like a year two years but if you just took the last five years and kind of cut that out into your own like like study that with that five years Let's say guys now are gonna average more like like three to five years five Maybe six if you're doing good, but then you have these guys like Brian Shaw's been doing it since before I even know what it was You know Brian Shaw's four-time world strongers man out of Colorado. He takes his rehab seriously He's like he doesn't care about how much it costs or what what it takes like it's to him He's an athlete first of like he's got these really amazing like cold pools and hot pools right next to each other at his house And all the different type of equipment that he would need to rehab and he's he's always making sure he gets bodywork done two three times a week And we're on the road like like when we were on the road for me that that's that was it was an education Because I was with Nick Best who's who's 55 and he's he's still doing this really? 55 how he's a just a savage man He's an old power lifter and and He's at the point where he needs help to get down to the ground to pick something up But he's trying to figure that stuff out and and he's definitely gonna pay for it for the years of savagery for sure But we got we have him and then we have Eddie Hall Eddie Hall's one world strongers man 2017 and he's the the strongest person to ever deadlift in the world He pulled 500 kilos from the ground which is 1,104 pounds I believe 500 kilo deadlift and just straight split up with it like it was nothing looked around the crowd made sure they understood he had it like it was easy and then put it back down, you know That in a lot of people's opinion that makes him the strongest man ever to live deadlift to a lot of people is king Then we have Brian Shaw four times world strongers man And he's he's like mad scientists with this stuff like if you go to talk to Brian Shaw about like the trajectory of a sandbag or Or how how you want to put your hand placement or where you want to do this or that or like anything that has to do with the science of lifting He can dissect it like basically build my the science guy. That's what I always call him Is that a debo because he gets crazy he reminds me of debo from Friday And he makes me look small Brian Brian's got me by like two inches and like 40 pounds Wow And when he gets tired or hungry he starts to get that flex, you know, and he's like like debo come down But like I'm traveling the world with these guys And I'm basically picking my little pieces out of what they've learned and what they've done because I'm very young in this game I haven't been doing it for a long time. I've I'm still I mean I'm getting to the point now where I feel comfortable calling myself like not a rookie I wouldn't say I'm of that I'm right about that But I've I've got to learn like what Brian does for his rehab how many times he gets massage therapy and what the difference is between massage therapy and a massage or or someone who's a PT and someone who actually is fluent in like Deep tissue or sports sports therapy that kind of stuff you learn all that stuff and I never Took the time or spent the money. Honestly, I just I never had it I was never in a situation where I could spend that money and take care of myself that way It always kind of seemed like a luxury and it's not like for them It's it's maintenance. It's like getting the oil change during a car. Do you roll out with a lacrosse ball? Yeah, you use like one of those wad balls. I just saw balls a soft ball Yeah, I just saw ball because it's big and it's it's not hard like a baseball So I mean for a lot of people that's too much but for me It's perfect and I actually do a lot of I try and get a lot of people to do them on the front of their hips too Because it's it's nice like pressure point stuff really good or like an atlas stone The the balls that we lift the concrete stones. Yeah, you just roll your stomach over that and just relax and just let it sit there And it kind of just pushes everything back and moves it around You know, so I like doing a lot of that stuff I've seen a lot of guys do that with kettlebells as well. Yeah Down on them and roll it over your back because it's unforgiving and it pulls all the tissue apart. Yeah Exactly. Yeah. Now what about food? Like what what kind of diet are you guys on? We all basically the exact same thing You know just a ton of meat and rice and we do a lot of peppers and stuff like that. No one's vegan. No no No, no That Patrick with the fuck's his name. There's a vegan strong man. I've heard of I don't remember his name But he's not like he's never been the world's longest man Well, there's there's a document that they're doing with James Cameron Where they're trying to promote him as being James Cameron is on this vegan kick His wife has a school and they feed the kids all vegan food and Arnold's a part of this too and they're yeah that guy Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know that is he's not one of the strongest men in the world He's he's a strong man and he's strong and I've seen no disrespect. I'm not I'm not saying anything bad about him He's just put that back up again, Jim. He's just he's I don't and from what I recall He's never even been invited towards strong as man. So it's bullshit Yeah, I mean you can say a lot of things like this guy say say he broke a record and in like Some powerlifting competition that wasn't a guy's backyard, right? And they call that a world record and then all of a sudden now he's a world record strength athlete because His buddy and his backyard said so a lot of that happens. I don't know specifically about him I've no no clue where he's getting his his his his credentials from one meal at day See this is ridiculous one meal a day and vegan vegan professional powerlifter 213 2013 said the deadlift world record for his weight class. Oh Okay 672 pounds for how much does he weigh though? 672 isn't even big for guys that are like 115 well he's only 57 okay, so he's smaller than me so they're they're talking about powerlifting too So once you get into powerlifting there's so many little federations and stuff like Everybody and their mother has world records and just listen that so He's documentary is touting because that's what I was confused like all the strong men that I've seen are giants right right Like how how can a 5 7 guy? I've never seen him anywhere On the circuit anywhere and there is a circuit like we've firms circuit with guys like you We have John Shaw yeah Eddie Hall and Nick Best. We have giant humans. Yeah We have we have giant slives giant slives the qualifying tour four world strongest men So to get to giant slives you either there's like a bunch of little federations that you could possibly do well in and then them bite you or You know like getting invited is kind of like the only tricky thing get getting in But once you get there if you prove yourself you get top three or if if like say you go to my first giant slive I went to it was like stacked like it was 10 of the strongest men on the planet and normally giant slive has like three of the top 10 and Then a few of the other guys trying to get in and so when I went it was top the all the top 10 guys And I got six place I believe the top 10 and then a few of the other guys trying to get in. And so when I went, it was top, all the top 10 guys and I got six place, I believe. But I still got invited to World Strongers Man because it was the top 10 strongest men in the world there when I did that. So normally you have to go to a giant's live, prove yourself there and then you get invited to World Strongers Man. Sometimes like we've had years where World Strongers Man got pushed and was filmed early so they had to invite other guys. But you can, you can always tell who's strong. You can see when a guy shows up and he's ready to go or if he's just got show muscles or if he's just a big chubby dude, you know. And it's, I mean, you strap a guy to a truck and tell him to pull it 30 meters. You're gonna figure that shit out real quick. Yeah, I can only imagine. So, it's a shit show for some people. Well, because the James Cameron thing they're pulling this guy out as if he's some world record power lifter. Strong man guy. He probably has a world record. He probably has some type of world record. I've seen him because I've posted videos talking about my meals and stuff before and a lot of people give me that like this guy does this and he's vegan. But I mean, if the biggest pull is ever pulled a 627, then that that wouldn't even do like that would get last place at an amateur heavyweight show in America. Also, the other thing is America, we have we have the strong men in the world too. Like everyone it's weird in America, we have these people like have these this love for other countries everyone wants to be like, well, I hear an Iceland, they're really strong. Or oh, and Poland, they're this and it's like, motherfucker, we're strong here. Like we're fucking strong. Like if you're an American getting into worlds is the hardest way to get in. If you go to another country, it's much easier, much easier because here we've got out of the top 10, we've probably got four or five guys, four or five guys that are top 10 in the world at any given time. And only like three or four, maybe five guys get invited every year from America. So if you're if you're getting into worlds, you've got to be a bad motherfucker or go move to Poland or actually Poland's got a bad dude right now. Go move to Lithuania or go somewhere else. It would be easier because you'd represent a country with a smaller town. Much easier. What about that? I believe. What about the mountain? The guy from the game with the mountain for Iceland? Yes, he's a savage. Yeah, he won last year. He's no joke, man. He's strong. How do you say his name? Well, half-thore, Julius Bronson. Just call him Thor. Say it again. Half-thore, Julius Bronson. Half-thore, Julius Bronson. Bjornson. Bjornson. Yeah. He's a savage. He's strong and he's definitely legit. No joke. He's good. He got third place this year. Isn't he fighting off Bell's Paul's? He had Bell's Paul's a couple years ago. I think he's almost all the way better. Not to be rude, but his face always had a little bit of my... I've got these huge fat chubby cheeks. So I'm allowed to talk shit, I guess. But he had kind of like that look on his face a little bit already. So I'm pretty sure he's probably like, oh, I'd say at least 99% done. And the other thing... What is that shit? A lot of times it's stress, it can be an infection. I'm not a doctor. I'm just putting it on a doctor? At the moment. I'm working on getting my license. Jamie. What the fuck is this guy here for? It's fucking good. Yeah. So all of you basically are saying to eat the same thing. It's just meat and rice basically. Meat and rice potatoes. It's kind of meat. And a lot of times it's bison. We do... It sounds strong. Yeah. I fucking love it. I love bison too. How long you in town for? Two more days? You got somewhere you can cook? Yeah. I got a lot of elk for you. Oh my god. I love you. I fucking favorite commercial freezers in the back. Nice. I shot two last years. Really? Yeah. I tried to give it out to some maybe. Nice. Where'd you go? One of them in Utah and one of them in Central California. Nice. Nice. I've always in Oregon they got a ton of elk on in a lot of water too. It was Roosevelt elk in Oregon. They're bigger body too. It's my animal. The best meat. It is. In my opinion, the best meat there is. It's elk by far. Yeah. It's my favorite. So good for you too. Yeah. It's taste that I'm good too. I've never had elk that I've been like, even if the guy cooking it sucked, it still came out good. Yeah, it's a crazy taste, right? It's like people that think that that venison is gamey. Like first of all, just because someone hasn't prepared it correctly and they didn't take care of it after they killed it. But too, it's like not elk. No. No. That shit is always good. You get have an old bowl, like a fucking 10 year old bowl has been rotten and stabbing other elk with his head and still tastes delicious when he took it. It's fucking amazing. Yeah. It's the reason why wolves are chasing those motherfucker. Exactly. Delicious. They have to let go. So how many times do you eat a day? Should right now, it's usually about five, but right now my five meals are smaller. Like when we're going into worlds like the last two months, I mean, those five meals and then anything else, everything else. Just gone crazy. Everything I possibly can. Yeah. And you know, I try and keep it clean, but you just you just want it all in one of everything. And when you're in a competition, how many days is a like a world's strongest band competition? World's Strongest Man is normally two or three weeks. Two or three weeks. Fucking savage. It's so brutal. So are you working out at all while that's going on or are you just doing the events? You're doing the event and then you immediately try and find some place cold because normally, worlds is in some exotic location that we're selling tourism to. So it's like Malaysia, Africa, we were in Florida this year. It's always some hot, humid place. So they're trying to get people to come to see it. Right. A lot of it's a tourism ad and it's always beautiful background, right? Beautiful background. Fucking hell on us. You know, it's brutal. Yeah. So but I mean, it's it's part of what pays for everything. And none of us really, we all know to expect it's going to be hot in human. We just, you know, now myself, this is the first time I've had people come with me like every time I've been to worlds before, it was just me and my gym bag. And I'm just ready to bang, you know, but now I have to for some reason I kept thinking of the sock on the cock thing when I said we're ready to bang. I got a question here. So but now this this year and every year forward from now on, I had my crew like my girl was with me and two of the guys I trained with. And they basically, so we'll be in our tent and like 400 yards away is them lifting. And if I want to know who's doing what or what position they're in or like I'm competing in a group of five, I need to know how many points this guy just scored what this guy has like I need to know all that. Before I would have to walk out there hot and humid, find out that, come back and be moving back and forth, doing all that stuff if I wanted to get food, anything. It's just a ton of extra stress. This year, like they literally wouldn't even let me bend over to tie my own shoes. Like they put them on me and behind me set and I was fucking strong as shit, Joe. I'm telling you because of everything. Like the work too, like I really think Brian Nick and Ed for how strong I was this year, like just training with them. And then you know, when you when you're with somebody, like you compete, just if you and I were walking to the door, I'd try and get that faster. You know, but it's just the way it is. Right, right. So doing that for the entire year going in the world, I showed up and I've been going chest to chest with the strong, in my opinion, Brian Charles is strong as man, whoever lived. And so I've been going chest to chest with this dude all year. You 30 other dudes ain't shit. Like I'm here to take your money. Right. Right. So I love it. I felt great and having them help me and stuff, it just it all added up to me feeling the best I've ever felt. Do you do a lot of ice baths? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't before because I I was basically just pushing out and just didn't want to. But they, they have to if you're training with these guys, you have to. They're not going to let you slide. It's like that, that coach that's just like, yo, you don't want to. Okay. Well, twice as long for you. When do you do the, the ice bath? Because I was reading something, I think it was Andy Gao and had a study that he put up about a hypertrophy and how it, how it affects his, it's affected by ice baths. Right. And if there's a certain amount of time after lifting, you should wait before you get in an ice bath. Yeah, we've all known that for a while. Yeah. I did. I didn't know that that was new information because a lot of people are just now finding out the way your body reacts after a workout, like the pain, the inflammation, all that stuff, you're supposed to allow that for us. It's like we'll train normal. It depends on filming, like because we, we worked 13 hour days on top of that, you know, and you know, filming us fucking exhausting. It's like, yeah, you did that perfect. Do it three more times, you know, shit's so crazy. But um, so normally if we trained in the morning, we would, we would wait to ice bath to the end of the day. But if, if we trained immediately after, um, after set, like we got off that, we went and trained. So it'd be like six or seven at night. We'd come back, we'd eat and we'd like conversation take our time and then we would go just before bed. So it's, it's like, I think minimum we would do like like two hours or so. And I don't, maybe that's too long. Maybe, maybe, but um, you know, for us, that's like usually just, that's our routine. We, we don't want to avoid that stuff because that's kind of your body learning how to deal with that. Yeah, I think that what they were studying was the difference between someone who did a immediate after workout or someone who waited an hour and the waiting an hour was beneficial to muscle growth. Right. Yeah. And it's the same thing with, you see people like pop an ibuprofen after workouts and stuff. But bro, you're supposed to feel that, you're supposed to feel that shit. Yeah. Yeah. It's part of the part of the whole thing. Now when you're eating these five meals a day, do you have like a meal prep person that sets it up? So the other right amount of calories and nutrients and you're doing it. I don't have to worry about that too much. Um, we're more on set with caters and stuff. So it's super easy. The caters like give you bison and rice or something. Oh, everything you need. Everything went in. Nice. Nice. So when it's that, it's that easy. But when I get home, see, you get used for that too. So you go home and you try and eat some shitty meat after after like three straight weeks of clean food. Your body like, what are you doing, bro? Enjoy these hearts. Exactly. Exactly. Run my girl. I was like, oh, you're bad. What about drink? What do you drink? Do you drink just water? Straight water. Um, um, I switched to those like a, we when we're doing like human shit, like when human areas, like a liquid IV. We did those. We did those. But and I got off a gatorade and switched to those body armors. It's like I was body armors is like let sugar. It's just it's way better more electrolytes. So it's only I only do those when when we're actually training in its human. Like I try them the best I can to keep myself from like allowing that type of stuff unless it's competition. So like when it's competition, take the fucking ibuprofen, drink the body armor, all that shit. Like this is what you this is the moment you worked for. Like you want it to be as smooth as possible now. But when you're leading up into that, it's it's water. When I'm when I'm really tired of my diet, like everyone's wanted to be a coke zero, which I'm telling you getting crazy. It saves me. I don't get eaten and out, but I'll have this coke there. It'll be okay. Can you know now fuck with you? No, and now it's amazing. It's that's God's gift to us. This is this is for everyone in Texas. I'm so sorry, but in and out is a million times. Well, they're in Dallas now. No, they're in Dallas. They're in Austin. They're in new brownfels. Yeah, those water burger people are drinking the cooling. It's a million fucking mine. If you're comparing water burger, you've got to compare to like McDonald's to Burger King. Oh, it's better. It's a different show. Like this is this is a different ticket. The only people that fuck within and out is five guys. Okay, five guys. But if you go to Austin and where we're on it is if you go out there, there's this place called P. Terry's. There's only three or four of them. And they're only in that area. I'm telling you they crush everybody. I'm Terry's. P. Terry's. It's just the top. Terry's like Terry cruise like T. E. R. R. Y. Apostavias. And I'm telling you like this is not a sponsor that they are the fucking shit. And they're fries. And then I'll surprise they're okay. They're not the best. I think guys have better fries. Way better. And they have better burger choices to five guys. We're the hallopanios. Bacon. Exactly. They have shakes. Right. Well, they don't have shakes. Well, they do have shakes. And then I'll shake some place. Yeah. Five guys didn't have shakes for a while. None of the have shakes at some places. But they win with the hallopanios. Oh, yeah. I'll be using bacon. Yeah. The game more options. Yeah. They can't fuck with that. Better buns too. Yeah. Way better buns. That's what I'm saying. But when you go to Austin, you got to try to be there. I'm fucking hungry now. I mean, we left, uh, we left evil live two last night in the limo. And I was like, we've been here for nine hours. We're stopping it in and out. I was like, you've never had in and out. I was like, no, I've had it. We're just stopping that. Damn. Be Terry's bang for your burger. Fuck. Fuck. That does. God damn. Good. Yeah. That looks so good. And then only in that area. Really? Yep. They need to branch the fuck out. That looks fantastic. Whoa. Damn. Next time we're there for sure. Yeah. I'm in. So, um, what about supplements like vitamins, minerals, I'd protein is something I definitely stick to. And I do pre workouts, depending on like what mood I'm in. What kind of protein powder use? I'm spoiled. I do the RTDs like the ready to drinks. Well, like I'll get those cases at Costco, man. Costco's always got great deals. But, um, I like to basically use whatever is easy on my stomach. You know, like way do like P protein hemp. I've had, I've had pee pee was okay. It tasted kind of funny. Um, we're weird. Hemp hemp's nice. Hemp's always nice. And if you come up, for me, like it's just nice to go back to that, like just. Have you ever sent in to on its stuff? No. On it. I just should have pushed her. I had some here. I give you some. No, we haven't even on it. Hemp. Fuck. Maybe we'll see. It's always nice to you, man. Whatever you need. It's always nice to go back to the hemp. Like, yeah, for anything, for like, if you're doing clothes or anything like that, it's just so easy to digest too. Right. Hemp protein just like goes, no problem. Nice. Yeah. It's my favorite. Yeah. And then so I'll do, I do pre-zinc stuff like that. I actually work with a company called Nanosutical Solutions that does, do vitamins. And it's basically, I'm going to fuck this all up. Concussions don't don't. That's fucking, don't email me telling me how to fuck this up. I'm telling you right now. I fuck that. Okay. Got the email gel. Okay. The email gel. That's what. So, Nanosutical Solutions, they take like basically your normal vitamins and they break them down into a smaller bit, like normally the smallest way you can, you can, it's called bio, like the way your body ingested. It's called bio-building. There you go. Thank you. That was going to bug me. So, for your body to actually accept it like the lowest we've gotten is to, I think, micrograms or something like that. And the, the sky out of San Antonio, he broke it down into nanograms. And he will, he's been working with me. I think I'm the only athlete he works with. He's a small company. And we've been talking, we were working together and I could just tell right away. I used to do B12 shots. You ever had B12 shots? Yeah. And you know how right afterwards you kind of taste that, that weird taste in your mouth and you get that energy. Well with him, he has the sublingual vitamins. So like between the B12 and the glutathione, they're at them telling you like the B12, it was just like getting the B12 shot. What's the name of this company? Nanosuticle Solutions. Nanosuticle Solutions. There we go. Yeah. Yeah. Prioritary manufacturing process allows for the molecular dispersion without excessive heat or breaking of the chemical bonds. This allows the vitamins and supplements to remain unchanged and undamaged when they're absorbed in your body. Fuck it. I'm in. That's exactly what I said. Right? Exactly. Exactly. Methodly. Methodly. Methodly. Methyl B12. A melatonin glutathione. Glutathione is a shit. Nobody knows about it. Yeah. I just found out that turmeric has an RNA. I learned it this year. I learned that from you. I was like, I thought it was turmeric. God damn it. It was so stupid. Yeah. We are reptiles for sure. You know, for sure. So I do that. Take on small people out there, make environments that are nanograms. Yeah. Exactly. So I just try and eat clean and that kind of stuff, you know, and it's you can we can always tell when our bodies like act a little weird. Funny. And you can just backtrack a little bit and you're like, Oh, like, I've been doing this a little different. I've had beer fucking six nights in a row. Like just chill out that kind of shit. Yeah. So most of the time it's self regulation. Now you said that they drug test you guys. What are they testing for? Uh, they test for everything. When we get drug tested at World Strongers Man, it's for everything. It steroids for steroids. It's for everybody has to be on steroids. No, I don't know. I don't know what to tell you when there's one test a year. Right. So you want to test that test. You have to pass that test and they can test you randomly to the random, the random thing from my experience, the random thing only happens if you're acting like you're on amphetamines. If you're acting like you're on amphetamines, they're going to test you. And there's been guys who pop for amphetamines after they randomly tested them. If you try to put a sock, why you're caught? Exactly. If you're screaming at somebody about cock and sock and all that, you're going to get drug tested. Oh, so that's what I would imagine that they would worry about that when it comes to lifting. Right. Most definitely you don't want somebody to die on there. Right. You know, you can have that and more like pulling that truck. I'm telling you, they stopped using the heart meters because people were losing their fucking mind seeing that in hearts were so high. It was like 240 a minute. Why? It's like maybe 230. Yeah. It's insane. You can get that high. That's what everybody else said. So they pulled the fucking meters. That's hilarious. Oh my God, dude. That's like a jack rabbit. Crazy. Huh? Wow. 240 a minute. Fuck an A. Does anybody pissed hot for steroids? I believe one person got busted. I would imagine. I don't want to say his name because I don't know if it was for steroids or for a math or a math. What do I say? What do I call it? Yeah. That makes sense. But I mean, I feel like for steroids are kind of, I mean, I don't want to like push it, but it seems like you'd have to be. I mean, it's it's a sport where it's it's built for bigger men. But yeah, there's a lot of guys who've gone through and been very adamant that they're not. And you know, we get tested. We're literally like every year I have to explain to the guy like, yes, there's going to be marijuana in my system. And that's in the rules that it says, it's okay. Like I have that conversation every year. And it used to be illegal. You should be illegal. And we got to we got to switch, uh, believe 14. Do you get switched? I brought it up a lot. I don't know. It's like really changed anything. But I was like, look at these fucking gorillas. You want everyone here on Viking in? Like I literally like all along all I'm saying is we should be able to smoke weed. I'm not saying these guys should be able to do math or any other shit. None of that. Well, I think we're finally recognizing finally as a culture that weed is not what everybody thought it was. Right. They were in the 50s and the 30s. And thank God. Thank God. Because I mean, people were doing so much work shit. Well, that's why that little Jeff Sessions cunt was driving me fucking crazy when he was the attorney general and he was saying, we got to, you know, marijuana is good people. Don't smoke marijuana. Like, right. You're not hanging around with good people. First of all, it's good people don't want to hang out with you. Exactly. So you don't know what you're talking about. And wasn't it Hillary that was saying it was she was going to do her best to keep it illegal? Yeah, she had some nonsense that she was saying to those. I don't know. She'd be fucking who knows. That's crazy. If I was you and just being honest on the show would scare the little fuck out of me. Because so many people listen, I just be worried that sooner or later, like, you know, I'm going for you to show up. Hillary just shows up. Just show up. I'm going to carry on one of the kings they carry with the poles on the shoulders. Big news. She just comes and moves the veil and peaks. Yes. That is the one. Did you see that video I put on my Instagram with the dude who took it. Yeah. Oh, it's about to grow up with a Hillary head inside the body. That was so badass. Who is that guy? Let's give that guy some props because that fucking animation is amazing. Put it up on the on the big screen. It's like one of those things were like, how did this guy even think of this and where is he buying his weed? This is not something that a regular person thinks of. There's his name, people crap. B-E-E-P-L-E underscore CRAP. And he's got this video of this Trump robot with glowing eyes and one artificial leg moving and the entire body of the Trump robot is Hillary's giant head floating around in a vat of liquid. A war torn United States. Yeah. Soldiers marching with him. Yeah. It's some apocalyptic post-apocalyptic scenario, but there's all these lights and it's fucking amazing. It's so dope. And Trump's body is weird and his feet are like baby feet. Yeah, they always get like they do their best to just fuck with that like because it bothers them. He shouldn't have reacted like a bother them. Did he act like a bother them? I think he said something about my hand in these big hands after they said it. I don't know. That's hilarious. That's the thing is every dude knows. Like if a guy flinches when you say some shit, you say some more like shit. Exactly. Exactly. You're not supposed to flinch. But they're the ones who say you don't body shame. I mean while they're body shaming this poor guy for having a little he doesn't even have a little hands. We're at normal hands. Rules don't exist anymore. I just made this thing too, which is like a sit off. That's what you're talking about. It's like a gorilla. Yeah. If I was Trump, I would hire a trainer and just get on the best juice too. If I had abs like that, I'd never wear a shirt. I'd go to funerals without a shirt on. Yeah. Sorry, bro. You did, but I'm jacked in town with it. Put a sock on your cock. Yeah. I don't, yeah. I don't, I don't think Trump has little hands. The regular hands, but it is a constant theme. Yeah. But that thing that people crap guy that you say is named, people underscore crap. He's amazing. Got some great shit on his page too. That's really cool. God damn. Look at that. A giant Kim Jong-un robot. Yeah. Wasn't Trump just in. Dude. Most great right now. We're partying with that dude. They probably killed so many together. I wonder if it was like the interview where he let him drive the tank and they were listening to my, my early sirens was a Miley service. What was it? Um, I don't remember. It wasn't Miley service. Listen to it. In the movie, the interview with the guy from the, yeah, they were driving around. It was, um, I don't remember. Yeah. Those are the Seth Rogan movie. Yeah. hilarious movie by the way. I never saw that movie. Oh, you've got to see that shit. It's fucking clips. No, you got to see that one. That's good. That movie like vanished. Like I forgot about it. Huh. Like until you just brought it up, I was like, oh, yeah. Yeah. It's on Netflix. I'm sure it is. Yeah. All those, all those like from super bad got me, like I was a mom super bad. So you see when they were on the good insects when you go to college, you don't want me to suck and dick. If fucking pussy. They're so good. Who wrote that shit? Tell me who wrote that. So I could say thank you. I don't know, man. But the scene with these just drawn dicks. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so crazy. I love movies like that. Yeah. Just preposterous shit. Just like it relaxed humor. Yeah. Yeah. You didn't care if it bothered somebody. I mean, he wasn't trying to be a dick, but he was funny. Well, what's interesting is that was quite a few years ago. I wonder if they would even do that movie that way today. That's, you know, I mean, that movie was like 2013. There's a movie coming out about three younger kids than the super bad movie. And it's rated R. And it seems like it's right along that same vein of like, yeah, humor and comedy. Thank God. But we need more of that. Yeah. It's like the backlash is stronger now than ever before, but also the appreciation of it is stronger now than ever before too, because people are so tired of people being so politically correct and so upset about everything. Yeah. You know, no one's telling you to be an asshole, but people are jumping on things that aren't even bad. Right. It's like I was, I'm actually like a little nervous about telling athletes that they should smoke weed now. Like that's nerve wracking because like your hold dependent, you're dependent on your boss in the places you work and the thing you do, right? So just saying something like that, if two people find that offensive and they raise enough hell, sure, that's a big fucking deal. But what we're just saying is like it's better than Viking and it's better than yeah. It's a very much healthier alternative alternative. Well, you know what it is, man. It's a tool. It's like you can abuse tools, but you could also use them correctly. I mean, you don't want to fucking hammer nails with a saw, right? But if you use marijuana correctly and you have discipline and you know what you're doing, the problem is that it's been illegal for so long. People don't understand what the best way to use it for is and what are the side effects? What is the, you know, what's the paranoia? What's this heightened sense of awareness that kind of freaks people out? Like how do you how do you mitigate that? How do you how do you get over? What's the right dosage? All that stuff is dependent upon information and when people align to you about it being terrible and you know, making you fucking blind and losing your marbles. Right. You're going to kill people. Yeah, it's just stuff. People are so confused about it that it also makes you more paranoid because as you're smoking, you thinking, oh my god, I shouldn't be doing this. What am I doing? I'm ruining my life. I can't believe doing that. And then you get even more paranoid and then you're like, I'm never doing this again. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Now, what about sponsors? Is it ever an issue with sponsors? The, the weed thing would be would be right now. The only people I work with other than myself is that nano-surgical solution. So he's actually working on doing a CBD thing and stuff. I'm, I don't know if I'll be a part of that because I'm trying to there's it's so available now. I just, I'd rather just find whoever does it the very best and not not market it because it's so saturated. I just take it for myself. Actually, a lot of people I worked in a group homes when I was in college for kids with autism and for for a long time. And there was actually this little girl who she had this this, it's not a disease. She had this, I'll just call it a thing. She had this thing where she always felt like she was falling. So, so like she looked completely normal. She was autistic and nonverbal didn't speak. But imagine all day feeling like you're falling. So she learned as a child really little if she would hit herself that people would hold her. So if you weren't holding her, she would literally actually watch her break her own nose. She was, she was 11 years old. This, sweet little girl like just super nice and smiley. But like if you didn't hold her, she just whack right around the face. And we found out that through, I don't remember exactly how it came about, but they, they gave her THC pills. They gave her THC pills and then stopped. She, she would walk around the house normally. Like she was still nonverbal. It's not like a fixed or autism or that stuff. But with the whole symptoms of feeling like she was falling, which I'm, I don't even think having anything to do with autism. Again, I'm not a doctor. But um, wait, what? I got to worry about that shit. So, uh, they gave her THC pills and she was like just walking around the house smiling. She would help us cook. She would move around like she would help the other kids because there's four kids in the house. She would help the other kids tie their shoes, stuff like that. Oh, that's awesome. Then her parents came back must have been four months later. And their friends had gilded them about giving her daughter, their daughter weed and they stopped giving it to her and she went right back to it. Straight back to it. So stupid. It's just ignorance. People just don't understand what it is. It's all it is. Oh, that's so sad. I felt so bad. This is one of the things that like just ripped me apart from working in that field is just, there's so much like there's these little rules that you don't understand. We had a kid that would sit, right? And he would just, he would feel stressed out and he would sit. And the rule was when he did that, we weren't allowed to help him up or move him or anything like that because that was rewarding bad behavior. That's how they classified that. So he would just sit in the middle of the road and we weren't allowed to get him out of the middle of the road. He would, he would, and then he learned that if he didn't want to do something, if he basically would stay in his room all day, he would stay in his room all day because he didn't like, they only work or he liked was me and I think it was just because I was big and jolly and all that. But if he didn't like the person who was working with, he'd just sit in his room on the floor and then they couldn't touch him, they couldn't do anything and he'd just sit there. He'd go days with... Jolly and all that But if you didn't like the person who was working with he'd just sit in his room on the floor and then they couldn't touch him They couldn't do anything and he'd just sit there he'd go days without eating or going anywhere out of the room or anything like that and it was all because we put these rules and and Put these chains on ourselves based off of other people's opinions are worrying what it would look like if we did this You know if this girl's taking this pill what does that look like or if we're picking this boy up off the ground What does that look like and it was it was it was like trying to help these children with your hands tied behind your back And I don't know if it's like that anymore. It was this was a long time ago But it was just it was heartbreaking I remember everyone was terrified to work with this little boy He was ten or eleven. He was just a sweet little dude. He just didn't he got nervous, you know and so I remember coming in and one day I was like, you know what I'm taking him to go to a football game So I took him to a college division one football game never had an issue never had any problems never sat down Nothing sat second-row in the end zone and like would get all excited every time anybody came by like the the cannon went off for a touchdown It was like the greatest moment of my whole like college career was hanging out with this eleven year old at a college football game The people were too terrified to even get out of this room That's terrible, but that's so cool to you got them there though. Yeah I'd like to think that that a lot of people work more in that direction after I left, you know I'm hoping and see was you could see in his eyes. He was a sweet little boy, you know, and you you There's never met a kid that was evil ever you just need to know how to how to work with them How to talk with them. Well, that's cool. You have that kind of patience. Yeah Do you have kids your own? I do I have a three-year-old boy. Oh nice Yeah, my little Atlas bear first one three-year-old. Wow. That's a that's a fun age man They start talking to you and they're running around telling all the stories and everything at night now He doesn't even like like we have to read books before we go to bed because when we go to bed He wants to tell me stories So he'll lay there and he'll be like well this one time and he'll talk for like ten minutes about some shit, you know It's so sweet and so cute Now it's a wild thing having a little person that you made. Yeah, yeah people that don't experience it's It's very very hard to describe. Yeah, it's like the sweetest most loving most intense Sweetness you've ever felt in your life yet the scariest fucking most horrifying thing at the exact same time right? You feel so vulnerable. Yeah, vulnerable is a great word for it I also have so much more compassion for other people now because I think of other people now as babies that grew up Yeah, where I used to think I look at this asshole and I think oh that asshole used to be a little baby like someone's a little boy Right someone's carrying him and holding him and he just got bad information and now he's all fucked up Yeah, yeah, I saw some homeless guy today. I was a stop light. He was wearing a bathrobe Got a bathrobe and socks on it's just dirty Fucked up and I was looking at him like this. That was someone's baby boy. Yeah, and now here he is Like I in his 30s or 40s whatever he was just wandering around all fucked up and dirty with mental health problems We're in a bathrobe and I'm like there used to be someone's boy. Yeah That's us. It's good for you to feel that way, but it's it's rough to live like that Yeah, well, it's it's it's so hard when you look at all the problems in the world and all the people that are suffering from poverty and disease and strife and Natural disasters and all these things is just so many people to care about and think about yeah It's almost like you can become paralyzed with compassion just stuff Really just looking at all the problems with the world. Yeah, and then the other side of it The one that gets me a lot is like when you see Parents or you hear about parents. I haven't seen it a lot, but you hear about parents who just don't give a fuck It's like this is this is a burden on me and they avoid it and did you I When you look at your daughter's eyes have you ever once in your life imagine being able to walk away from that? Fuck that would that would kill me. I heard a story about a lady who abandoned her kids here that day I just couldn't imagine that she abandoned her kids and wanted to start fresh left the husband with the kids Just left Wow, and I just sitting on the what in the fuck and then the fires came and their fucking house burned down Wow, and so then so here they are the dad and the kids daughters and the mom Fucking jet and the guy's there the no house. Oh my god Jesus Christ Yeah, man, it's uh, it's rough because you got to wonder like what is wrong with that person like We're kind of schizophrenier. They dealing with kind of mental health issues like what is right? How could you do that? Like how do you not like you think about what you experience with your son? And I think about what I experience with my daughters and like how could you How could you not want to be there for them? How could you not want to take care of them? How could you not want to love them? That's there some kind of disconnect. Yeah What happened? Well mean you think about that poor girl who kept punching herself in the face because she thought she was falling like There's obviously an issue there like what other issues are there psychologically? What empathy issues? Detachments, you know Sociopathy like what what's wrong with them that they're allowed that they can allow that in their life Too almost too many people man It's almost too much to pay attention to yeah, well, I mean legitimately it's hard to say what it is too much. Yeah, it's hard to say that except there But it is I mean that's how a lot of people end up going crazy. Yeah paralyzed from fear or worry. Yeah That's where we comes in. Yes You just worry about other shit. Think about aliens Aliens If you had a guess I'll turn around you, what do you think about aliens? Do you think Bob was our town of truth? I Didn't look him in the eye cuz you weren't in the room with them. Yeah, but I told you I want I'm the one of the creepers that watch the YouTube video I'm not going right there I said at home. I don't really watch much TV like I all sit at home and like stretch and watch watch these videos So I think it's a whole new thing to it like it adds an element that I really like like being able to see miss Pat Fucking hilarious the entire time. I was like like glued There's everybody. I mean, I've never flown in which he talks about both dudes are great at slinging You know, I love his art. Are you subtleness? Like oh man. He's fucking why would imagine that for like guys doing such ruthless fucking Explosive shit like you're doing all the time like comedy must be kind of important for sure It's a huge release plus. I mean, I like it and a lot of my friends were that like I was friends with a lot of guys at the comedy store So I was around it like I even I saw about doing it for a while. I just I know I'd have to dedicate so much to even be decent that I just couldn't do that But it's it's one of those things I like to take tried it for a little bit. Yeah Yeah, I was with them. I was hanging out with him a lot when he was working on material and so I remember he came over He gave me this badass poncho one time. He just randomly came over to give me a poncho And then I was like date. Yeah, we wanted to hang out and we were sitting out on my deck And we were just working we were just chilling he was he's like it's so cool. What are them? What's that quote? It's better to be a warrior in a garden than a gardener in a war. Yes, that's tight Yeah, let's take yeah, and that's what that's similar to you It's a lot of guys like that you see a lot of these guys who are just They're built ready to go, you know like if some shit went down Like I would happily stand next to you, you know Like I'd be I'd feel like secure But you don't have to worry about like if if we're coming here You're not gonna have fake lats and drum and flex up on right not being an asshole That's one of the things you do see with fighters too is that most of them in general They're really nice people. Yeah, so they don't they're not always puffing their chest out for no reason Act like an asshole for no reason they're nice folks. Yeah, they get all that shit out to get it out in the gym And if you're a bad motherfucker, you don't have to act like a bad motherfucker. You just be you You know, that's why I wear pink chucks and strong and pretty shirts and shit, you know like I don't have to act like I'm bad Exactly well, you know one's disputing it exactly Some times do Of course who are they are they even real that's the people I'm saying I'm not a doctor for But for the aliens What do you think you had a bad if I if you had a hundred bucks you last hundred bucks It's it's hard. I if I had a hundred bucks and we were gonna find out I'd say I'm leaning more toward just them now. I'm not more to adjust to I wasn't leaning before that interview I wasn't though I wasn't before the documentary that Jeremy core belt documentary Bob Lazar area 51 and flying saucers mmm-hmm before that. I was like mostly bullshit. Is that one? Is that one available? Netflix yeah, it's great. Yeah, I'll check that there's a lot of old Bob Lazar shit too from the George nap interviews where he goes over The details of the craft and he describes it and explains it and How much a fucking new about element 115 in the 1990s? That's that's that's that's one of the big ones that gets me That's one of the big ones that's like that's a big red flag that this dude's real. There's a lot who knows But there's a lot that makes me go mmm. I know we you talk about this all the time But I so fucking wish Sasquatch was real Two man every time an organ or watch the tin I'm walking around I buy all the little like roadside trinkets and shit. I love that shit I wish he was fucking real man. It would be nice, but I think it was not a dead one you would have It's I mean that's that's one of the ones. I'm like 90% sure you gotta give you always gotta give room You always gotta give room for the possibility The thing is a people really believe and then go looking for it They invest so much time and that they start going crazy. Yeah, like survivor man less shroud. Yes It's gone gone gone gone. It's out there in the woods. Yeah. He's got a pup tent waiting for Bigfoot. Not fucking zippers It's weird man. He's a hundred percent believe her now Well, he does that survivor man bigfoot show. He's like what I heard a branch nap Definitely a squash. Yeah, those shows are weird man because those shows have been on TV like surviving Bigfoot or finding Bigfoot rather So finding Bigfoot was on TV fraud what eight fucking years. They never found shit No, like how the fuck do you keep renewing that? I'm gonna breathe underwater the show's called breathing underwater. Can you breathe underwater? Not yet tune in next week next season No, we're gonna try to breathe underwater We should I'll just give us that off season we'll get this talking these scientists they're saying no one to breathe underwater Not yet they don't know shit. Oh, we south Louisiana. We got a guy he breathed underwater If if there was a Bigfoot no one be happier than me. Dude, I'd be right there I just so fucking stoked. I just seen it cage. Yeah, just fucking them That's trying to get out Caged I want to see it like in a in a fucking destiny like the mushrooms trip where he's like walking and singing with him. Oh Jacklax pick a next pick a destiny pick of destiny. I would want to be there I want to want to see it with my own eyes video I'd be like man. I saw 80 foot tall Donald Trump with a Hillary Clinton head Walketh through a post apocalyptic Philadelphia. You can't you can't prove to me that video is real I would shit my pants. I don't know what I would say though if I was in the woods and I was camping and I saw a fucking nine foot tall Garilla I don't know what I would say you wouldn't I mean if you came back I'm not sure you probably have to yeah because you'd be so you feel so stupid Well, plus I mean there's a lot I mean say there is one out there There's a lot of bullshit artists out there telling you they saw some shit You know a lot of people trying to get some camera time They can't be one though if it's gonna be a real thing a living thing that has to be a living population of them Yeah, because primates don't live that long. I don't think there's a primary that lives any older than humans We're just we're just way into the weeds. We know it doesn't exist. It's most like success Yeah, as they like get better and better like using drones and scanning the forest and stuff Yeah, it's getting less and less likely. Yeah. I used to do that as a kid though Like walk out in the woods and like look and hope he was around and hope yeah when I was living in Oregon I was like health Canyon is probably one of the least explored parts of Oregon If he was anywhere he'd be up there, you know well there's some dense Azthic forest in the Pacific Northwest Which is one of the reasons why I think it's so attractive. Yeah because you like you think like man Anything could be in here no one knows like you go outside of Philadelphia or excuse me Seattle when you go into like You know, what is it? What's the mountain out there? What's the Sajama say no one's the one that blew but there's another one that anyway those big ass mountains filled with soup There's the trees are so dense. It's like a box of Q-tips Yeah, just one after the other bang bang bang bang bang and the forest floor is all Pine needles so that nothing would leave a footprint Right and then you look you look what if you saw something 30 yards away It could disappear instantly left right. You wouldn't know where the fuck it is. You'd never find it and it could it could be out there So I think that also leads to this This delusional idea that it might be live right but I think it definitely was a real thing You think back in the day? Yeah, they have that gigantic pithicus. Yeah that they proven was a a real bipedal hominid that existed it as recently as a hundred thousand years ago and in America No, it was in Asia. They found it in a pathicary shop. There was an anthropologist who's in the pathicary Teeth and he was like what the fuck is this and they said we found these and he's like where'd you find these because you recognize that it's Primate teeth and then they they start digging they found jaw bones that were indicative of a bipedal hominid Because of the shape of the jaw bone they could tell the difference between like the way a gorilla's bones are shaped in the way ours are yeah, and they think it was in the orangutan family that it was enormous some of it enormous fucking eight to ten foot tall bipedal ape Yeah, so stories that build and build and yeah, that's that's probably where the the lore and the legend comes from You never seen like a picture of what it looks like I Know I remember you talking about it on here. I don't remember if I saw a picture Yeah, you could find it on Google there's pictures of it Standing next to like a standard, you know like six foot tall man like what I'm a regular sized man would be like standing next to this Giant ass fucking gorilla Really did live it really did live and it lived alongside people while people were real people They know at least a hundred thousand years ago. It was alive. That's that's what it looked like. Oh shit. Yeah That's a depiction of them. This is a few different versions of that. We'll get that other one with the Arm up in the air Jamie and the lower right hand corner. No. No, no, no go go up up Go see those pictures. I see that when you have those little pictures and the little windows below it See them on with his arm up in the air. Yeah, I clicked that one. That's the one That's what it looked like. I should fuck you up I'm like you're just too. Yeah, probably super fast See how it's kind of like a rangutan looking Yeah, they think they think it was kind of a member of the orangutan family looks like my dad But it was a real thing, but it's just funny how like we want those things to be real Yeah, we want mysteries to be real. Yeah. It's part of the reason why you have to really worry Wonder whether or not someone's telling the truth because the desire for something to be real so strong Like UFOs. Yep same thing people want to believe cut so hard to be objective What about with all that stuff? Oh, type of same on here Because like a lot of it he sounds like way more intelligent than I was expecting when I first turned it on I didn't really know much about him What they mean about Africans traveling the world in boats well about them being in America first or about them like giving that technology to Rome I got he said a lot of stuff that like I mean Obviously again, I'm a meathead. I'm right. I'm not like the smartest man on the planet But he's made a lot of sense when we were saying well for sure when people think about Africa They forget about Egypt right and Egypt is one of the most fascinating and absolutely spectacularly advanced civilizations of all time. We have no idea how they built those structures There's all this speculation about the especially like the Great Pyramid Just this is a stunning technological and physical accomplishment that to this day baffles people. Yeah, that's Africa so those people had boats and we don't even know how long mean Graham Hancock believes and so does Robert shock and John Anthony West when he was alive believes that those people were building those things tens of thousands of years ago Yeah, that that is like a spectacularly Creative and innovative society that was most likely wiped out by some sort of global Cataclysm around 12,000 years ago and then everything after that was a rebuilding of past knowledge Right, so it would make sense if they had traveled to South South parts of America And then just basically everything out wiped out and so they're they're working from fresh start in America And then over on this side They don't have the information about that because they all got wiped out well It certainly makes sense if you look at the omics those those giant stone heads It look like African faces. I mean they look exactly like Africans and these are heads that came from thousands and thousands of years ago And a civilization the omics that they know very little about Yeah I felt like I was crazy for thinking he wasn't crazy I'm gonna show you a thing But it's like the the history of humans is something that becomes more it it unveils itself over time and the more they're starting to find new things Like there was something of the There were some ancient castle that they just discovered that used to be underwater That's like 3,500 years old. No, I'm talking about the receding floodwater. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah They felt like what the fuck is this they don't even know what it is so 3,500 years ago long Before Europeans ever came to America these people had built this fucking castle is now underwater You like the sea levels rise and fall. That's it. Yeah. Where is a thing? It's an Iraq. Oh, yeah, it is an Iraq. Yeah So they they found these ancient now Iraq is also where Sumer was that's The the earliest known civilization in terms of the earliest known writing the earliest known agriculture and mathematics That's Sumer that's epic of Gilgamesh all that shit came from that part of the world So there's all sorts of stuff that was probably lost in that You know thousands and thousands of years of history. It's amazing It's so fascinated to be there just like I like this place that I was in in Italy There's a church in Revello. That's a thousand years old and Below the church is a glass floor of the church There's pictures of it on my Instagram. It's a glass floor of the church and below the glass floor is a Another church that's so old. They don't even know when it was built Oh, wow. So it's more that that's it. That's from my my Instagram So that that they have it like blocked off and they put a glass floor over it so you could look down and see it Because they don't want you know people to tread on it and fuck with it But the church itself the just the church that you could walk around in is a thousand years old Right, you know what? And we're working off information that's basically just been since we started writing things down Yeah, we've got this little short time period where we started writing things down I mean acting almost as though that was the beginning of time And you have to take people's word for it. Exactly. Exactly. No pictures. No video. Same thing with the aliens and the Sasquatch There's some things that you want to believe so you throw that in there. Yeah, and The jury was written by the winners exactly so a bunch of lion ass holes are killed everybody Oh, the chair My son loves that song here between that one and we will rock you yeah, we were in a limo yesterday He was like put on we will rock you so I'm cranking. We will rock you my three rolls in the back. They'll boom boom She's so excited. That's awesome. Yeah, that's a that when you think about fucking classic songs man Queen had a gay classic songs that just worldwide to this day that are used at basketball games football games all over the world Yeah, yeah Such a icon. Yeah John Jones came out to we are the champions. Yeah, this was this last one. Yeah, nice I didn't get to see the fights that how did I know John went to Was the split decision Fight man fucking Tiago Santos is dangerous. He hit John with some big shots Fucked his legs up with kicks to the point where John had to be carried out Yeah, when he when he walked out of the octon they were carrying him he couldn't walk his legs were fucked up That guy kicked the shit out of his legs and Tiago blew his knee out somewhere in the first we believe Oh, if you were a kick and blew his ACL out, but never even winced dude You hobbled around on that knee and just kept throwing kicks with it and everything. That's yeah crazy It was an awesome fight you think He fought again. This is I'm not projecting anything. I didn't get to see the fight Did he fight well enough to suffer an extensive damage to left knee? Yeah, I'll for the rest of two thousand Motion full of the Legos the question. I was yeah, do you think you earned another shot? Well, he he definitely did he prove he was worthy. Yeah, he had a split decision what? What's up complete ligaments torn in his left knee? Oh, yeah, there you go. Yeah, I kind of we kind of saw it looking at it Yeah, shows left knee meniscus and all his ligaments are completely torn Wow The meniscus and all the ligaments He's still stood in there for his walking rounds. He needed surgery and his right knee earlier this year Also suffered damage during the fight as he compensated for his left knee. Oh man So he doesn't even know if you might need tests on his right knee as well But you know what the good news is the UFC doctors are at the top of the food chain They'll fill that motherfucker up with stem cells and mm-hmm do everything they can to rebuild some of that inner tissue Good he deserves it if you're gonna stand in there and put it all in the line like that You know give them and his fucking stem cells if they fight again John Jones fucking power doubles him takes him to the ground Yeah, I mean, I think I don't I'm a I was shocked that he didn't do it I saw I read I don't know if it was on his page or I'm the one like MMA junkie or something But he said that he it was pride he didn't want to do that because yeah, it's crazy He's that's John though, but pride almost cost him the title Yeah, like would have Tiago clipped him and dropped him in the third round and then he won that round on all the judges score cards And then he won a decision. Yeah, he almost lost the title We could look crazy. I mean, I don't agree necessarily with the guy who gave it to Tiago I'd have to watch it and see how they thought it and because when you when you're calling a fight I'm trying to be entertaining. I'm looking for patterns, but I'm not really scoring it right to score it I think you have to do in silence right. Yeah, so I'd have to see whether or not I agreed with them But it was definitely close it was definitely interesting and a lot more interesting a lot of people thought a lot of people thought John was gonna blow him out of the wall Yeah, that's what I was expecting I've messed around just like you know like bro like Like pushing him around and stuff like that and he's boy stronger than I would expect how he's strong as fuck Man shit, he took Daniel Carmiade down, you know Yeah, he's a motherfucker dude And I think when he goes up to heavyweight is gonna be even stronger and I think that's probably what's gonna happen next for John Oh, yeah, he'd be fucking should yeah, they're winning steep and The genifining that's out here in August. Oh, yes, that is Yeah, that's an August and that's at Anaheim. Yeah, yeah Oh, man DC and steep A2 that should be very interesting too. I don't even know who to root for because I fucking love steep A Yeah, but like I've got a I Feel like I have to love Daniel because everyone else for no fucking reason doesn't like they do now You think there's more more he's getting my love turned good as he fucking deserves it, you know I mean he's he's a bad motherfucker Especially knocked out steep A with one punch that turned the tide nice good good for him when he beat Anthony Johnson that turned the tide people get it now for a while though. They were like looking at him like he's illegitimate Yeah, that's absurd Hello, welcome to the world of MMA Pettis versus Diaz is on that car to you know over Merrill versus Polo Costa All right brother. What's wrapped this up 33 o'clock? We've been doing this for three hours. Oh, sure Easy yeah time So tell people again when the show is on the history channel we're on Wednesday nights It's it's strongest man in history with me myself and Eddie Hall brown Shawn Nick best You can check me out on Instagram just Robert over over over Beautiful thank you brother. That was awesome man. That's fun. Thank you very much. Bye everybody