the general gonna experience. I feel bad for like this next generation because I don't even think they realize that what's happening with that. It's that addiction to your phone. That's really what I think it's gonna be is eventually we're gonna, everyone's gonna have this sort of opinion and attitude because people are starting to get wind of it that it's bad to be on your phone that much. And I think just parents are gonna just start saying like, yeah, no, you can't be on a fucking cell phone all day, you can't be on it. And I think it comes down to us. I think we have to make a decision to do that with our kids. Yeah, you gotta teach a discipline for sure, but also recognize that everyone is using these things and it's a part of civilization now. I really feel like if we could see the writing on the wall, we would be terrified. I think human beings are, we're slipping into some weird place where we're for sure within the next few years gonna be connected to computers. Oh yeah. How we're gonna do it? I don't know how they're gonna do it. Whether it's something you wear or something that's in you, but it's common kids. And it's almost like all these things are falling in line at the same time. Like all these endocrine disruptors and plastics that are fucking up people's reproductive systems. And then at the same time, we're all getting addicted to phones and not as personal. You know, because people aren't really communicating and hanging out and just talking to each other without checking their phone every five times. The future is gonna be us looking at each other and downloading each other's thoughts. Fuck it. Because you get air drop pictures and shit now. It's literally gonna be like here, take this picture. Just with a fucking thought. And it will 100% is gonna happen. They're already doing shit, right? They're already making devices that can go in your body that connect to other shit. I'm sure, I'm sure it's so much more advanced than we even know. Think about how much we don't know, right? There's gotta be some crazy shit going on out there. For sure. Really unethical shit. Dark Bush shit, let's go with that right now. Hey, what was that thing? I want to see Elon Musk basement. What did he experiment that he has going on right now? It's probably 18 miles deep. Ha ha ha. What is that thing they did where they recorded human thoughts? Like someone was watching something and they got a recording of that from something this person was wearing. I saw it, I saw it. Yeah, brown, that is. That is like, just think Morse code was not that long ago. That was not that long ago. And it seems like technology will just move now with AI. It's just moving faster and faster and faster. It's like, it's really cool, but it's also fucking terrifying. That's the shit that I'm doing. If I fuck asteroid, dude, this shit that we're talking about right now is the shit that keeps me up at night. No, is this it? Scientists record a pink Floyd song from patients brain waves. Yeah, this is it. The tech could eventually allow for communication without words. What? 100% if these eggheads keep going, we're fucked. Oh, yeah, dude. We're going to be doing crazy shit. That's the really like, and then you got to figure like it's going to be who's rich, who has the best computer built into their body, gives the same guy who can afford a fucking Lamborghini is going to have a super brain. And his computer is going to be faster than your computer. He's going to be able to download and upload information faster than you. It's kind of wild. Like, now you're going to have to be an early adopter, right? You would have to be like one of the people who gets the brain operation first. And then you'd be like way ahead of everybody. Yeah, but that first one we're going to look at. It's going to first is going to fuck up. It doesn't the night before the operation. Are you sure this is going to work, Harry? Look me in the eye. You're going to cut it into my brain. Are you sure? I'm pretty sure. I don't want to hear pretty sure, Harry. Yeah, dude. Any dude that's fucking nuts. That's like those people on that, that went on that, you know, the fucking submarine thing. Yeah. It's like, what a cool thing that must have been to like sign up for you. Like, dude, we're going to go to see the Titanic. And then that's fucking wild. That could have been you, Joe. You could have been down on that thing. No. Not a fucking chance in hell. There was a Mr. Beast. He said that they invited him to go do it. I am not hopping in that fucking backyard smoker and dropping to the bottom of the ocean. Would you go to space right now? I'm like one of these charters fucking chance on love space. Those things blow up. You have to go real fast. You go into space, kid. Those things blow up. I'm not interested. Not until they get that shit down like an electric car. When they get a spaceship that moves like a Tesla, just green. Yeah. OK, I'm in. Yeah. Just not worth it. I get it. Look, starry nights are beautiful. I get it. I get it. You'd want to like go out, get real high and come back down. I'm good. You can look and keep that. I trust that it's up there. I don't have to jump at the top of a cliff. I'm good. I'll just sit down and look at it from here. Like, even as high as we get, like what we're calling space, like look, we've made it into space. We're like looking that far off the Earth's surface. Yeah. There's so much out there. Is that what, is that what those tours are? You just go into space for a second. You just go like, come back down. No. You don't like go to space space. You don't want to go land on the moon. I want to check out Mars. You're not going to do it, but Earth. Yeah. Look at Dodge some fucking asteroids. You know what? But they will be able to do probably really soon is to give you a VR representation of what it would do like to travel through space. Oh, I better already exist. I went, I had a, yeah, there was an NASA thing that I had on my Oculus. Yeah, it was good. It was super cool. I mean, it was like, it was just a movie essentially. It wasn't like, I didn't get to like, free move, but it was like I was on like a space station type thing. So you were like moving all over. It was really, really cool. Is this it? No. What is this, Jim? I just looked up space, tripped outer space. It's first and then popped up. Get the fuck out. Joe, you would go and look at it. I'm looking, this is a space elevator, and it's going to fall and everyone. Okay. So you got a little bit of extra. Bro, I am not going in a fucking position. What if it gets hit by an asteroid? This looks like your studio, Joe. Oh my God, it does. I can't hit a balloon. No, no, no, no, no. Geforce. No, listen, you got it, they have to do it a thousand times before I even think about doing it. A six hour journey. No, no, no, no. Six hour journey. See, that's crazy. If it's, bro, I am not going up there. Perfect place. Perfect place to fall to your death. Like how many fucking fail saves? Do you do nothing more dangerous? I'm sure, I'm sure. I'm sure it's safe. Yeah. Do you do anything dangerous? Like a $125. $125,000. $125,000. That was a thousand. Oh, it, what? We're trying to go to positive. So 125 grand to go up in a balloon. Yeah. Well, I hope it works. In six hours, I feel like that's kind of disappointing. If like space should be more than six hours away in a balloon, that was scared of anything that people are trying out like flying cars. I'm like, just try that for a while. But you drive it for a while. I'll get you. I'll be over here. People like this, just the self-driving cars that fucking, like you hear about once in a while, they'll just fucking go haywire. Like mistakes happen. Yes. Mistakes happen. And then you're just in a car that you can't fucking stop and it's like mowing people down. It's a nightmare. I have a Tesla. I never put the self driving on. I mean, I do sometimes on one of the highway just for goofy. You do. I just drive itself. I keep my hands on it. So it completely self drives. Yeah, completely self drives. But to a point, but I don't let it. It's just to me, it's just like, I'd rather just be really tuned into what I'm doing and paying attention. Yeah.