Colonel, thanks for coming back. I wanted to speak to you at Greater Length, given that after our interview last week, a barrage of attacks against you. So, the sound and kindness areas came out and I wanted to give you an opportunity to respond, but also to clarify some of the points that your former employer is making about you, Johnny Moore, who runs your organization, because humanitarian federation was on television this weekend, calling you a liar or suggesting that anyone who criticizes his group as pro-homas, etc., etc. So, I'm just going to go through some of the claims again, too, because you're making some significant statements that will, I think, color people's understanding what's happening in Gossen, so I think it's important to do this. So first, I just want to get to your separation of the army was in January. You left the army in March, if I'm remembering correctly. What did you do right after you left the US Army after 25 years? So, right after my departure from the army, I had no interests in politics or a second career. My interest was being a stay-at-home dad. I applied at Lowe's and I was doing part-time Lowe's Lawning Garden, really enjoyed it. What does that mean? Lowe's Lawning Garden. So working at the Lowe's hardware store in the Lawning Garden section, giving recommendations on weed eaters, what plants to buy. Really? Yeah, I found it very therapeutic. I was not- By the way, I love that. I'm not criticizing it. I was not looking for a life of stress. I was not looking for a life of attention. I have no social media whatsoever. I don't even have LinkedIn for employment purposes. My family and I enjoy a private life because we enjoy our lives together. I'm not really seeking anyone's approval. I'm not seeking clicks or follows or Instagram likes. So, yeah, when I first got out of the army, I was keeping things pretty low-key. I'm spending a lot of time with the family. My wife and I are both- my wife and I are co-den leaders together. My son's cubs' cubs' cub, cub, dad. So we co-den lead for my son's always- always-gov, dad, which is phenomenal. We love it. And just all the things were involved in and after my years in service and the places I've been and the family moments that I've missed in life, I felt that the rest of my life should be committed to being a good father, raising a good family. Because I think that's what- that's the next phase in life for me is contributing to the next generation. And for me, that's my son and the youth. So it's pretty much- pretty much what I was doing. I was not seeking- seeking excitement. So you get out after graduating West Point 25 years in the US Army, Green Beret, Lieutenant Colonel, is your rank when you get out if I'm- Where am I? Yeah, I was a senior- senior-ranking Lieutenant Colonel. And then you wind up working at Lowe's Home and Garden Center. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Definitely your son's voice-gov trip. It's pretty great. But that's not the picture of an activist, I would say. It's the opposite. So how did you wind up going to Gaza? You gave an abbreviated version of the story, but if you could just walk us through exactly how that happened. Sure. And you know what I would like to remind people and especially remind Mr. Johnny Moore is that I did not- I did not work for GHF. It's very hard to actually find any information about GHF. I work specifically for U.G. solutions as a subcontractor for the security component of- of the greater Gaza humanitarian foundation mechanism. Okay. So uh, GHF is Gaza- humanitarian foundation. That's the group about which- it's very hard to find any real information. Very difficult. That is distributing aid in the Gaza Strip. U.G. solutions is the security contractor providing security for them as they do that. Is that correct? So the- the Gaza humanitarian foundation by- by their own accord. They are- they claim to be a- a- a- a nonprofit. Okay. GHF is not really a- a thing in- in function. They have- again, there's so much that's unknown. It's a very shadowy shady type of organization. Underneath GHF is a company called Safe Reach Solutions. They're another private security contracting firm. They're what's called a prime contract. They hold- they're the- they're the- they're for profit. Absolutely for profit. Money making business that has- that's basically the- the- the- the- the contract. Underneath them they have subcontracts almost like building a home. Okay. Got the guy that's building a home. You know, get all your some contracts. Yeah. So the- the refugee solutions is a subcontract. To the building of this of this home. Okay. Specifically providing the armed. Security component and. No one else under the Safe Reach Solutions framework. Is authorized to be armed so anytime you hear anything about. Who may have been shooting. It- it was either within Gaza. It's either the Israeli Defense Force. Or. UG solutions. UG solutions. No, right. One is UG solutions and who owns it and. Where's the based and. So I got a phone call. May 13th. They called me. And they were asking in a weird we're specifically looking for. Recently retired or out of service soft veterans. To to join us on this mission to Gaza to do. The distribution of humanitarian aid. I thought that perhaps this company. Was humanitarian aid focused. I could find very little on the company. But I did see that they were based in North Carolina. Um. I saw that the the founder of the company. Um, they'd his claim to fame was that the you know he was a he was a green. Beret at one point he served as a green. Beret in the United States Army and. Once he got out he he went into some entrepreneurship with a. Post recovery alcohol hangover drink. Um, I don't know what it was called. Um, but it kind of gave me pause to think that. Where's the expertise? Where's the experience? Where's the and I thought OK maybe you know maybe he's a. A country drink company. Uh, energy drink slash. Um, it's. It was advertised as the ultimate hangover beverage for the for the. The soft operator. That you know has a few many drinks the night before can can get ready for the mission. The next day that was kind of his his claim to fame is that. He even in his in his in his biography on the website for this company. He calls himself self titled. I'm not calling him this. This is not me saying it. He calls himself a derelict. So. Um, it just kind of gave me pause that that this is. And I thought OK maybe he's just the you know the owner. You know sometimes the owners don't necessarily. Um, contribute to the mission. But it did give me pause to think. You know how how did all this come together? How did all this? How did all this come together so quickly in the hiring and. Yeah so they called me and the question that I've had many a time that I often ask myself is. Why did you why did you do it then? Yeah that was my next question. Yeah why. Um, and I remember I sat before when they called me I said my answer is not yes. My answer is not no. I'd like to discuss it with my wife and you know just consider the timing and. Um, let me let me get back with you. And when I talked to my wife I told her I said going into this. Full eyes wide open. This is going to be rough. It's probably going to be dangerous because the amount of. Um, just the what I see is like. the lack of experience and planning to this magnitude. This is a seriously complex and seriously complicated. Mission that requires. You know people that have deep experience in this. This is again as I've said this is not a weekend job. This is not a you know let's just go try this out. This requires depth of expertise which was not present. Um, so I talked to my wife about it. My wife said well you know you do. You have been a lot of that so. You can contribute. You can you can help. You can be of value. What I really believed in was. That if the United States. Was going to go into Gaza proclaiming that. Our method is. Going to replace the UN. We're going to we're going to do this now. That I wanted to be a part of what I thought at the time. Was. Truly an American ideal an American you know an ideal of American exceptionalism that America will go in into the breach into danger and will help. That's that's what I really felt like I really felt like. That America was putting a good foot forward in this to say. Like hey we we respect our ally. We don't want to necessarily get involved or criticize the prosecution of the war. But we also realize and recognize a real need. To end the starvation. So I I really felt that being a part of it was something. That was in line with American values. I really wanted to be a part of it. So what does it mean to be safe in your own home for a long time that meant good locks and maybe an alarm system that was enough but they're not enough. And you know that because the news is filled with stories people who thought they were protected and fell victim anyway. Simply safe can help prevent you from becoming the next victim. Instead of just responding after somebody comes into your home and intruder enters simply safe can stop them from ever getting in and the first place is proactive. It doesn't just react. It stops the problem before it starts. Simply safe cameras and live monitoring agents to text suspicious activity and if somebody is lurking around your house agents engage in real time. They activate spotlights and call the cops to get the intruder away from your house and prevent them from coming in. Not all security systems do that. The difference is enormous. That's why our team along with 4 million other people in this country trust simply safe. Monitoring plans start for about a dollar a day. They include a 60 day money back guarantee. Visit simply safe dot com slash Tucker to claim 50% off a new system with professional monitoring in your first month is free. That's simply safe dot com slash Tucker. There is no safe like simply safe. Um, so, uh, cause you managed to re-infendation. I'm going to go through some of the claims they're making. Um, that you were fired. Where you fired? I was not fired. Um, not only was I was I not fired and I've brought some, some points to discuss to kind of lay out the, the pathway to my eventual termination in terms of me. You know, they call contract termination. Um, that I terminated my contract in writing. Um, so in terms of contract termination. Yes, my contract was terminated. I terminated it in writing. So, it essentially yes, you could say that. I quit in protest much like those before me, much like Jake Wood, former director of Gaza humanitarian by a day who stepped down in protest. The second in charge of the entire contract for you, de-solutions who on the 27th of May with a very, long period of time. Um, scathing email to the leadership to the CEO stepped out in protest. The one of the operations directors in the higher level company of safe reach solutions. Um, stepped down in protest. Um, I was not the first and I was not the last. When I did, I, I quit in a way to where I, I wanted to stay involved in the mission. So I had coordinated to work with safe reach solutions in the, the prime contract to specifically be working on the humanitarian assistance team because that would put me in a position to where I could then influence how operations on the sites ran. I would, as the humanitarian assistance team person that had leadership to take charge and to, to plan accordingly. I could be in charge of how rules of engagement, standard operating procedures, distribution process, um, organization and planning. And, and I felt that it was better for me to stay and be involved, then to walk away and, and just leave, you know, leave no one at the wheel. So I, I did terminate my contract in writing on the 13th of June and provided it to the leadership in writing. And so just to be absolutely clear, you are not fired. I was not fired. And, and you, I suppose have the email resigning. Not only do I have the email, you know, I have the email chain. Um, I have the, you know, the, the actual letter itself that I, that I wrote to them. And you know, you can, you can read it yourself, but this was provided in writing. And what I would continue to ask of U.G. solutions and Gaza humanitarian foundation with Johnny Moore, who, you know, if he wants to say that that I am a, a liar, I think that that's, that's the, that's the, your a liar. He has said that I'm a liar. And that's, that's unfortunate because he doesn't know me. Um, I have opinions about him, but I don't know him either. But to say that I'm a liar, I served our country for 25 years in uniform. And what I would say is that, that America made me graduated from the United States military academy at West Point. I served in the army for 25 years, answered the call, not just once twice three, four times, but 12 to fight and battle for the ideals of this nation. So for him to call me a liar, I think that all veterans and all Americans should take pause and think about who's calling me a liar, someone that has spent his entire life self serving with PR firms and selling Bibles and whatever else it is he does on the side. Um, you know, who, who is Johnny Moore? Do you know, have you met him? I have not met him. Um, I, I, I didn't shake his hand and talk to him. I saw him when he came to visit very, very briefly. So what I would call a photo op. Um, so he does not work in Gaza. Oh, absolutely not. He's only, I mean, I think he's only, so what's interesting is that this entire time that this operation's been going on now for, you know, operating since the 26th of May till now. So breaking 70 days. Um, he's only been there one time for a photo op. I find it a Paul. He doesn't work out of Gaza. Absolutely not. He's, he should say we put in three interview requests for Johnny Moore. He's not even an Israel. Oh, so how was he running the Gaza humanitarian foundation from, uh, from his flat in Virginia, I guess. I don't know. I don't know where he lives, but I know that he's, he is not in Israel. He is not in Gaza. He does, he doesn't have an act. So it's what it feels like to me is that the Gaza humanitarian foundation is a side project, resume item for Mr. Johnny Moore. It's not something that he's dedicated to and it's not something that he has the expertise and the acumen to understand how to run. Does he have any background in distributing humanitarian relief, you know, no. And what's important to understand is that going with a missionary organization to somewhere and distributing some meals or providing, you know, religious support, that, that isn't humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance is an operation. It's a very complex operation. People from starving to death is different from it's not just food. It's water, medical veterinarian services to make sure that we're not, we don't have a a rabid animal population. It's, it's so many things that the, the experts within the United Nations that are educated that, that spend their lives to become experts in are very, very, very good at doing. So to think that we can just take that on and do it is, it's a very, it's a very arrogant way of looking at this problem. So Johnny Moore has no background in this. He's not there. I just saw him in her feed on Fox News and he listed you and everyone else who's criticized the operations of the Gauss humanitarian foundation or pro Hamas. Are you pro Hamas? I am not pro Hamas. That's a pretty heavy charge. I mean, Hamas is a designated terror organization. Yes. I mean, that is, that is a heavy charge to lay on somebody from such a, from, from, from an individual that carries such little weight. So, okay. Doesn't sound like the Christian response to criticism to me, but what do I know? Well, I would say, none has appearance on Fox, you know, in just the short time I've been doing this with no PR firm and no, no polished background. I was a soldier and after we have soldier, I worked a blue collar job and I, I call myself a, a husband and a father. I don't call myself a by any other name. Um, since this story has broke from Hollywood to Bollywood, polar bears to penguins, people want this story because it's the truth. Not because of me because the world wants to hear the truth for once. It's interesting though. I mean, the, the forces against you organized immediately and I mean, they had a press conference attacking you. They did during that press conference, which I watched, they didn't respond to a single not one of the allegations you made about their conducting Gauss and not one. said it was a litany of a tax and you so I just want to continue to go through some of them. Absolutely. So the most damaging and from my perspective by far was the fact and they showed the signal messages that had written complimentary texts to the management of the Gaza humanitarian Foundation. At the time you now say you were dissatisfied with their conduct, did you write those texts and if so why? So those text messages that they had captured out of signal snapchats were something called impact statements. Those from me, those weren't to the leadership of GHF nor were they to the leadership of safe reach solutions. Those were specifically to the Americans on contract under UG solutions specifically. That is who I worked for and who I worked for only. The chief operations officer of UG solutions who was forward at the time directed me in writing. I mean directed me in writing to to daily create these impact statements to include a photo and something positive. At that point the contractors were really run down. We were running 24 to 48 hours. There was very little organization and it was keen that everyone was becoming quickly unmotivated. So I was asked so I did send out a picture once from one of the days we were there that was a that was a nice photo of a boy who was happy and I think it's as a leader which I am though I was not in a direct leader position there in the beginning. I was promoted one but leaders don't gripe down. Leaders gripe up as a leader that I make my issues and my complaints and my dissatisfaction absolutely known to the leadership directly in writing and in verbal. Absolutely. But the contractors that are there that are doing everything they can to the best of their ability with a complete lack of information and I will also say that the Gaza humanitarian foundation has set them up for failure with no legal protection. So my position in that was that I want to contribute to the mission and the men and my gripes and my issues are with the leadership. Okay. I was directed to do that. Here's a depressing but true statistic nearly half of American adults they would suffer financial hardship within six months if they lost their primary income owner. That's the telling sign that people are living on the edge. Many of them economies fragile. That's true for millions and millions of people. What do you do about it? Well life insurance is run the best ways to protect yourself from potential hardship. We recommend policy genius to get it. Policy genius plans offer life insurance policy starting at just $276 a year for a million dollars in coverage. It feels complex to buy life insurance. They make it really easy to help you compare different quotes from the markets top insurers so you get the lowest possible price the best deal for your family. Policy genius lays out all of your options really clearly coverage amounts prices terms. No guesswork at all. It's all very clear. They handle the questions. They handle the paperwork. They advocate for you throughout the process. So if you don't have life insurance because it seems too complex, they are the answer. Your family's future could be guaranteed to a great extent with policy genius. Go to policy genius.com slash chakra to compare free life insurance quotes from top companies see how much you could save and to what extent you could protect your family policy genius.com slash Tucker. You're saying that the text that they waved around at the press conference and the Johnny Moore. Those are signal chats. Signal chats. Those were messages of encouragement to your men not to the leadership of either organizations. I did not have any authorization or nor did I have the capacity to send anything up and out. I had no contact information other than our signal chat groups for UG solutions. I had no communication with anyone above that. My communications went to the men. They did go up to GHF from the COO of UG solutions. He would send them up, but they did not come from me. Okay. So you're not your positions. You were not recommending the conduct of the Gaussian humanitarian foundation. You were saying to the guys providing security for this. But I did operation that they're doing their best. Keep going guys. And for the most part, the 277 up to 314 men on contract. And I say men because they all are men. There were no females on the contract. No women on the contract. So I use that term specifically. But the men on the contract majority are veterans, combat veterans. And they felt that they were doing the right thing. The lack of leadership and guidance is what has led to where we are now. In fact, not just a lack of guidance, but the guidance of do what the IDF do. So not the lack of guidance, but the giving of just completely unethical and immoral guidance. That's not how the United States, we don't follow other people's lead. We set the standard. So that raises the question that I'm going to ask you in just a moment, which is like who's working for whom here and where's the money come from? But first, let me get to one last criticism of you, which was that you weren't even in the field very often. That's what they're claiming. Yeah. And you know, that's that's both disappointing and surprising because every photo that they put in that PowerPoint to show different things are pictures that that I took on location. I was on a distribution site in Gaza. Every day, 24th of May, Mid SDS one and I brought these three. You can see you can see you can look at them there. Every single day is a photo of me or a photo taken by me that the Gaza humanitarian foundation then used in their public releases. You took all these pictures. All of the photos that the Gaza humanitarian foundation released publicly until the 13th of June were taken by me. Okay. Well, I guess pretty much proves your point, doesn't it? I was not only there. I was there when others were not. Case in point, we had and you may have found this story amusing. We had 30 Palestinian volunteers local workers. So Palestinians that that work with us on the sites in a lot of the photos. They're the ones that you see with the blue vests and they were there to work with us to help with communication, to help, you know, they're from the local population, to help with the crowd as much as they could. And they were brought onto the location, but GHF and SRS hadn't budgeted the money to feed them. So for a foundation that's supposed to be feeding people, thus far they've proven that they can't even feed their own employees. So myself and one of the humanitarian team workers who works for SRS, there was nothing else we could do because it was Shabbat and everything was closed in Israel. The only thing open was Domino's Pizza. So we ordered 32 Domino's Pizza's from where there's a Domino's in Gaza in Israel. Oh, and the Israeli side. And we went to go pick them up and then with an armored vehicle with armored personnel, myself and two others armed. We delivered Domino's Pizza to security distribution site one so that the local, the local gos and workers or the local Palestinian workers could eat that night because GHF and SRS had no plan in place to feed our local Palestinian workforce. We delivered them pizza. I would also like to add that we did it in less than 30 minutes. Okay, tip two. So it sounds, so I think to my satisfaction, you've batted down the three main claims they made against you, but those are not the only claims. I don't know if Gaza, humanitarian, and Phidish and Johnny Moore are saying this directly, but your family's been attacked. Yes, stentively. Yes, since you told your story, where's that coming from and what's your reaction to it? I think that there's a lot of, so a lot of attacks or hate against my service record that you honorably discharged. Not only was I honorably discharged, I was honorably discharged under what's called a 100% combat related special compensation, which is rare. So in the military, when you retire, there's the VA process, separate process. Everybody can apply to that. Through the military, through DOD, there's the combat related special compensation process to where if what you've endured is directly as a result of combat, you can have a further special compensation to where not only am I a 100% totally and permanently disabled US Army veteran honorably discharged with honors. The Army has also credentialed me with 100% combat related special compensation, meaning that my injuries and wounds afford me to where none of my income is taxed because of the sacrifice I made for this country. And you were commended and awarded a medal for Brave or at least one. So what are the, what's the criticism exactly for service record? So what I think is, well, so individuals have who think that they know me, who don't. Again, all of these people that have attacked my family and I, we think it's, we find it amusing because they all do it from behind a keyboard, from behind some Twitter handle. No one's come on the record. Here I am on the record. My name, my reputation, my life. You can find me on the internet. I'm here. Here I am on the record. My name, my reputation, my life. You can find me on the internet. I'm here. But people that choose to attack me do it behind a pseudonym or behind their keyboard. If America thinks that that that anybody should trust that, I don't think I don't think most Americans do. And the attacks I've had is that oh, well, of course, he's never seen anything that brutal before because he, well, he was SF, he never saw combat. He didn't command a special force as company. And what I would like to say to people out there that think otherwise, not only did I command a special force as company in third special forces group, first battalion. I was also the battalion executive officer and deployed that entire battalion to combat. I was then offered a second command to command the United States Army Survival of Asian Residence in a scape school. So not only did I command and special forces operational combat unit, I also commanded the United States Army's seer school at Fort Breck. So for anybody that wants to say that, well, he commanded here and didn't command that, you can you can FOIA my DD 214 and you can read it. I don't I'm a little confused though. What exactly did you do wrong? Why and they attacked your marriage? They attacked your wife. Yeah, your service record. There's no evidence that any of its true. I've looked into all of it. It's their lies. At least that's my conclusion. But what exactly is your crime? What did you do wrong? So people would, you know, the in the United States Army to make it to the rank of lieutenant colonel. You know, people talk about colonel general officer. Those are all nominative. Those are like icing on the cake. The golden, the golden pen, the golden watch, if you will, is 05, the 10 of colonel command select, battalion command. And I commanded a battalion, an operational battalion that deployed. For people to say that, oh, well, he commanded a this battalion instead of that battalion from coming from people that have never commanded these individuals that that bashed me online, never held a command in their entire lives. Well, why they bashed you in the first place? I don't understand. So here's the story you just told, you get out long lifetime, 25 years, distinguished career, highest level. And then you work it Lowe's home and garden center and run a cub scout troop. And then you decide you're going to go over and try and pass out food, disturbing people. And then you decide what they're doing is moral and you say so. I mean, those all seem like the right thing to do. I don't really know where's your crime exactly is you criticize the behavior of a company that's serving a foreign government. And that makes you a criminal or like, why are you being attacked? I don't really get it. I think that the the criticism of something that is very lucrative when it comes to money. So I would pretend, though I have no proof because I have no way of knowing this. I don't even I don't even know. I haven't even I haven't even seen the posts myself. And to be quite honest, they're their clowns. My family members have looked at them and they're all under, I think one guy calls himself Greenberry nap time. Oh yeah, I'm really going to lose sleep over with that guy. Thanks to me. So the it part of it is ignorance. People who haven't been there think they know because of what they heard from their buddies who also haven't been there. To the men that are there, mark my words because I have lived it when they come home and the adrenaline wears off and the $1,380 a day stops and life goes back to normal. And you have to look at your children and you have to look at your wife and you have to look at yourself in the mirror. It's going to come to you. And when that day comes, you're going to want to tell the truth. I've seen it. I was on site with these men where they see things and they're like, what are we doing? That's not right. That shouldn't be. And they, it's easy to ignore it when you're in Gaza where seemingly people don't care where you can report 30 deaths outside of a distribution site and have Johnny Moore say it didn't happen and get away with it. It's it's criminal. Well, here's the story you probably haven't heard a lot about. The Chinese mafia is exploiting rural America to create a drug empire. This is not available on cable news. The network's not telling you about this, but it's totally real. Communist affiliated drug gangs just drawing parts of the United States, the parts that Washington ignores, to sell drugs, laundering money and building a black market network inside this country's most beautiful but least served areas. We've got a a brand new documentary on this. It's called High Crimes, the Chinese mafia takeover of rural America. It's available now on Tucker Carlson.com. It's excellent. The purchase of churches and schools to aid the operation, the cherry rigging of power boxes to steal electricity for in pesticides, collusion with the Mexican cartels. It's it's unbelievable. By the way, one of the drug houses is like walking distance from my house. I didn't know that. It's a layered and fascinating story. To Tucker Carlson.com to watch now, we think you'll love it. Johnny Moore said it didn't happen. Johnny Moore is seemed to deflect every instance of, and again, what I find interesting is that the people that are coming out and speaking to the atrocities aren't Hamas, doctors, surgeons, Americans. Johnny Moore says they're pro-homos. Oh yeah, anybody, anybody that has anything critical to say of the Gaza humanitarian Foundation automatically becomes labeled by Mr. Johnny Moore as Hamas. And that is dangerous. This is not the 1950s where, you know, I'm a patriotic American. Well, didn't you spend like decades fighting radical Islam with a rifle? Spend decades fighting radical Islam from grassroots to long entrenched radical Islam in the Islamic liberation front in Southeast Asia. Even, you know, new radical Islam in the Middle East is a different flavor than the old and transgrass routes radical Islam in Southeast Asia. And I have been a part of both. So how does it feel to be written off as a Hamas supporter? Me? Yeah. If it came from anybody that I held to be credible, maybe I would care. But I mean, who, who is Johnny Moore, I mean, I think it's, I think yesterday when he was on Fox, it was, it made my heart warm that you could hear outside of the Fox studio the protesting. In fact, the host said, we have some people outside exercising their, their constitutional rights. And yes, continue the protest, go to his house and protest because he is lying to the American people. And it's really sad. So if Mr. Johnny Moore wants to call me Hamas or call me a name or say that I don't know what I'm doing or say that that that I'm a liar, it matters not to me because the American people know better. Where's show us your books, Johnny show us where the money comes from? So what do you know? I know you made it clear that you didn't work for Gaza humanitarian foundation, but you worked providing security for them. Yes. A couple of different layers. But where does their money come from? I don't know. And what's, what's appalling to me is that that exact same question you asked her is the same question that every member of Congress that I spoke to over the last two weeks has asked me. They, I mean, you've made the point with, and you did the math on it that they are not feeding the population from Gaza despite what they say. And they can't because they don't have distribution centers. They've got three work in distribution centers in a country of over 2 million people. So that just doesn't make any sense. But they are bringing in truck, truckloads of food. Who's paying for that? I mean, there's money here. Right? There's money. There's a lot of it. And there's no indication of where it's coming from at all. No indication. The only indication anyone has to include, again, not just lonely old peon me, but Congress. Our United States Congress has no idea where the Gaza humanitarian Foundation's money comes from other than the 30 million that came to the State Department last month. Who do they work for? Do we know? Don't know. So, I mean, Gaza's control with the Israeli military. In fact, the prime minister of Israel just announced 20 minutes ago that the Israeli military is going to occupy all of Gaza. So they must work for the IDF. I mean, I can't. Do you think that they do? So from in terms of the Gaza humanitarian Foundation at that level, that high level, I can't say, I would think that there's probably a higher entity now safe reach solutions, which is the actual contract mechanism, like the actual, the execution of the contract does answer to and the client is the IDF. And that was told directly to me, looking at me in my face by the other contract that provides security or everything else as well. For SRS. Yeah. So SRS, one of the subcontractors is U.G. solutions for security. One of the some contractors is another company called Arkel at Louisiana. It's very hard to find anything about them. They provide the trucking and the driving. And then there's another company called LMCC underneath SRS that's an Israeli company that provides the construction materials for the sites. Okay. So safe reach solutions is the contractor that handles like all the details for passing out aid from building the facilities to providing men with guns to protect them. SRS is what most people would think GHF would be doing. Right. Exactly. Yes, okay. So and they work for the IDF. Yes, sir. Okay. So this is an IDF operation. I mean, the way I would describe it is that the United States is providing a humanitarian assistance mechanism that is not providing food and more water nor assistance. That what I would call is an appendage of the Israeli defense force. So if you consider the combat operations that have been going on in southern Gaza, in any combat operation, you have you have an offensive force and you have a sustainment force. You have a shaping force. If the active combat activated combat reserve units in the south are the combat component conducting offensive operations. SRS thereby Gaza humanitarian foundation, I would call shaping operation number one. Just place the population, move the population, allow for phase two, the ending of operation Gideon's chariots that just ended last night. That started when we got there. Like the day after we got into control was the purpose of that operation to clear the entire central portion of the enclave of Gaza. Yes, from from what's called the morog corridor, which runs east to west, just north of the sites through Rafa, Moassi, Kongunis, Burish up to the Nessa, Remcordor. So yeah, that so that is that was the objective of operation Gideon's chariots, which as of last night came to an end, highly criticized because they didn't accomplish that task entirely. But now they're shifting into the next phase, which from a military perspective, if you are trying to absolutely destroy a nation, that's exactly what you would do. You you conduct wide area security, you conduct offensive operations, you establish control, and then you occupy. And that's what they're doing. What's happening, Gaza is often described as a war and you said you heard and saw small arms fire mortars or tillary barrages, but they were all coming from the IDF. Did you see counterfire? Were they fighting against an armed enemy? Was it actually a war? Did you ever see any Palestinians committing acts of violence when you were there in all the days that I was there? And again, GHF who again, their lawyers and their press personnel have gone there for some photo shoots. I've been to every site. I've seen the idea around every location. I've seen the idea of operational graphics and array of their battle forces. I've seen it with my own eyes. I have never in the entire time that I was there at every site seen an armed Palestinian. Not one, not one. So the artillery, the mortars, the small arms, I mean, these were they were not defending themselves. No, sir, there was the idea of you again, I'd like to clarify in terms of the the position that the IDF is in, the Israeli Defense Forces, the position that they've been put in in the South is untenable, operationally unsound. And they, they shouldn't be to have active and I put that on GHF because when the IDF said, here are these sites, we put them in operational combat zones. That's why Jake would step down. Jake would on the 26th of May, day one, cut the ribbon, yellow, shut or golden shovel. Here we go. It's supposed to give us a big pep talk. He stepped down. And who is he exactly? Jake would was the previous Johnny Moore, if you will. He was the guy in charge of the Gaza humanitarian foundation that as soon as this thing kicked off, we're going live. He stepped down and then members explained why he stepped down. I have not, I've never met the man. I don't know much about him. Other than when we were about to kick the whole thing off, there was going to be this, you know, kind of this pep talk, you know, great, you know, go forth and do great things. And then it was a, hey, pep talks canceled because he stepped down. It was kind of, it left kind of us, uh, kind of a lot of us just thinking, what is this? So this all starts. You were there from the very beginning. There are almost 300, all over 300 American contractors providing security. When you start to see the Israeli military shooting unarmed people, including children, does anyone talk about this at night? Like, I can't believe what we're watching. Yes. And in fact, um, in some of the videos that have been taken that I've taken, and I think it's another interesting story to go down to, you know, how the the videos got released because you G solutions released them themselves, which was ironic, but in one of those videos, um, I'm walking. And one of the other contractors with me says, it shouldn't be this way. It didn't have to be this way. We didn't need to do this. And what he's talking about is the fact that the, the Palestinian crowd was calm and controlled. And they were leading. Yeah, what's wrong? I just, I didn't want it to get set up. I know, I know when you're trying to push thousands of people through a very small exit. It doesn't happen quickly. So as they're leaving, you G solutions personnel following the lead of the, that's what the idea of do, spraying with pepper spray, stun grenades, warning shots. Um, this contractor, he's walking next to me, and he says clearly it's in the conversation of the video. It shouldn't be this way. We shouldn't be doing this. It didn't have to be this way. And I said, and I say to him in the video, like, you know, because he was, he was one of the leaders of the mobile team. He wasn't in charge on site. So he was just a, he didn't have the authority. But I was like, hey, you did it. He did a very good job of maintaining his composure. And I said, Hey, you did a good job. This isn't on you. You know, we did, you did what you could. But people recognize it. And people are coming forward. There, there are a number of at least close to a dozen now of other contractors that have either come out off the record and some that will soon that are multiple coming, coming on the record. So the Gaussian mandatory and foundation and safe, free solutions and U.G. solutions, they can, they can bash me, bury me, make fun of me. All they want doesn't bother me. Got to know, I've got skin in this game. But what they think bothers me not others are coming behind me is GHF going to call everybody a liar. Are they going to call everybody a disgruntled employee? Was that disgruntled? Everybody a Hamas support everybody's a Hamas supporter. All of these American veterans that raised their right hand to serve our country and uniform for decades when Johnny Moore didn't serve his country a day. He's going to call us all mass. He's going to call us all liars. We're all disgruntled employees. So put that on me. Put it all on me. I support Hamas. Say it. I'm a horrible employee. I didn't perform. Say, say you're worst because those that are coming behind me, you're going to say that about them too. You can't and the truth is coming. What did you think of the idea? Did you deal with them when you were there? I did. The Israeli Defense Forces in the that were specifically activated to conduct operations in the South, in Gaza were reserves. Reserves called forth. Rapidly. So there wasn't a lot of training almost none. I think they probably got even less training than the U.G. Solutions guys did before they went in. And that's pretty abhorrent. Not disciplined. Not professional soldiers. It's not what they do. Not impressed with their proficiency and performance because granted as a reserve force that's called up and immediately put into combat. When the United States calls up reserve forces, we put them through an extensive preparation for sure. Absolutely. They're, you know, because it's not their profession. These soldiers didn't get that. And they were thrown into the fire. Throwing into the fire by the Israeli government into a precarious, untenable situation that no army should have to deal with. You should not put food distribution sites in an active combat What did, I mean, were there officers aware of the fact that they were shooting kids? I believe that they were, they were all aware. And I think that on the, at the lower level, and it's starting to come out now. They're, they're have every day. There are more and more IDF soldiers that are returning home again. As I said, when these contractors come home and the adrenaline's gone and you're not living and you're not in the situation anymore and you have to look yourself in the mirror. And those things come back to you that we shouldn't have done that. We shouldn't have allowed that. Same thing that's happening with these IDF soldiers. They're reservists. They're in there for 90 days. They come home. Almost like clockwork as they come out of that feet as they come out of the field and they decompress. They have to look at themselves in the mirror. When you're in there and you're in war and the fog and friction of war alter your compass, alter your, your azimuth you your moral compass. And when you step back into society where there's expectations of civilization and that moral compass straightens up again, there's a lot to answer for. It's happening. A lot of the IDF that are there that are serving are coming out and saying like yes, we were ordered to shoot the children. We were ordered to shoot by their officers, by their officers, by their units. You mentioned a few, a food distribution site where there were 30 dead bodies. That was, um, it was 20 20. Yes, that was secure distribution site number three on the 16th of July. How do you kill 20 people? Was there like a revolt of the people? Do they go after the IDF or how does that happen? So a lot of people. I was not physically there. However, what what GHF put out in their press release was that it was a stampede. It wasn't away from the site. It wasn't near the site. It was on the site. It was smack dab in the middle of the distribution site where, where starving human beings are collecting food. It was a stampede that stampede killed 20 people. Now they say that one was stabbed. I've never seen any documentation of that, but 20 were killed. So if you fire live am, was there live ammo being fired? Absolutely. As quote them again, the even the lawyer for U.G. solutions who spoke against me said that. Aguilar is a liar. Though our forces may shoot warning shots at their feet and over their heads, we don't shoot at them. Well, thank you, Mr. Contract attorney for admitting to a war crime on the record because shooting at an unarmed population, targeting shooting at them, shooting in their direction intentionally to control them, is specifically prohibited in the protocols that didn't even come in. So thank you, Mr. attorney for putting that on the record. When people get shots of death or trampled at a distribution site, what happens to the bodies? Does Gossip humanitarian for the nation bury the bodies? Oh, no. No, Gossip humanitarian foundation, safe for solutions. U.G. solutions, we don't have anything to do with it. The idea will come in, collect up the bodies and or or the idea will allow the international Red Cross Red Crescent to come in and take the bodies in this case from site number three to the El Nasser Hospital. And what I find interesting in that very instance, that same day, July 16, 20 people killed on site three. GHF even put it in a release, sadly to report that 20 Palestinians or 20 civilians were killed on site. Hamas did it. Hamas started the stampede. But then when the hospitals, when the surgeons and Nasser hospital said, we received 30 dead bodies from or excuse me, 20 20 dead bodies from this site, IDF and GHF said they're lying. You just you just said that 20 people were killed on your site. Now the doctors are coming forward and saying yes, we did receive 20 trampled dead bodies. Now you're saying they didn't. How did Hamas kill a trample with people to death? The claim is that on site number three that day, Hamas incited a stampede. How that is absolutely ludicrous. Site number three on the 28th of May, site number three had a very similar situation. Stampede site number three is each site's kind of got its own flavor, if you will. Each site's kind of like its own it's own arena. Site number three, because it's right in the middle between site number two and an IDF base, it's very cannibalized when the foot traffic from the maraud corridor comes south into the site. It's very congested. It's very tight. The exit is very tight and the exit is also very constrained with debris, just mounds of rubble. So when the people are leaving, there's really nowhere for them to go except continuing to be pushed through this small exit. It is the perfect setting for a stampede of human beings. It's it's if it was created for that on the on on the 28th of May site number throttle neck. It is a bottleneck surrounded by razor wire and surrounded by fighting positions where IDF have machine guns and they're firing live rounds, firing live rounds. When you hear UG solutions or anyone talk about a quote-unquote warning shot, there's no such thing as a warning shot. I've never heard of that before. What does that mean? The United States military doesn't use it because firing a bullet is firing a bullet. Escalation of force would be for an example if I was in Baghdad as a combatant. Natural under title 10 authority under the United States Constitution fighting as a as a belligerent in war. I can't just walk into somebody and be like, oh, that looks like al-Qaeda. I'm going to shoot them. There's to be a threat. And the process of that threat to where unless you are engaged in active combat, you feel a threat. It's typically you you have signage like they don't go past this point, right? Then you shout show and then you shoot. And when you shoot, you shoot to kill. You're not shooting a warning shot. Warning shot is such a misnomer. It's not a bullets are these five five six rounds. They are not only five five six rounds. They're a five five six M8 55 green tips steel core armor piercing rounds. So what's the lethal distance of around like that fired flat? Like how far does it travel? Oh, well, considering like if I was on an M4 range, you know, I'm shooting for qualification. I'm shooting out to to 300 meters at the furthest pop up target. Maximum like maximum effective range of with that M4 is out to 500, but out to 800 to 1000 in terms of where the bolt travels with its velocity. So I'm saying yeah very far. So if you're firing thousands of rounds, yes, you're going to be frying over people's heads like where those bullets go, where those bullets going. So and what's the answer when you G solution says we fire towards the sea. The sea's a big place. And you know what? The sea crashes into beach. And you know what's along that beach on the coastal road in Gaza hundreds of thousands of civilians. So when you G solution says that our men fire into the air towards the beach, well, thank you again, Mr. Attorney for just verifying to the world that you are shooting bullets into a crowd of unarmed civilians because what lines the entire coast from north to south of the Mediterranean Sea in Gaza, thousands of human beings. Have you ever I mean you had 12 deployments? So have you ever seen anything like that anywhere else? I have never experienced witnessed been a part of anything that was that uncontrolled, undisciplined barbaric immature. And what I would call just a reckless use reckless endangerment. We are not dealing with, we're not. First of all, UGS contractors in Gaza are not belligerent combatants. We're there in a tourist visa tourists. And we have no way to fire them. Fully automatic firearm. Where'd where'd you get the gun? UG solutions provided them to us from an Israeli company called IWI. It's a very, it's an Israeli company that makes this weapon. All of our weapons, our shotguns, our pistols, our machine guns, our fully automatic rifles all came from IWI. So you land on a tourist visa and they hand you an automatic rifle. And we didn't qualify it or not either. Really? We did not qualify on our weapon system, which was a requirement in the contract, which is why I brought this up as a point because zeroing your weapon, as you know, you calibrate the weapon to you. Of course, qualifying is a whole other stage. Once you zero the weapon and it's calibrated to you, you demonstrate your proficiency. Can I use this? It's even the most elite of military forces, zero and qualify on any weapon that they use immediately immediately. It's the first thing you do. In fact, the contract itself, the contract even states that we must demonstrate proficiency and qualify on our weapon before we go in the Gaza. No one, not one person, no one qualified on their weapon system. These handed you a rifle and they handed us rifles, pistols and machine guns of which we didn't qualify on any of them. Had you operated those specific weapons before? No, I mean, very few people. I mean, maybe there are a couple guys that are that are enthusiast within, you know, that have rifles that may have an IWI rifle. I'd never heard of it. I don't own one, but no. Oh, these are actually manufactured by IWI. manufactured. No, not just given to us by IWI. These are IWI rifles made in Israel right off the But no, these are actually manufactured by IWI. Manufactured, not just given to us by IWI. These are IWI rifles made in Israel right off the right. Was you never operated that kind of rifle before? I would say the majority very, very, very, very few if any of the contractors had ever operated that weapon. I had never even seen one. I wasn't even aware of what I did with you. Gave it to me. And when I, when they first handed it to me and I looked at it and the options were safe, single, fully automatic. I was like, whoa, this is a, this is serious. Not even the United States Army infantry gives weapons that are fully automatic. For humanitarian assistance loaded, they give you ammunition as well. 210 rounds of M855 green tip steel core armor penetrating ammunition. What? Why green tip ammo? You know, I really, I really don't, well, again, the Israelis gave us that. But was there, is there a reason? You wouldn't give someone that type of ammunition in a very close, condensed space like that unless you either had no regard for human life, civilian human life, or you were intentionally trying to kill civilians at that distance. When we were given that ammunition, I thought it was absurd. I was like, I thought we were going in to Gaza to deliver humanitarian aid and we had a a weapon only only to defend ourselves against an imminent threat of death. Meaning, I don't pull that trigger, not a warning shot, not a celebratory shot. I do not pull that trigger unless I am directly threatened with the imminent threat of death. So why are you giving me steel core armor penetrating? I wouldn't say I'm repuricing, but armor penetrating ammunition that can shoot through sand berms like knife, like a hot knife through butter. What are we doing? Well, that's what, that's what the IDF gave us. That's what we're going to use. I'm like, yeah, but aren't we paying for it? Part of the contract, right? We're paying for it. Can't we dictate what we buy? Well, this is all they have. And I'm like, that's not true. That's, I'm, that's entirely not true. So you passed out food. Your job was to provide security insights, whether they're passing out food, but you have said that they didn't pass out water because it was too expensive. How, how does that work exactly? Is there a lot of water in Gaza? And so you're passing out requires water to cook it, right? It was like dried beans and corns and stuff. Yeah, it's kind of like your kid turned 16 and they walk outside and you got the big bow on the Pontiac and it's like happy birthday and you give them the keys and it's got no gas in it. Real jerk move, right? So to give people food that requires water to cook it and then give them no water. And in order to get to the food, they have to walk 8 kilometers and then walk 8 kilometers back to their house to cook it and you give them no water. It's, it's so inhumane and evil that it can only be deliberate. Is there a lot of water in Gaza? There's none. I mean, other than cisterns from rain water, remnants of old wells that that may be still operating at a very low level, but in terms of municipal type of water, freshwater, tap water, absolutely not. So how do I mean, is anyone else bringing water into Gaza? No. No water. No. That's why if you saw in the news today, just today and this is not just in Western media, this isn't Israeli news and 12 channel 13. I watch all these Israeli news breaking news on my phone. I'm just into it now. And the new or the now realized danger is that they're, they're critically low and running out of water, which should not surprise anybody. How would they be getting it? We're not the Gaza human terrain foundation isn't providing any. Did you bring this up? We brought this up on the very first day and not just myself, other contractors, other people that have a conscience that were like, okay, I see this child or this woman breaking into a box of food and it's all dried goods, no prepared goods, all dried goods that require water to make. They require effort to make. There's no water and we asked that and we were told, well, the idea of said no to water. Well, who's in charge here? I mean, I thought we were doing the humanitarian aid. Well, we are, but we're not going to push back on it because water would be three times more expensive per truckload than we can bring in equal to that of three trucks of food and more food is better than what than then limiting that for water. And like, I think a someone that was actually educated and humanitarian assistance and providing humanitarian aid and someone that was a nutritionist that was well versed in feeding people would probably disagree I would disagree with that water in the United States Army. If you're in the field and conducting combat operations, I mean, not having water is a sin. You'll go without water. So us providing no water for food that has to be cooked with water is almost like a slap in the face. It's dehumanizing. Where is Johnny Moore addressed this? No, because Johnny Moore won't answer any questions and to be fair I don't think he doesn't answer it because he's a bad guy. I think he doesn't answer it because he doesn't know. He knows nothing. I'd be willing to take, I think it's a very charitable view when I heard him suggest that anyone who criticizes him and his quote, life saving work is working for Hamas. That's why I began to wonder if he was really a good guy because good people don't immediately deflect in that way and accuse their critics of working for a terror group. There are legitimate questions. You don't have to be a Hamas sympathizer to ask. Yeah, I think that's delivering enough war. I think that's very inflammatory and mumbastic to think that that that anyone that would speak out against seeing travesty and dehumanization is automatically labeled as Hamas because you don't agree with his perception. Especially if he's an American army colonel from San Antonio who spent 25 years fighting radical Islam. I think it's a little mis-wife served in the military. We've been served in the military. Yeah. That's so, I don't, I think that others can judge whether Johnny Moore is a good guy, but I don't think he gets the presumption of good kindness after he says something like that. That'd be my position on that. I try to give everybody the benefit of the doubt. I think, and bless you for it. Never met him. So you brought this up, but they said it's too expensive. And the IDF doesn't want the gossins to have water, so no water for them. Yeah. Again, when there wasn't a cooperative discourse with the IDF in terms of how many trucks, how much food, which sites, which times it was directed and there was no conversation. It was, you will deliver to this site during these times, these many trucks, you will distribute this much at this time. And that is it. So the IDF is totally in charge. It sounds operationally. The IDF gets the dictate when we go in because they control access into Gaza. So when all of our trucks get loaded, we can't go into Gaza proper from carrying shalom until the IDF say it's okay. Sometimes they don't let us in. You worked with the IDF on and off over your career because what did you think of the IDF when you're in the army? Overall, as holistically, not impressed. Now, there are some units within the IDF, within the Israeli Defense Force and within the Israeli Ministry of Defense that are good. Yes. Professional. Good. That's the best. Famous. Rit large. Not impressed. Interesting. And not because necessarily that they're bad soldiers, it's leadership, poor training, poor equipment, this idea that, and part of it is that when you think about the Israeli Defense Force, they're not, the Israeli military structure doesn't call themselves an army or a Navy or an air force. They're Israeli Defense Force. They defend Israel. Yes. They're not expeditionary. They're not like the United States army that has to train, to fight wars overseas. They defend within. And for the most part, they're fighting an enemy. Now at this point, that our women and children and old men, it's not hard to defeat and annihilate an enemy when you're enemy, the majority of them are under the age of 15. It's easy to shoot kids. It's, it's, it's, it's almost you have to have a sense of cognitive dissonance to do it. You almost have to separate yourself from the situation, which is why I've said many of these contractors, if they have a conscience, which I think many of them do because they've served in the military and they know what right and wrong looks like. And in the idea of that, when that separation of that cognitive dissonance between your morals and what you're doing comes back to you as a human, it hits hard. And in the coming days and weeks, as this operation, as operation Gideon's chariots has ended, and the Israeli army has to refit into this restructuring for occupation, which is a whole new ball game. Occupational army, you at US army, World War II, US army post invasion of Iraq, that's when things get really nasty. That's when things get really gray. We think that things are complicated and complex now. Wait until you put an occupation army under the streets of Gaza City. If, if you don't mind fleshing out the difference between what's going on now and a, formal occupation. So right now in the south, so consider if you're a, a combat force, infantry, armor tanks or tillery, you're maneuvering, you're maneuvering against an enemy or not. In this case, I didn't see many enemy out there and see any enemy out there. When you were an army of occupation, you then become static. You become routine. You become identifiable. That's when counterinsurgency often resonates the most is that so right now, if I were Hamas, while the active war is going on, the offensive, I'm laying low. I'm hiding, I'm not going to kill. When the occupation begins, that's when the, the, the insurgency presents itself in armed violence. If that's when you have permanent bases, it's going to get violent and it's going to deadly and is the, well, more deadly. And if the United States doesn't set a firm tone of what's acceptable and what's not no longer can we have this idea of do what you will and we'll just kind of we'll play back up. No, we cannot. The president of the United States needs to set clear firm expectations and boundaries with our ally because this occupation, two things will happen. One, it's going to become extremely violent, grotesquely violent. Markovatanks being blown up on the Salahadin road going into Gaza. The Israelis won't like it. But then also, when forces begin to go into Gaza city and people, other people start to see the amount of starvation and destitute and destruction, it's going to bring the world to its knees. And it's not going to be a year from now. It's not going to be months from now, days from now. When the rest of the world sees what Gaza looks like is that what you're saying? Yes, because if you consider, um, so the Spaniards, the Jordanians and the French have each gone in and dropped air drop. Air drop is ineffective because each aircraft you see flying over, pushing out bundles. That's only the equivalent of half of one truck. It's not much at all. Half of one truck only feeds a 100 people, one meal not to consider what hits the ground and explodes. Most of it doesn't make it to the ground safely. So those air drops were for show for the first time in a long time. Others besides the Israeli Defense Force Air Force have seen what Gaza looks like from above. And these Israeli government specifically said no media in the aircraft. But some of the crew on those aircraft, the Spaniards, the French, the the Jordanians, saw that and went back to their governments and were like, this is beyond words. And I can attest to that. Just from the air, it was obvious to them the devastation. So when, um, when they're conducting, um, equipment drops in this case, food pallet drops, I mean, it's at a lower altitude. It's not like it's from, you know, it's not like from 10,000 feet in the air. It's from a lower altitude, which you get a pretty good view of the ground of the ground from above. And, and the scale of devastation in Gaza that not that I just, you know, I'm not talking about someone that saw this from the outside or someone that saw pictures or someone that looked at a picture and assessed it was there, touched it, felt it, smelled it. And what's it smell like? So very, you know, for those that have experienced it, um, the smell of death, human death has a very unforgettable smell. You mean like rotting bodies, rotting bodies, starvation, the body just breaking down. And when that's in mass, it's overwhelming. I, I smelled this, this same smell once in, in, in Baghdad during the, um, during the 2006 timeframe during the height of the sectarian violence when Sunni and Shia were just slaughtering each other. And one of our jobs that we had to do during that time was on our patrols, we would take a truck and a trailer and we would load bodies. Many of veterans have, have done this. This is, this is recorded history. We would load with the Iraqi army. We'd go through neighborhoods and load bodies because they've just been slaughtered. Families slaughtered. That smell did that. Um, in terms of picking up the bodies. Yeah. Yeah. Well, while in Baghdad in the height of sectarian violence during the, my very first deployment as a platoon leader, um, and many of veteran can attest to this because we had to do it. Um, we, we would have to move through on our combat patrols. We would have to take army trucks and trailers with Iraqi army personnel to load up bodies because there were so many. That's, that smell is something you never forget in Gaza, standing on the berm of site number four, looking north to Gaza city. So if you're standing on site number four and you're looking south, you see berries and you see everything to the south towards the Egyptian border. If you're standing on the northern berm, you're looking at Gaza city, the, the apocalypse. The only thing I can describe it as well in the evening when that coastal wind comes over the Mediterranean and sweeps through and that hits you in the face. It smells like death and to that scale mark my words. Someone, someone that's lived at someone that's touched at someone that's felt it. When the world gets to look at what's in Gaza city and jibalia and southern areas on the Gaza side of the border, the world will not tolerate it. So what I would say to every American leader, politics aside, put the politics aside, we need to be on the right side of history because our allies are close. Some of our, you know, we say that Israel is one of our closest allies. Some of our closest allies, France, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, are all standing and we're not. That says something. Have you brought this to the attention of American lawmakers? I have and some of them have taken action. Congressman Castro, I had a very good conversation with his staff and him. Senator Warnock, Senator Tillis, Senator, what had been Holland would have told us say. Well, Senator, Tillis, you know, as a Republican, his concern is because we have a large constituency of North Carolina, North Carolinians, veterans, who are in Gaza, armed on a tourist visa, lied to with no protections. That's his constituency. I'm I'm I'm a, I'm one of his people. So yeah, people need to, people need to take notice. This is not a political party line. This is humanity. So when you go into Tillis's office, who's a very strong pro Israel guy, big neo-Kiran, big neo-con, and you tell him this story. How does he treat you? So we talked to, we talked to his staff on, on, at his invite, his professional staff that gave notes to him. And but every meeting I had with with Congress, whether they were Republican or Democrat, when I sat down and I told them the truth of it, we have Americans, US citizens, veterans that we put into Gaza, armed to stave off a hungry, starving population with no rules of engagement on a tourist visa. One of the staffers, even spit out his coffee when I said it, explain the significance of being an armed combatant from a foreign country on a tourist visa. Why is that bad? Well, anytime, you know, imagine if you will, if someone came from France to the United States to visit just to see New York City check out the sites. And they wanted to be here for a few days. So they, they would enter, you know, blue passport, blue, go through clear, get your little ticket. You're on a tourist visa. Imagine coming from France to go check out the big apple, and you're walking around with a fully automatic machine gun, a pistol, a shotgun, then armor piercing rounds. That would be absurd. Now, what I continue to say, what? So in other words, I mean, you have no protection at all. You have no legal protection. Not only do you have legal, not have any legal protection under his Israeli government, where they're under the good graces of just hoping that that, you know, that at some point, some Israeli official doesn't see what we're doing and saying, like, uh, that's criminal right now. Everybody's just like, just do it because nobody sees it. But man, are we, I would call it, you know, like back in the day, we're riding dirty. We don't have any legal protection. And no rules of engagement. What do you mean? No rules of it. So the, I feel it would have been incumbent upon safe reach solutions as the, yeah, to issue a rules of engagement, but they did not. So a rules of engagement is something. And even the, the most elite units in the United States military get briefed on and rehearse a rules of engagement. That's what makes, what can you do under what circumstances? That's right. Can't you do. That's right. Especially when it comes to pulling a trigger to shoot a bullet, to kill a human, when all of those humans are unarmed civilians. That's, that's something that throughout the history of the world that we from, from the Battle of Jericho, I've been there. I wasn't in the Battle of Jericho, but I went to Jericho on my way out of Israel. Um, from Jericho to what we're seeing now, the world has always had the notion of protecting and safeguarding the vulnerable unarmed population. It's what the Geneva Convention and humanitarian laws based on. We've always done that. Why is it different now? Book of Esther, we're sure. Yeah. They're genocided. But, yeah. Excuse me. Um, yeah. Again, did the Americans you were with, like having a better off there's beer for sailing Gaza, but whatever you do at night, for a long day of watching civilians get shot at distribution centers. Did anyone say, man, this is, this is kind of nuts. So the, the contractors that I mostly spent my time with, because remember, I was the, as soon as we got into country, I was promoted to be the Joint Tactical Operations Center team leader. So I had a small team who predominantly worked out of the, the Joint Talk to Operations Center. I had additional duties laid upon me by the leadership of U.G. solutions in terms of taking pictures and, you know, being this pseudo PR person because they had no one to do PR slash this pseudo operations person. So that's why you took all the pictures. So taking all the pictures, I was pulled to do in writing. I didn't take that because it was a hobby. I had no intention of taking, like prior to getting there in my, in my, my phone. I mean, I still had a flip phone before I went because I wanted to get a new one. Um, so I could watch movies on the plane. Um, in, in, in getting there, like the only pictures I had on my phone were like a few from, you know, some family stuff, but not a phone picture taker. Um, so all the pictures you showed me, the ones right here with the dates on them and it's basically took pictures every single day you were there. It looks like they're all timestamped. Um, you were asked to take these by your told, told, not asked, told, there's a, you know, this email here from a, and I think it's funny when they say about my, my performance here is that, you know, so this is an email. I have this, um, email here from Mr. John Corrigan who is the chief operations officer of UG solutions. Pretty important job. Boss, yes. And this is back to the headquarters in North Carolina. To me, just a lonely old contractor. I'm not going to say the guys named that he sent it to. Please add Tony who sees seed to our headquarters distribution list. He produces the daily impact report that I've directed into and he does all ground planning for movement for our team critical player to the operation. That was on June 2nd. Someone that's not a good performer, someone that was fired on June 12th. The day before UG solutions apparently said that they fired me, which they did not. Tony, you've done a great job in taking photos and videos which have been in a tremendous asset to UG solutions. Apologies if this has caused any consternation for you. We know that you are fully aligned with UG policies in our member of the team. This is on the 12th of June. Fired me? No. You resigned what for the next day. I already had my resignation typed up that day. What is important about this day on the 12th of June? Which I think is it would be funny if it wasn't so upsetting is that all of the pictures that I took every day go out of the field, take pictures, document. Let's tell the truth. Well, the truth that I grew up with is the truth that the truth, you don't get to cherry pick the truth. So every picture, every video, everything I took from the good to the bad, the indifferent. When I came back, I uploaded into the they established a Google share drive for me specifically every day. That was one of my tasks. Come back from a site, sit down at the computer, upload the photos and videos and then wipe them from my phone. They didn't want me to have them. Why didn't they want you to have them? They didn't want anybody that so in the contract, they specifically state that any photos written experience, pictures or video are the sole proprietary property of UG solutions. How you own an idea or a thought? I don't know, but sure. So I'd upload them and then wipe them, upload them and then wipe them. So I didn't have them. On the 11th of June, the Jerusalem Post, which I think is funny because they were also one of the ones that ran the Tony's a liar, which was it's just absurd to think about it because they that that actual news outlet took one of my photos and used it on the front page of their magazine. It's a it's on there. It's a picture of a boy holding a box of the aid. And in fact, John Acry, who was on the press release that GHF did today, asked me if he could use that photo as part of his personal collection because he thought it was so compelling and impactful to tell a story of what was going on in Gaza. He called me on the phone. I don't even know who he was. And I said, yes, you can use it for your personal collection. So all of my pictures went into this share drive. That picture made it to the Jerusalem Post. I got blamed. Oh, you sent your picture out to the mediums like I didn't send a picture out to the media. I don't even have them. So I email the chief operations officer like, Hey, John, can you clarify this because kind of getting some heat? And he does. And he clarifies, hey, that he says, you know, it wasn't it wasn't you that did it. It was, you know, we, uh, I'll read it. So I'm not a good employee, gentlemen, and this is to all the leadership of U. G. Solutions. Tony, you've done a great job of taking photos and videos, which have been an asset. We know you've kept those internal and point to point with me and me only. The issue we had is that one of our Israeli political folks at the highest level, who we believe had compartmentalized access to certain materials that we owned, that we agreed to share, turns out he access the photos and now he has them all. Well, we have told him to explicitly not share these. He has shared these with the media. And we have no control over the photos. We have since shut down access to only U. G. personnel. Apologies this costs any consternation. We know you're fully aligned to policy. Bottom line, we attempted to fulfill a request from our Israeli partners and they took advantage of us upon and took advantage of us upon themselves without coordination to their government and higher headquarters. And now all of the media, meaning pictures and photos are out. Funny is that days later when I got back to the United States, I got all of my videos and pictures back that I took from an Israeli citizen. Like these people are clowns. So they've made a bunch of specific allegations against you at a press conference in media appearances. It sounds like you can refute all or most of them with documentation, all of them. Are you going to sue them for slander? Because it sounds like slander. suing is so laborious. I really want all of this. I want the story to get out and I want our government to take action. So I can enjoy the pre-fall fishing. I'd like to get back to work at Lowe's. You're going back to Lowe's home and garden. Oh yeah. Like I said, it's therapeutic to not have to worry about so many issues and just help people. But again, to all these letters, you know, UG solutions and GHF may say, well, we still fired them. Two things I'd like to ask GHF. I would like the termination letter. I would like their firing letter. I want it. I want to frame it. I want to put it in my office as a as the worst employee of the month of the worst employer that I've ever worked for. Give it to me. When you put it in my office as a, as the worst employee of the month of the worst employer that I've ever worked for, give it to me. Give me my termination letter. If you fired me, you notice when they put up this slew of documents that they never provided a termination letter. Give it to me. Show us. I'd like to have it, actually. But this letter, I think, is really just tops the Sunday with a nice cherry. This is from UG Solutions corporate from the COO back in, so they had a CEO state side, and it has COO forward kind of like a home and a waiting. I read this on breaking points, but I think it's appropriate for this. Dear Tony, as your engagement with UG Solutions concludes, we extend our gratitude for your contributions to our mission in Israel and Gaza. We appreciate your flexibility and adaptability throughout the deployment, and your willingness to support the mission in a variety of ways. While your current assignment ends, please let us know if you are interested in future opportunities to work with UG Solutions. This is on the 24th of June. I left the next day. Does that sound like? No, it's signed by the COO. So what this whole smear campaign sounds like to me is I'm the only person in their entire construct of a company that one has the depth of knowledge that I have of what actually happened and what's going on. But two can corroborate as an eyewitness, as a human being, as a carbon based life form, having been on the ground in Gaza to corroborate all of the video of the guy shooting and then saying, Yeehaw, hell yeah, I think you got one. That was in that drive that got released to the Israeli government. It's out there. There's no denying it. Watch it. Yeah, so what happened to the boy, a mirror? Interesting. Who was apparently murdered and then your former employers tried it out of picture claiming he was still alive, but it was a different person. Yeah. Do we know anything about what happened to his body, whether his family knows where? Yeah, so you know, Johnny Moore, who claims to be this evangelical last time I checked now, we should know that every hair on one's head, God does. In their smear package of information, they said, Mr. Aguilar claims that this young boy was killed on the site. Well, here's a picture of him two days later. The picture that they used of a mirror two days later, and also the pictures of a mirror, are pictures that I took. They used photos that I took to discredit photos that I took. You can't even wrap your head around it. So the picture here that they said is a mirror is on the 1st of June at site number four, timestamped in my phone because I have the original. Site number four and site number two are 26 kilometers away through a combat zone that knows civilian can traverse between the two. So how did a mirror get from site two on the 28th of May to site four on the 1st of June? Well, he didn't. Because he's dead too, because it would have been impossible unless somewhere in Gaza, they now have the ability to start trek being people to another location would have been impossible. Do we know anything about his family or how that was? So they questioned it, right? So an NGO reached out to me after the story broke and they said, do you happen to know what site and what day I do exactly what site exactly what day? I even know exactly what time. And I provided that information to them. They immediately energized their NGO network within Gaza to begin looking backtracking. Nasser Hospital, backtracking, asking, taking the picture around kind of like old on the milk carton days. Yes. And they found, they found his mother, his stepmother. His mother and father had both been killed. His father was killed in Israeli airstrike. His mother had been killed. His stepmother has been looking for him since the 28th of May. And that photo that I took of him is the last she'd seen him alive. She now has this photo. I've seen her. I actually, yesterday I had the real special opportunity. I got to talk to her on the phone with a translator, which she and I zoomed together. And she asked me, what do you say? What do you look like? How was he? And I just told her I was like, it's a beautiful boy. Happy real strong spirit. And she's like, do you think I'll ever find him? And this isn't just me saying this and it's non verifiable. I talked to her on a interview with an activist group where there were hundreds watching. So everybody can verify this. How hard it is to tell a mother that her son is dead. He was killed in May and yesterday it was August and she hasn't seen him. Nothing. She's been looking for him. Now Johnny Moore would say that's Hamas propaganda. So Tony Aguilar who has no contacts really anywhere who's back in the United States managed to orchestrate this Hamas Kabuki theater facade simply to discredit the Gaza humanitarian foundation. How arrogant must you be? This is a Christian. This is a Christian evangelist. This boy was killed. And instead of accepting what we can do to change it, I have a great recommendation. Let's not put humanitarian aid food distribution sites in the middle of combat zones. That would be a great start to not killing innocent people to include. I thought, you know, and again, confirmation, she even said, I'm here. She's like, I've been looking for a mirror and make this up. Touch this boy. I looked him in the eyes. I thought he was maybe six or seven. He was 10. That's how I'm making it. He is. Don't put food distribution centers in the middle of combat zones. So my last question is, what other steps should the US government take to make this better and to avoid what you've said a number of times is going to be an international cataclysm when the world sees what's going on in Gaza with the US is supporting and for what should the US government do now? Today, Mr. John Acry, who I think is the second in command of GHF, second in charge, whatever, whatever title is. He was introduced by Mr. Chapin Fay, who's their spokesperson, who by the way also has no experience in humanitarian assistance or the military. So for Mr. Chapin Fay to say that I don't know what I'm talking about in terms of lines of sight or field to fire. Give me a break. What is who he's the spokesman? Chapin Fay is the paid spokesman for the Gaza humanitarian foundation. A spokesman they had a higher in pay once my story broke. So where's he from? No idea. I mean his entire life in background has just been PR. It's insulting. But Mr. John Acry has said, we would like to propose a plan for the UN and for the Gaza humanitarian foundation to work together. No. No. The Gaza humanitarian foundation does not have the capacity. It does not have the logistics. It does not have the experience. It does not have the personnel to do half part or any part of the humanitarian assistance operation. What the United States should do is stop with this rhetoric that the United Nations is giving away all of its food to Hamas. That has been disproven. Disproven. Re-engage the United Nations. Take all that money that we're giving to line the pockets of profiteers who spend most of it on PR firms and spokespersons and lawyers apparently and allow the United Nations to use it to not only expand their operations but this would be a really good idea. Instead of the idea of sitting and just videotaping and watching UN trucks getting ransacked, perhaps provide some security for them. Just like so I think it's ironic when Johnny Moore celebrates that not one of our trucks has been attacked. Well, you have them driving on a road that's in an area where there are no Palestinians that live within tens of miles. Armed to the teeth by IDF and armed Americans, of course they're not getting ransacked. It's almost like you're in the stands of the football field and you're saying, well, I didn't get tackled today. You're not even on the field. So how about we provide some security assistance to the United Nations to go into the site? Not arming or armed security, just a security presence to assist them in delivery, to empower the United Nations that has doctors and nurses and humanitarian assistance and nutritionists and people that feed people and people that know what they're doing and people that know how many calories come in a meal and how many people, how many calories someone needs that can provide water. It might be a great start, water. The United Nations mechanism should be put back in full force today. The United States should stop, do not spend another dime on the Gaza humanitarian foundation because it is not achieving any mode of a goal of feeding anyone. It is not. It's proven that it's a failure. Why it's a failure? We can dissect that in the annals of history. I've got some ideas, but it's failed. Have you had any contact with anyone from Gaza humanitarian foundation in the last couple of weeks? I have never had any contact from anyone within the Gaza humanitarian foundation at all period ever. So the fact that they can so, so bodaciously say that I'm a liar and they've never even spoke to me. It's pretty bold. I don't know other than other than Mr. Johnny Moore and Mr. Chapin Faye, the spokesman, I have no idea what human beings are in the Gaza humanitarian foundation. Much less who pays the bills, who pays the bills. Much less who pays the bills. Who's making what? I love to see that. Well, I think you've done a lot so far. Carl, thank you very much. Thank you for spending all this time. It's been a really happy to come up here and be in the studio. It's a great experience and thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. That is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. We hope that you'll do that.