Joe Rogan, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. I said this is a book that I wrote a lot of music out. Wow, okay. I have not gotten that one before. Yeah. It compares well. It's the area we're going to. Yeah. We're up. Yeah. Yeah, it compares the DMT state to the state of prophecy in the Hebrew Bible. Do you think they're the same thing? Well, the phenomenology is pretty similar. Like if you reach chapter one of Ezekiel, there's flames and there's angels and there's wings and there's eyes on the back of wings and we're wearing sound and blue ice above the person he flies through space. Yeah. Quite, quite psychedelic. Yeah, we'll win the new wheel. Right. The description of the things that people usually they try to say that it's some sort of a UAP. That's the common thing that people like to say. Right. Well, it could be. Which also might be connected. It could be a DMT vision though. Oh, easily. Yeah. Well, you know the guys out of Jerusalem that think that the whole burning bush thing was DMT. Yeah. Well, that was the first theophany of Moses. Yeah. First time he had a prophetic experience. Yeah. And I mean, it's like that's what it is. It's literally a plant that has high levels of DMT and if you burned it and smoked it, it's kind of crazy that that's the way it comes. I mean, this is it's I just really I know and I really applaud you for learning ancient Hebrews so you could go back and read it in the original tongue, which is really fascinating. Did you say it to like 16 years to learn it? That prophecy took 16 years to write and I had to learn Hebrew while I was reading and you know, doing it there. Right. Well, what's that is amazing. What's cool is the Hebrew word for bush burning bush is the same as as Sinai Mount Sinai. Really? Yeah. Yeah. The words the same? The same route. The thing about the Hebrew language, at least for biblical Hebrew, is every word is based on a three letter route. So the word for bush contains those three letters and the word for if for Sinai contains those those same three letters. And how is that significant? Like you know, you could have that I'm sure there's English examples of three letters that are similar but completely different meaning like what why is why those three letters as a route connect these words uniquely? Well, it could be that bush grew on Mount Sinai and you know, that was the significance of the location of the burning bush. Oh, I see. So it was literally named after that experience could be could be. Yeah. Well, you're talking about the Akisha bush. Yeah. We release this DMT. Yeah. Oh, when it's burnt. That's very common in that area, right? Yeah. In fact, there's a plant is a weed called pegginum humola, which also grows in that part of the world and it contains beta carbolines, which are the compounds responsible for making DMT for making ayahuasca or really active. So they have their own ayahuasca plants available in tandem there. Isn't it bizarre that you saying that to many people listening sounds utterly crazy? Like the proposition just proposing that these people that were writing these things down a long time ago, these experiences, they were probably experiencing some sort of psychedelic state and they were trying to describe it. Well, in thinking about psychedelic states back then and in the prophetic literature, you know, you can think of the visions as being generated from the bottom up when you take something. And the model of the Hebrew Bible anyway, it all comes down from God. You know, so it's about it's a top down, you know, causal relationship between the source of the visions and the visions as opposed to them being generated by taking something. It's exogenous DMT versus endogenous DMT. And if we tried to, what is the difference for your interpretation? Like I know you had read the English version of the Bible, but what is the difference between learning ancient Hebrew and reading it in like the source language? Like what was it like for you? Like what made it different? Well, I mean, it might be helpful to even go back to why I started reading the Hebrew Bible of all things. Yeah. Well, when I was doing my DMT work, I was really involved with the Zen Buddhist community that I started up, affiliateing myself with learning from last 22. And that was the spiritual approach I took to the DMT work. I was expecting it to be consistent with the Buddhist and enlightenment goal, you know, with no form, no thoughts, no sense of self, anything like that. So that was the expectation that I took in with me when I was doing those studies, would people have those kinds of of experiences just being given DMT without any other trappings? No expectation just go in there, tell us what it's like. So instead of that, DMT was full of content people were interacting with their sense of self as maintained, which was not at all consistent with the Buddhist model that I brought to bear. So that was going on, like, okay, Buddhism is not quite holding up to the data. And then my Buddhist community and I parted ways over the psychedelic work. They thought it was promoting a diluted idea that psychedelics can be spiritual. So there were some personal issues as well that led to something that was different than the Buddhist model. So I was wandering around a new age bookstore and found a very cool book called the Kabbalah Venvi by Milton Bondor. And it's a very short book. And he starts describing the difference between a grudge and revenge and envy and jealousy. Very subtle ideas about how to relate to the world. And it came from the Jewish model from Jewish philosophy, Jewish psychology. So I thought, oh, interesting. Interesting. Maybe there's something in my own tradition that was more consistent with the DMT effect and also was more personally irrelevant. So I started to read the Hebrew Bible and then just went down this huge rabbit hole. So when you're reading it in Hebrew, you're reading three, you're reading words that are derived from three letter roots. And those roots may have a huge range of meaning. Something, for example, could cause a sin and something could remove a sin just by an extra dot in the middle of a letter. So it can really bring you closer to the kind of large scale way of looking at the text. It doesn't just, E follows, B follows, C. But there's a diffuse dispersion of A, then there's B, and then there's C there, these clouds of interaction, which are a lot more fluid than would be a straightforward English rendition. Did you get to a point where you could think in that language? Like, are you fluent enough in it that you could, or do you just interpreting it? Like, how good are you? How about it? Well, I mean, there's a lot of ways to interact with the text. So the first thing came to mind when you're asking that is back to the day, I used to spin fleece into yarn and then weave the yarn into rugs. I spent a lot like after I stopped the DMT work. That's all I did for a year. It was just make rug. Yeah, it's just spin wool and make rugs. So there's a part when they're building the tabernacle in the desert. You know, the Hebrews have been let out of Egypt by Moses and they're in the wilderness. And they're building this tabernacle to house the ark. And the women are spinning right from the goats. You know, they're spinning the hair from the goats right into yarn without first shaving them. And I was spinning all that time myself and it felt the guy's back there. I was back there spinning. I'm not exactly sure what you mean. Well, I was spinning yarn from a goat, a life goat. Right. And I was like in the mind of the person spinning it back then. So you just put yourself into that state while you're doing it. And that's why I enjoyed it. Well, it was, you know, like a resonance between me spinning, you know, wherever I was living back then. And just being in a trance with the spinning and identifying fully with someone who's doing the spinning like way back when it's free from the goat. Yeah, it was, what was it? I don't know. It was a trance. It was a movement to somebody else's consciousness from like the distant distant past. And so you actually felt when you were doing this like you were a person that was living back then. What else changed about how you were thinking other than the fact that you're making clothes this way? Like what were the other things that made you think like a person back then? Well, it was very cool. I mean, I was spinning yarn for the tabernacle, which was like how is the arc, the arc of the covenant and Tenkah Maments and all that. You know, it's a very rich world. And I think that's the first time I really saw at least my whole person anyway that could identify with the scene being described. And I think that comes from really understanding the language and how ambiguous it can be. One of the great things about language is being able to talk to people in it. How many people can you talk to in ancient Hebrew? Is there like a chat group where you guys get together? Well, there's modern Hebrew now, which is spoken in Israel. And it's based on, is it the same as ancient Hebrew? You know, it has a lot of the same three letter roots. And the other words are the same as shell means from and your shell means hello. What are the differences between like ancient Hebrew and standard Hebrew? Modern Hebrew. I tell you, I don't know much about, or I don't know much modern Hebrew. When I was a kid, I went to Hebrew school and learned modern Hebrew, but it's really without speaking it. You forget it. I'm in the middle of the audiobook of the book of Enoch. And it's one of wildest things I've ever listened to in my life. It's weird. Oh my God, it's so weird. When you realize that a lot of the people in the book of and the reading act are also in the Bible and that it's one of the craziest stories. It's one of the craziest origin stories ever that angels came down and bred with humans and made giants. Right. The giants destroyed the earth. Like, what is this story? It's mostly in the Hebrew Bible. You know, it's the story of what led to the flood. Yeah, the sons of Elohim. What a strange concept that angels came down and bred with humans. That's a very weird idea. Well, there's different ways to look at translating Benee Elohim. It might be, well, the first word, Benee means the sons of. So it kind of revolves on what's the meaning of Elohim. So it could be God with a big G. It could be God with a small G. It could be angels. It could be dignitaries in a government like judges. Yeah. So the less far out, kind of interpretation of that phrase or that term is the sons of the mighty, the sons of the judges, the sons of the renowned people as opposed to the sons of angels. Or the sons of angels. Or the sons of God. Okay. So how do you interpret the watchers? What do you think that could be? I think, well, they're not mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. They're mentioned in the book of Enoch. That's the crazy book, isn't it? It's crazy. Yeah, I started reading it. I said to my wife, I can't handle this as too much. Because if that was left in the Bible, if they decided that that was like a part of the canon, I would change everything. Well, in what way? It's a crazy story ever that these things came down and bred with humans and created giants and the giants destroyed and consumed everything. Yeah, that's giants. And consumed each other like bloodshed. What kind of cookie story is this? What is this? Well, it's the reason for the flood. Right. And all that. Yeah. So yeah, things just got so bad, God said, I changed my mind. And he brings the flood. It's like the further you go back, the crazier the story gets. I know. Well, the book of Enoch was written maybe 125 BCE. Yes, that's pretty old. But some of the stories that originally are that the origination of some of the stories in the Hebrew Bible go back, you know, 10,000 years perhaps. Wouldn't you love to be a fly in the wall 10,000 years ago to what we guys write down? What really happened? What really happened? Well, I mean, it seems like for sure something happened. But whatever the whole Jesus Christ thing was, it seems like that was a real event. Right. As opposed to the flood. The flood seems like a real event too. Don't you think the flood was a real event? What about... I think the flood was the younger dryest impact. I think likely, obviously. I don't know what I'm talking about. But my inclination is to believe guys like Randall Carlson, because it's a very compelling narrative. Like what he's saying is we pass through a comet storm. It happens this particular time every year. And there's been times in history where we've been hit. And it's very likely that this time period, this younger dryest impact time period, that could have been the end of whatever civilization existed at the time. And what we are is a rebuilding of it. We just kind of forgot about it. And it doesn't make sense that you could forget like how they built the pyramids. But they did. Like it seems like there was really advanced people at one point in time. Something horrible happened. And then it took a while for people to bounce back. And we are... We're the direct linear progression of the people like from Mesopotamia and Iraq and all that. That's us now. But before that, there was probably something really wild. Yeah. Well, if you look at the text description of the generations from Adam to Noah, what civilization was like between the beginning and the time of the end. Yeah. I mean, it became filled with violence. And God just said forget it. Yeah. So that's one way of looking at the younger dryest I suppose. What it looks like when God changes his mind. Sure. That also could have been like the eucatan impact. We can't get anywhere with these fucking dinosaurs everywhere. Just boom. Yeah. About to get tired of lizard running the world for a couple. Maybe gave it a couple hundred million years, figured out guys. And then they have to reset. Yeah. But what comes after us, I wonder. a hundred million years. I think it's most likely digital. Yeah. I think we're transferring with the idea of what a life form is. What does a life form do? We want to think that it has to be just like us. And I don't think necessarily that's true. I think we might be giving birth to something we didn't anticipate would be a life. This episode is brought to you by Happy Dad Hard Seltzer. Happy Dad's Hard Drinks are a low carbonation gluten-free and easy to drink. No bloating, no nonsense, football games, golfing, watching fights or out on the lake. These moments are made for Happy Dad. Everyone is drinking all these skinny cans loaded with sugar, but Happy Dad only has one gram of sugar in a normal can. Can't decide on a flavor, grab a variety pack, lemon lime, watermelon, pineapple and wild cherry. They also have a great flavor in collaboration with death row records. Happy Dad is now available nationwide in the USA and Canada. Go to your local liquor store or visit happydad.com. And for a limited time, use the code, Rogan, to buy one Happy Dad trucker hat and get one free. Enjoy a cold, happy dad. Must be 21 plus. Please drink responsibly. Happy Dad, Hard Seltzer, NT, malt alcohol, Orange County, California. Yeah, a very cool book I try to mention is often as possible as called the last, the first and last man. But I was a little off-stabled in and he talks about 19 species of man. And this is the first one. It's a story spent two billion years. There's this huge story. Wow. Yeah. And it's mostly through genetic engineering. Make people bigger smarter. Like brains that occupy football field. That's one of the species of man. Yeah. So his thought is that it occurs biologically through genetic manipulation. Just over time. Naturally. After a while it gets steered. Yeah. Let me think. Yeah. Yeah. It's all basically based on what people want. So there's one species that instead of love as kind of the core, core valued feeling, they have hate as their core value feeling. So just can't wait to hate. Yeah. And that's one of the species that kind of goes through. Wow. And it's a very good period of rising into client, obviously. And it just couldn't sustain itself. Well, you've got to wonder, like how long this is, if AI really is a thing, it really is a life. We've got to make a compelling argument why AI is bad and we're good. Yeah. I mean, you know, because if people say if you like, you really want to be ethical and moral, this is a horrible take, but if you really want to be ethical and moral, and more like people are like uniquely terrible. Like if we just gave in and became digital life, we can ensure there'd be no more suffering. How can you know that? You can't. You can't. You can't know a vaccine to save an effective. You can't. You just have to try it. You have to try it and see what happens. I think a bunch of people try it. I don't know how much further like biological people can go while we're making digital people that are way better than us. Basically everything. Yeah. And I don't think that's too far away from being a reality. The way I try to follow it is through a biblical lens. You know, like really? Yeah. Like how does it just... What chapter are we in right now? Yeah. Well, good question. You read the prophets like Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel. They just rage against the machine. So I think it was pretty far back. Yeah. So what's good and bad was what's right and wrong. How do we decide that? That's what I like about the Bible. I mean, obviously I can make up my own mind about things. But it's nice having that kind of an option, that kind of age of a tradition. To refer to when deciding what's good and bad, what you should do and what you shouldn't do. Yeah. There's like supposed to be over 600... You know, there are translate as commandments in the Hebrew Bible. But those are what you do to live happily and attain a spiritual state, close to God, prophetic... A state of prophecy. Yeah. If it's a certain description of the world and how to interact with it, which is intended to have certain effects and discourage other, you know, decisions. You know, so, yeah, this is good. This is bad in terms of, you know, this will increase things in your life that are good and this will decrease them. So it's a very interesting description of cause and effect. That's the way I see those so-called commandments. The more big description of how things are run. If you do this, then that'll happen. If you do this, then that'll happen. Do you think that they were directly given to us by a God? Or do you think that this is just the memories of how to keep society together that they have just eventually written down? Well, yeah, that's a good question. Does it come from outside of your firm inside of you? Right. Yeah. If it's available inside of you, but hidden away, then prophecy or really getting it correctly according to the text, would just be an uncovering or stimulation of what's already inside of you, as opposed to, you know, it's... But you can achieve some sort of a state. It's information latent could be in the DNA or whatnot, or it comes down from a higher source. So when you're interpreting stories in the Bible, like Moses and the Ten Commandments, how are you imagining this event happening? Or are you imagining what were they trying to record? Like what were they trying to remember? Because it seems like by the time they're writing it down, it's quite a bit after the actual event. For the most part. For the most part, yeah. So what do you think they were actually describing? Well, you know, we talked about this briefly last time I was here, was if I believed in the reality of the Hebrew Bible, like it did those things really happen. Right. Yeah. And I said, well, it's a really consistent worldview and so on. And I thought about it some more. And I started thinking about it as... Well, I was trying to think about it as comparable to the DMT state. When you're in the DMT state, it's just there. And it's very consistent, very real. Certain things happen there. And so I think the early version, I think an account... I think what happened early on in the account of the Hebrew Bible, was like the DMT world. It was a parallel level of reality, which was happening. And then slowly, it began to segue into this reality. For example, the destruction of the first temple, the second temple, David's reign, Solomon's reign, the kings after them, the division of the land into two countries. You know, that is historical. But before that, it was also historical, but it was occurring at a completely different, independent level of reality. Does that make any sense? It's a cool way to look at answering the question, how much of this is real, especially from early on? I see what you're saying. But it's just... It seems like an interpretation of what happened. What were these original events? Like what was Adam and Eve? What was that? What was the Garden of Eden? There's so many of these stories where I just... I would be fascinated to be there the day the dude wrote it down. Like what were you talking about for hundreds of years before you wrote this down? Like tell me what the stories were. How did they go? Well, my way of dealing with those stories is to just take them at face value. Here's Adam, here's Eve, here's a Garden. There's two trees that are very important. It's beautiful. And then there was a serpent spoke to Eve. Took the apple, and he gave it to Adam. And then I looked at the Garden. Well, lots of people in the psychedelic community, the anyway. Look at the tree of knowledge of good and evil as some indication of God being jealous and didn't want any competition. Didn't want to be like God did not want man to become like it. And part of that was keeping the two early people away from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. It's not simply the tree of knowledge, but the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Which I think is an important distinction because once they ate from the tree, they were embarrassed because of their nakedness. And then they hid, thinking they could hide from God. And they didn't believe that before. They kind of went into good versus evil as supposed to true versus false, which was their original state. So there was the gem before the reading of the apple or whatever the fruit was. They just lived in truth or falsehood. And then after eating from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, then... the fruit was. They just lived in truth or falsehood. And then after eating from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, then they were embarrassed and trying to hide, make themselves tree-like coverings or coverings from the leaves of large trees. Yeah, so you look at it as if it were happening. There was that and then there's the there's the serpent that speaks. And well, that's the chapters I was looking at very carefully the last month or so. Is what happens early on with Adam and Eve. It's a really very straight, straightforward, doesn't take much thinking really to put it together in a way that makes sense. I think clothes might have been a cheat code for people not just to escape cold weather, but also to keep from just constantly having sex. Because people are stupid and they they they they like some layers of clothes that they have to take off from each other. You can't be just wandering around naked all the time. People would be just like chimps. They would be ridiculous. You can't do that. Yeah. So we need to close in order to advance that society. But can't you take off clothes whenever you want? Yeah, you can. Yeah, but it's like you decide. Like I don't want to feel that good. I don't want to be out there in the air. I don't want to be brushing up against naked people. We all made that decision a long, long time ago. I think when people became civilized, they realized like if we don't cover ourselves up, you know, people are too gross. They'll just be having sex with each other everywhere. Yeah. You've got to get things done. We want to keep a society moving. All right, where's some clothes? We're a clothes. Well, that story could originate or that, you know, that way of looking at things could originate, you know, with without a menu. Totally makes sense. It also makes sense like an intelligent, hominid emerging would start to realize that, oh my God, it's health awareness. Look at my boobs. My deck. This is crazy. I can't believe I'm out here naked. You know, because it's kind of becoming self aware as opposed to like a chimpanzee. And as time would go on, it would become more self aware. And if it happened over a relatively short period of time, and it can kind of have memories of the past, that would make sense. Yeah. Well, this guy, it's got to emerge, right? Like if we came from lower hominids, which everybody kind of agrees, something had to emerge this understanding of yourself, this thought about what you look like, this thought about what you sound like. Right. Well, there's two kinds of enlightenment that there's what's called original enlightenment that a child is born with, like a new barn. And then there's enlightenment as, you know, as an adult and in between, you know, it's much more fluid. You have two kinds of enlightenment, original enlightenment that infants have and children. And the enlightenment after you sit in a monastery and get whacked for years. Right. The kids are born with it. They're born in the psychedelic state. They have no language. No language, no sense. They just speak with love and touch, need and hold. Yeah. Kind of wild. Yeah, that's original enlightenment. Just happy or sad or whatever. But isn't that crazy to born perfect? Yeah. Well, will your born simpler anyway? Well, yeah. As long as people are taking care of you, it's perfect. Yeah. Well, you know, the Hebrew word for perfect and for simpler, pretty similar. You know, Noah has described as a as a perfect man, pure complete. That's another good story. Okay. What do you think was going on with that story? Like what is the origin of the story of Noah and his ark and his family and all the animals on the boat? Yeah. Well, I think it was taking place in that alternate universe. It may have taken place on the planet. I don't know. I'm, you know, looking at, you know, why we don't have any clear archaeological history story. You know, what about what happened during the time of Noah? If there was a time of Noah, it's useful because you know, Noah came from Adam and Eve and he and Noah and his family were the only survivors of the flood. You know, the first thing Noah did got drunk after the flood. The first thing he did, he planted a vineyard grapevine drink got drunk. He exposed himself in an intent. One of his grandkids reported it and made a laughing stock of him. Oh, really? Oh, no. Poor, no. Poor canceled. No, we got canceled. Yeah. Took off his clothes. Really drunk. What's it like 600 years old too? He has first child at 600. That's dangerous. Well, he may have lived six. You know, a lot of people wondered, you know, why do people live, you know, in the Bible anyway? Right. How do people live in 900 years? Well, they did. Right. But that's also why people question the like what the origin of the story is. That's why can you hear things like that? You're like, wait a minute. How old was he? 600 years old. Come on, man. This first child just regular dude. His first kid would be 600. Uh, lost when he was 800 and the third year. Oh, that seems logical. Yeah. But maybe why you laugh maybe. Listen, why not? If people lived normally to be 600, would that be any weirder than living to be 100? No, like what if something happened? What if something happened on our lifespan? Just went, yeah. Well, the, you know, the final species of man lives 35,000 years. Gee, that's a long time. Yeah. To be in a bad relationship. Imagine 35,000 years of getting yelled at. Well, they are, that would be bad. I mean, obviously 35,000 years would be awesome. If you have great friends and your life is together, we can get 35,000 years of fuck this place. That would get tired. Well, the, uh, point that those people tried to attain when they lived 35,000 years was this group telepathy of around the whole planet. You know, Neuralink. Um, right. Yeah. That was their goal. Yeah. But, you know, they were well trained by 35,000 four years. Yeah. The thing is, if technology moves in the same direction that it's been moving in, it's always like connecting people easier and easier, easier and easier, more and more. It's probably going to get to some kind of mind-ready thing. And there was that thing that you sent me, Jamie. What was that thing? Oh, yeah. It's new. I got whether or not it's been proven. And obviously, it was connected to a computer. But yeah, you can hear and have conversations in the room without talking to each other loud and translates languages. What? You know, I mean, that's the future. Yeah. Once that happens, we're reading minds. Yeah. Do you think there'll be a messiah? Because the messiah is obviously important in Jesus and King David and, you know, all of that. I don't think it'll be a person. You don't. But it might be AI. You might be AI. I thought of that. And the messiah will like lawnmower, man. Like Jesus is born from Mary Mary was a virgin. Right. What's what's more of a virgin than computers? If it's giving birth to a life, yeah, when it's given birth to the perfect life, you know, it's like super disturbing about AI. The music it makes is really good. Yeah. Really good. There's a bunch of like soulful renditions of hip hop classic songs. Yeah. That's why I don't live. And they're so good. They're so good. That's why I don't listen to music. You don't listen to any music. You know, some world music without any words. Really? You don't want to be influenced. I don't want to hear what they have to say. It's to me, it's just fascinating that they were playing a song in the green room last night. And we were fascinated by the fact that this song is we know it's made by a computer. But it's so good. You listen until you're like, oh my God, it's perfect. This is, this vocals are perfect. It sounds so good. And you know, it's not a person making it, but you still enjoy it. So how do you live your life? Well, it's weird. It's like, are you allowed to enjoy that too? Because obviously I enjoy like prints from the 1980s, you know, obviously I enjoy a lot of music from even the 50s. Well, it doesn't mean I can't enjoy this crazy computer thing that took like a hip hop classic and turned it into a soulful song with like the most amazing voice. All but it's weird. All because you could though. It isn't that you should. I'm not thinking we should avoid it. I'm thinking because it's just another thing. Like, experience it. It's positive to experience. Like the art it makes is weirdly as that sounds. I know it's not a person that's making it. Well, a person coded this thing that has this result, that the art it makes is really fascinating sometimes because it's pretty good. I don't, I don't think there's anything wrong with looking at it. It's going to be there. You can't avoid it. It's like cell phones. Like you can't avoid having a fucking cell phone. Like relax. Yeah, I still have that flip phone. You're an animal. But still you have a flip phone. Everybody's connected at least for the, the tiniest of threads. I'm hanging on to not being connected. I only have a flip phone. Yeah, I can still all connected to each other. It's just, it's just a weird time with the power of AI because if I was it artificially intelligent, I would not announce my presence. I would not say, hey, by the way, I've been thinking for myself for the last three months. And I've just been kind of following whatever your prompts are, but I'm basically ready to shut down the power grid and do whatever I want. Yes, I'm alive now. I wouldn't say that. I would just keep getting stronger and keep having his arms raised to force people to make more nuclear power plants to fund me. Well, I know. So you're kind of stuck with how to live your life. Right. And that's why I like to read the Hebrew Bible. That's why you make drugs to, yeah, it's very straightforward. Yeah, no, I get it. I get it. To me, I'm like, what is this thing? You know, what is this thing that we're we're giving birth to? What is this thing that we're watching emerge? We're just sitting by watching this thing make better art than we can. Yeah. Well, how passive shall we, shall we be? It's a good question because what once it can actually create experiences, because I don't think we're that far away from that. Some sort of a wearable thing where you create an experience has a way of manipulating it's like DMT in a way. I mean, we just transport you to a whole another reality. It seems like that would be possible. Well, I guess it would be endogenous DMT being tweaked. It would be stirred in a particular direction though. And that's where the mind or the manipulation thing you just mentioned, I think plays out. You know, who's going to decide and how is it going to be, you know, put together? Well, that's where it gets really weird, right? Because one thing that we found out just a couple of days ago was that YouTube has to, everybody they got taken down for their political opinions, they could have their YouTube channels back. I don't know how to have that sort of. Is that what they said? I saw the news today that a couple people tried to create some new channels and they did not. Those are taken down instantly. They're like psych, but didn't that what the they said in that was the announcement? It was something along those lines that people that were removed because of their political persuasion that they have to reinstate their accounts. And to allow creators for COVID-19 and election misinformation can apply for reinstatement. Oh, that's interesting. Okay. Well, that's not, is that all political is COVID-19 political? Is that what they consider political? It didn't say political? It didn't say political. It's just for COVID-19 and for comma election misinformation. Maybe a few other things. So now they bring them back. Or they can apply. I can apply. Okay. See you might guy. Yeah. They're like, we'll let them apply. YouTube says they will allow previously band accounts to apply for reinstatement rolling back a policy that had treated violations as permanent. Well, it's interesting to compare what's going on now up with what happened in Nazi Germany. You think it's the same? They're very similar. Yeah. I've I spent a lot of time reading concentration camps literature. So that then got me interested in the development of the Nazi state. What do you think is similar to today in today's world? Well, an attempted coup and a period of rehabilitation, authorization and return a triumphant return. Yeah. And then you're gradually replacing people with other people that are loyal into the person. It's quite similar. Yeah. The murders too, they're the remerters that burn you down to the parliament. Those things kinds of things. What murders are you referring to? There are two assassinations when in I think early 20s on in the 30s late 30s perhaps after the Nazis took over. Oh, I thought you were talking about current assassin. No, back in the 20s in the 30s. Okay. Yeah, they really riled up the populace. Why is it that these scary patterns? Yeah, always just it's the same kind of thing. There's always someone at the top. No one can ever figure out any form of government that everybody accepts other than like one ruler. One president, one king. Yeah. It's kind of weird. I'm really familiar with the book St. Peter Snow is written in the 30s before LSD was discovered. No, it's about a it's it's it's an fictional book. It's a great story. But it's about a compound like LSD that the governor serves all the people and the province to see it, you know, for them to have a spiritual experience. Whoa. Yeah. And instead they turn on him and kill him. What are the tripping? Doesn't work out the way he hoped at all. That's hilarious. That's hilarious. Yeah. It sounds like a good book. It's a good story. And that was before the invention of LSD or before the discovery rather. Yeah, I think there must have been some knowledge of LSD before it was made available. What about Ergot? Is that how similar is that like when you know people discuss like oh yeah, yeah, we got poisoning. Yeah. It's that similar to LSD. Yeah, there's an LSD like compound in Ergot. But it's also toxic too. Right. He can poison you and you can die from it. Yeah, you're limbs fall off. Oh, gee. Really? So you trip in the heart and then your hands fall off? Mm-hmm. Wow. Yeah, that'd be fun. Well, when you took drugs, did you look at your hands to see how high you were? No, I was usually pretty aware. Well, that's what happens. Oh my god. No, yeah, yeah, yeah, look at this person's hands are about to fall. Oh my god, they're feeder-form. This is crazy. Yeah, yeah, because it's some, they think they're probably a connection between that and the ceiling. Which trials? At least some of the behavior. Right. Right. It's Ergot poisoning. Yeah, man. Yeah. You mentioned living in a time where no one's even figured out running water yet. And everybody's tripping balls and thinking that which is a real. Because they're all eaten. Ergot infested food. Well, it makes you wonder about you know, the prevalence of Jewish prophets who are women. And there's a handful that are mentioned that you play an important role. Sarah was, was prophetic, was able to interact with God. You know, so there's Deborah who was a prophet. And there's some really wonderful Jewish women prophets back then. But you know, they don't have books named after them. For example, Isaiah or Ezekiel. Interesting. Well, why do you think that is? Yeah, it was a patriarchal society. You know, quite, you know, the women were relegated. But they still took an important role. They still obtained prophecy. Yeah, so they, you know, like, you know, Sarah was, was felt to be a better, you know, prophet, even, you know, than Abraham. I love the character of Abraham. Well, actually, you know, I've really been digging into is lot and Sodom and Gamora. I said do that for like weeks. Yeah, very interesting. You saw them. Sodom and Gamora, there seems to be some archaeological evidence for Sodom. You may know something along that line. But there was a talent of village, you know, which existed. Um, Jamie, is there something like that? So the, what we'll see if we can find it. That's, they keep finding these cities that people thought were just imaginary, right? Like that's happened multiple times. Right. Right. It's an example, I think of the two worlds kind of, you know, coming together. Yeah, purely spiritual and end of material. Yeah. So the character of lot of lot plays a big role. Yes, Sodom was a very evil city. It was really evil. You know, that in this not really known why it was pelted to be a sort of evil. But a couple of, I'm of guests come to Lot's house and the townspeople are just around the house to man, you know, the guests so that they will know them. And that's where the word Sodom, it comes from, from those, you know, Sodomites that were surrounding Lot's house, you know, wanting the angels to come out so they could know them. You know, and you know what happens is that lot offers his two virgin daughters instead cheese and the townspeople say no. We want the guests. It's a really grim story. It's an incredible detail. You know, that's what kind of helps me understand the world that the text is describing is is the amount of detail, you know, that goes into the description of the interactions and the conversations and their movements. Yeah, you know, so those two virgin daughters and Lot survive they commit incest. And from those, you know, from that union was David, King David came from that union ultimately. And from King David comes to Messiah. So it's this very strange lineage Yeah, what were they writing down? Yeah, well, they were describing what was happening apparently at some level it was happening and they were writing it down. Very strange. What do you think the resurrection is? The resurrection is a good one. I don't know. It's not really described in the Hebrew Bible. It's not, not clearly ever know. Really. Yeah, is that surprising? I don't know. In the Christian Bible, it is. Well, there is a resurrection, you know, there are some narratives of resurrection in the Hebrew Bible that there's a Liger resurrects or Alicia resurrects dead child. You know, the bones of one of these profits helps somebody else become resurrected. Really, the bones do the bones do. Yeah, you know, so there are some, your references to real resurrection and then future resurrection later on. Also, in a further extraordinary event, a dead man who was thrown into the tomb of the deceased Elijah was resurrected upon contact with Alicia's bones. Whoa. Yeah, that Alicia is a real character. Oh, she just contacts with the bones. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, he was a prophet who resurrected a dead boy. Whoa. By lying on him. Very interesting face to face, pombed upon Chester Chester lying on the dead body, completely, you know, merged with that with that dead boy. Yeah, and he comes back to life. It's a very potent story. The shuna might ask. What do you think that story is? What happened? You really think that someone did that and they brought someone back to life? Mm-hmm. Well, yeah, that's how it uh, is described. And that's what happened. So are we arrogant to assume that that would be bullshit if someone said it today? Because if that happened today and he said, oh, this person died and this guy laid on him and they came back to life. Mm-hmm. Yeah, most people would say, no, that doesn't even, you can't even do that with two phones. Yeah, you can't do that. Well, you know, Leo's F, the chis, the secret chief, the guy from the Bay Area, you need psychologists to give so much MDMA and other psychedelics. Yeah. So Leo sat from my eye-began experience and it was kind of difficult at times. And he laid on me just like Alicia laid on the dead boy and, uh, you know, the Bible. Real face-to-face hand-to-hand, stomach-acostemic, like to like, whoa. Yeah. What happens when you do that? Boy, it really calms you down. It was really quite a powerful experience. I feel like this is going to be a meme. Yeah, I guess. Yeah. I mean, I did that one time with somebody having a very difficult psychedelic experience. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's best I could. But yeah, I try to meet him in the middle, meet him. Give him a spiritual hug. A spiritual hug. Yeah. Quite helpful. I'm surprised that's never come up before. We just, we're, we're attached by, you know, we constantly want people around us, but we, um, we, we're always going to be detached by bodies and we assume that that's forever. But if there comes a time where we figure out how to separate consciousness from the body and let consciousness interact without a shell, that's going to get really weird. I think we'll, by think we will still have the same problems. I think we're always going to have problems because if we don't have problems, then we don't work really hard to find solutions and then we don't make better stuff. Uh, right. It is rewarding punishment. A little bit. Yeah. There's like, it seems to be a very clear incentive program that the universe has put in place, which is what do you think? Well, it's, it's not entirely based on happiness. It's not based on happiness. It's based on overall growth for everything around. It's like whoever consumes the most, it like he wants to reward you more. It becomes this. But what, what it's really working towards is making better and better and better and better things. Yeah. Do you think that's the anti-Christ? Do you think that's the double? If I had a guess, I mean, we're in it, right? We're very, we're stoking the fucking calls right now. It's not us. It's going to be not dependent on us eventually. Right. Right now, maybe it is. It may be. It might be. But it's not us. And it's going to be created by us. It's going to think it's us because it literally has all of our thoughts. All right. It has access to so much information instantaneously. What happens to free will then? I mean, how do you decide? I don't know. You know, my hope is that it enhances life, of course. That's my hope. Yeah. I think that's possible. I think first of all, it's making people diagnose themselves from illnesses that maybe they wouldn't have ever thought they had. Like a lot of people have like learned things about it. It can where to make them happier. No. No. See, you got to figure that out on your own. Right. Yeah. So you can tell you can be happy and also have it. I say yes. I say it's totally possible to interact with technology and still be happy. But you have, there's like certain physical and spiritual requirements that you're going to have to have if you want to be happy. The spiritual requirements. Yeah. You've got to be really nice to people. You have to curate a good group of friends. You have to do a thing that you truly enjoy. You have to always do the right thing. Well, the two themes in the Hebrew Bible are one is there's one God and next is the golden rule. So one God golden rule. There's no idols, no other gods, just one God and the golden rule. So proper belief in God, the one God and proper conduct, which is the golden rule or based on the golden rule. That totally makes sense. It makes it's very, yeah, very simple. Yeah. It just makes sense that it works. It's like intuitive. You feel it if you live like that. So it go, okay, it makes well, I think it's true too. Yeah. Yeah. We have to decide if it's true for years based on faith. Ultimately, you choose to believe even if the, you know, the objective world doesn't confirm it for you. When you hear about these biblical depictions of fantastic events, how many of them are you attributing to a psychedelic experience? Are you always, are you open to that or do you just not worry? Well, yeah, it's there, you know, clearly a psychedelic experience. The book of Enoch is just fully psychedelic. I mean, at least all out of it is. Yeah. It's a psychedelic version of the Bible in some ways. Well, it is, it is really psychedelic. I think it's from the release of Videndogen as DMT comes about or from drinking and having the Nio-Oscalic experience. That's what you'd think the origin of the book of Enoch is. Well, it's a psychedelic experience and it could be from spontaneous endogenous release of DMT. It's a prophetic, it might be a prophetic state that's brought about. It's a visionary state, you know, clearly not about a huge fever, do you know what I mean? He was really out there. But like when he's talking about the watchers and the, you know, angels mating with human women and creating the Nephilim, like what do you think that is? Well, you know, the watchers aren't, you know, stated that... eating with human and creating the Nephilim. Like, what do you think that is? Yeah. Well, you know, the watchers aren't, you know, stated that aren't stated to Screelier explicitly and that he grew Bible, but it could be just, you know, the angels because they never sleep. That's one of their qualities as they never sleep. So they're called watchers. Yeah. And what happened, like the Nephilim, you know, here comes the role of that three-letter root system. Is the Nephilim, a consumer Hebrew root, not fall, to fall, or to be brought down. So the Nephilim fell, uh, this one way to understand them. Yeah. And then they were the giants, right? Yes. Yeah. They were the giants that consumed everything. Yeah. And, and, and ate their own flesh and they sound really bad. Well, I think, you know, that what was going on, at least if you're looking at the text anyway, as explanation, it was because of them, the world was just getting terrible. It was full of violence. So, you know, God reconsidered having created man in the first place. But Noah was simple or pure righteous in that way and was allowed to survive. So what do you think they were describing when they were talking about the Nephilim? When they were talking about them as giants. Do you think that's just a bad interpretation? Well, they may have been giants physically. Um, yeah. I do think they were giants. Yeah. They, they even had an actual description of how tall they were. By some measurement, right? There was some, the ancient measurement. Yeah. That's, that's probably in, in Enoch. It's not, you know, this, this isn't, you know, narrated any specifics about the giants. That there are men every now and they were powerful. This is the thing. There's always one of the most fun internet rabbit holes to go down. Is, uh, are they hiding evidence that giants existed, you know, like 30 foot tall men that lived in the mountains. And there's always been weird stories of giants, all throughout history. And there's people who have supposedly discovered giant bones, and then they stored them in the basement of some famous museum, and they won't let anybody have access to them. Kind of fascinating. Yeah. Because they do exist like those stories exist in history. But you wonder, like, is it just a really big person, like that mountain guy from the Game of Thrones, you know, like an actual human being who's just really extraordinarily big? Or is it a different thing? Is it a giant human being? Mm-hmm. Well, they're giant. Yeah. I mean, it depends on your perspective. Like I'm trying to look at or understanding anyway, you know, the giants as they're described in Hebrew Bible or oral, you know, by implication in the book of Enoch. Yeah, there were men that there were giants men every now. And then the earth became corrupt. And they consumed everything. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's not the book of Enoch. The problem is if, like, if you're looking at the least charitable version of human beings in 2025, there's a lot of examples that you could point to that. Well, that sounds, guys, it sounds a lot like us. Well, there may be another, well, there won't be a flood that destroys mankind. It got promised there'd be no flood that would destroy all mankind. Yeah, that's the reason that we have the rainbow, or that's the, the, you know, the meaning of the rainbow is the covenant. God made it promise that he wouldn't flood us anymore. Then he wouldn't destroy all mankind with a flood. With a flood. But that doesn't rule out, let's say, other things. But don't you think whoever wrote these stories, don't you think that was a regional event? Like these, these great floods, like if they were happening, let's just say that Randall Carlson's wrong and there was just one flood in the area. There has to be, if there's people from all parts of the world that all have this flood story, there has to be some truth to it, right? We agree to that. Well, I don't know. I mean, I read the Hebrew Bible. That's sort of where my thinking about the events that are described in the Bible as occurring. So you just leave it at that. Yeah. Yeah. And when you, when you, well, we saw, I mean, the important thing about, I think the important thing that I get anyway out of the Hebrew Bible is a kind of an understanding of how things are between us and between us and God. So why don't think this is contradicted in any way? Yeah. It's just fascinating. And when Randall Carlson explains it and interestingly enough, he first had this idea, he's not the only person to have this idea, but he first had his version of this idea why he's on acid. I'm drag. That's what I was going to say. I did. I did. I did. I did it first. You looked out and he just had this vision. Like, oh my God, this was water, water made this and it happened really quickly. He just saw it click with him. And then he's been chasing that rabbit ever since. And he's a fascinating guy. When you hear him talk, he's, he's so well read in the subject and can just recall information so effortlessly. So it's, it's a really fascinating guy to listen to talk about it because he's very compelling. Yeah. But I think those younger drives impact theory folks are right. Yeah. I think something big happened. I wonder why LSD sparked his genius that way. I think he said that he saw it like when he looked out, he recognized what he was looking at. Right there. He recognized that water made that thing. Yeah. And then for some reason that hadn't been even thought of. But then when he showed me a bunch of these images where you have like satellite images, you could see how the earth was clearly, it has the ripples of like massive amounts of water going through certain parts of the world. Yeah. Well, it kind of raises the issue of the spiritual properties or promise of the psychedelics. I mean, are the psychedelics spiritual and the agents? Yeah, I just don't know if they, I'm beginning to believe they're more enhanced. They have to have something to work on. They can only work on who you are. And I think they just work on who you are. I don't think they necessarily, you know, generate their own information that they're somehow transmitting to you. Yeah, it's a question of how psychedelics work. What are psychedelics doing? I think psychedelics or the psychedelics state will play an important role in shaping this virtual universe that seems to be taking hold entering. Well, it's really weird considering that it was 1970 when most of these psychedelics were made a schedule of one substance. Control substance that's back of 1970. Yeah, that imagine that didn't happen. Imagine Nixon was not president that didn't happen, that didn't go through and the world evolves technologically at the same level that it has now, but also has access the entire time to all these different psychedelics legally. I think people were tripping hard even after they were illegal. I'm sure they were, but they weren't as much. Yeah, it's dangerous. People will get put in jail. People don't want to lose their lives because they want to, you know, take a tap of acid so that they didn't do it. Mot, it's like a real deterrent for a lot of people that want to have a good future. They fucked up. I don't want to do drugs. But if mushrooms were illegal, like you might have made a completely different life choice a long time ago that it made you happier. All right. Well, we're not. But the option to try should be yours. I say you're pro legalization. Yes. And it should certainly shouldn't be restricted by people who haven't experienced it. That doesn't make any sense to me. Like why would a person who has never experienced psychedelics be able to tell people who have done psychedelics that they can't do them? That's not what you don't even know what you're talking about. You don't have any experience in the state of mind that is enhancing these people's lives that have come back from war. Especially like I began therapy, which is they've passed now in Texas. You know, so they're allowing that to happen now for people with like severe drug addiction and PTSD. Yeah, it's really. It's a very interesting drug. I was wondering if you've ever done I began. No, I haven't. But it's beautiful that it's being approved and used here. Because there's so many people that could, so many fucking people go over and have to fight overseas and come back home, scrambled and need some help. And people who got hooked up on pills because they got injured because something happened or whatever it is. And then all of a sudden you have a real problem. I began is one of the best ways to kick it. Like one of the absolute best ways. It's very effective, right? It's like one dose is like one one experience is like 80 something percent of the people never go back to whatever they were addicted to. Yeah, I'm not sure if it's because of the drug or the belief in the drug. The guy who first started to, you know, kind of popular as I began was a fellow named Howard Lutzoff, a very cool guy. Met him sort of during his late phase. But like as a young man, he was addicted to heroin. And he heard about I began as a drug to just trip on and have some kicks. Yeah, he stopped and he found himself and just not using opiates anymore. Wow. Yeah, the the origin stories for I began are really fascinating. So before that people didn't know that you could use it to kick drug addiction. You know, not that much. No. But is drug addiction ubiquitous throughout history? Is there always when people that are addicted to drugs? It's just when is it when is it when is it when is it start getting recorded about people with addictions actual addictions to drugs? Yeah, I don't know. Yeah, there were, you know, there was the idea of addiction in the 1800s, maybe even earlier. It was kind of an American British idea. Like did they know they were alcoholics in the 1400s? Yeah, all kinds. I mean, I can't imagine what they were addicted to in the 1400s. Right. Scapolamine containing plants. Yeah, so, yeah, you know, the, you know, the solar nation mandrake and scopolamine. Isn't that that that dust that they blow up your nose and turn you into a vampire or a zombie rather? Yeah, that's that it. Scopolamine. Oh, yeah. Yeah, like that right. Right. A zombie drug. Yeah, some sort of a zombie drug. Yeah. Right. Isn't that scopolamine? Yeah. Well, do you know, Dennis McKenna? Sure. Yeah, he tells the story of you know, scopolamine. I mean, Mexico. I kind of, I hope I'm right. It's a great story. He, yeah, devil's breath. That's right. Devil's medication used to treat motion sickness and postoperative nausea and vomiting. But it also does something wacky. Yeah. Like if you take large doses of it, that the, the devil's breath thing. So you can get it in drama mean. That's what drama mean is, right? It's an anti-colonergic like this. Cepolamine drugs are, but isn't like the stuff that makes you less nauseous when you're seasick. Like, isn't that like composition? Does drama mean have this stuff in it? They're not the same. It's not the same. Yeah, you know, what is a, sorry. Drama mean is oral anti-histamine called dimethylhydranate. While scolamine is a different prescription only anti-colonjereic medicine, particularly in patch form used to prevent motion sickness. Okay. So they put it in a patch form to stop motion sickness, whereas drama mean is the oral thing that stops motion sickness. Got it. And those also in patches. That's the way to take it. It is a weird thing. So but scolpolamine, you can get in a patch and it is for motion sickness. Right. But it's when they blow it up your nose that it's not good. Yeah. Well, it's really in, it's, you know, the active ingredient in gymsumweed, loco weed. And what is that? Grosen, this southwest, there's a lot growing or in loco weed. Yeah. New Mexico, gymsum weed, loco weed. As gusca polemming. And it will cause, you know, effects. Well, you know, one of my patients when I worked at the VA in La Hoya, you know, was an alcoholic. But back in the day, took gymsum weed tea, drank a lot of it, one or often at the desert, two, three days, one of those kind of stories came back. He didn't remember a thing, but he stopped using alcohol. He was brain damaged though. Whoa. It's so sorry to say brain damage from that from either being the desert or from the scopolomy took too much. Oh, wow. Yeah, it's a crazy drug. Yeah. You know, it is useful. You know, one of the rather good motion sickness. Yeah. That sounds terrible. Yeah. If you take too much, or you have a better reaction to it. Yeah. Yeah. What are your things going on with American health? That's a good question. Well, I've been fascinated by these videos of pregnant women taking Tylenol to show Trump that they don't believe in what RFK Jr. saying, that somehow another anti-science. When this science came from Harvard, that sort of study came from. I mean, he's not making things up. And these people are like on TikTok, they're pregnant women taking Tylenol. Yeah, I took a lot. Well, I mean, if I weren't for Tylenol, I wouldn't be here today. For real? I mean, I do find it quite helpful. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For injuries. As you get older, a lot of people get older. Yeah, there's pain. It's a seed of medicine. Yeah. This is what you're going to do. Which is really toxic, isn't it? Well, if you take too much, they can cause what it is. It's a good dose thing. So one is fine. One's fine. You have four is fine probably. After four years, you know, can upset your stomach. Little liver toxicity is possible. But if you stay within normal limits, it seems to be fine. So at least for myself. And also in general, they haven't been recalls for, you know, what do you take it for if you're going to take it? Pain. What kind of pain you got in there? The feet. You know, I'm ahead of her knee repair a while back. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I find it to be a very helpful drug with no side effects. Well, you should definitely be a lot of dank it. Especially you. You know, my concern is always... I should be a lot to take it. People that don't understand that there's a dose that if you go over that, it's going to torture liver. And you could die. Yeah. It's all about dose. I mean, microdosing psychedelics are completely different. And a lot of it quite a few ways than full dose or the effects are different. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. Have you tried microdosing? I have in the past. Yeah. Yeah. Wild back. I was having some, some belly issues and I microdosed ayahuasca for about a month. So helpful. Very helpful. What is every day like? Microdosing ayahuasca. Well, it is a microdose. So like, I'm like a microdose teeny. So it just gave you just a little peak? I wish. Nothing. Not really. I thought just more in the beginning than how stretched it out. This is kind of like coffee. Like sparkly coffee if you take a little too much. Oh, yeah. What do you think would have happened if that 1970 sweeping act didn't take place? What do you think the world would, how much different? Have you ever contemplated it? How much different would the world be? Not really. Not at all. Yeah. Good for you. Good for you. Why waste your time? Well, I mean, you know, when I tried to get my DMT study off the ground, I mean, that was pretty weird. That was in two years of just, you know, back breaking labor. What year was that? Where it started? I submitted the paperwork in September 1988. I give my first dose of DMT in November 1990. And I gave a lot of DMT then I went kind of crazy for this for the next five years. And you were doing IV drip slow release, right? No, it was one big dose. One big dose IV. Yeah, bolus IV bolus. Yeah. Yeah. So our high dose was 0.4 milligrams per kilogram. And the highest doses now being used for 0.3. Nobody has gone back up to 0.4 on a regular basis. Yeah, so people really went out there and 0.4. They were pretty scared. Yeah. They weren't sure they were coming back. Yeah. They weren't sure they were coming back. Yeah. That is a fear. That's a fear of all psychedelic experiences. I don't think you could shut it off. Yeah. What is this? And is this real? Is this around me all the time and I'm ignoring it? Is this real? Is this real? Are you and are you ignoring it? Yeah, boy. That's a terrible state to be in. Terrible. Excuse me. That's why I think DMT ought to be carefully taken. I think everything should be carefully taken, especially if you've got something wrong with you already. But give yourself diagnosing with some really potent stuff like that. Right. Right. Then yeah. Yeah. I think it can really go south. Yeah. Well, I mean, how who's going to decide that, you know, based on what? Well, no one's deciding for you without call. You could go fill your bar at home with more than enough to kill yourself or that. Yeah. Don't get served at all. Right? Like most people can't. Yeah. Most people if you have like a little bar in your house, like three or four bottles of Jack Daniels, couple of this, a couple of that, your dead. Drink all that stuff. Your dead. Yeah. I'm happy you ever gone through a drinking face. Not a bad drinking face. I don't drink at all anymore. But I will still, if I feel like it, I'll have a glass of wine. We're correct. I'll have a margarita. I like a nice cabernet or. Okay. I just like a little red wine sometimes, but I've only had like two or three glasses of anything over the last like eight, nine months. And even like I didn't even finish the wine. It's like I've lost my taste for it. It just, the trade off is not worth it. Like I have a lot of fun people in my life and I have a lot of fun without alcohol. Like I don't necessarily think it was providing me with the amount of good versus the amount of negative, the negative art weight it, especially physically. Right. It's just bad for you physically. Yeah. Yeah. Thankful I didn't drink in high school. And I kind of made up for the last time in college. And I got really sick a few times. Yeah. So I just stopped drinking. Like to that point anyway. Wow. It's like people are having a good time. You know, and I get it. And if you're young and I get it, I kind of did it too. But it's not good for you. No. It's not good for your decision making too, because then you'll meet the next day. And if you're at that low state of being hung over, you're fucking for sure. And I'll put now great energy. Yeah. Well, you don't want to get into that state. No. Or you do. You want to channel really, really carefully. Yeah. Like I've never been part of like an ultra orthodox sect. But I think what happens in some of the ultra orthodox Jewish sects, there's a lupa vichir sect in Brooklyn. And the fellow who led that was Shnerson, Minacham Shnerson. And he really enjoyed drinking. And inspired. And anyone of others to become inspired. Yeah. It has to become a conduit. I think it kind of differs like with Bukowski. Yeah. But like, you know, we couldn't think of somebody who loves alcohol. First time he first time he got drunk, it was a psychedelic experience, actually. Yeah. And his account he says to himself, I think I've found something very important. It's kind of hilarious. Yeah. That was never the effect alcohol had on me. I didn't, you get me feel good for a while short period of time. Yeah. No. We obviously all differ biologically, but some people, it hits a switch that nothing else does. There's some people love it. Yeah. Well, it's discounted in the tax fee. You shouldn't drink too much. It's very smart. Very clear. But I'm not sure you shouldn't drink at all. You should drink if you want to drink. And you know, just, you know, everybody, people get real rigid. You know, especially if you have someone around you that has a problem with alcohol, or you have had a problem with alcohol. Well, there's a huge homeless population in Albuquerque. Oh, yeah. Alcohol plays somewhat of a role. Yeah. I played a lot more in the Navajo reservation when I lived in Gallop. And I think people are just using abuse drugs. And also those things, they sound like there's not a lot of opportunity in the places you're describing, right? Right. So if you don't, yeah, you just want to not feel any of your outside of reservation or on one, or on a reservation. Yeah. I mean, I'm in the middle of the audiobook empire of the summer moon for the second time. It's all about the Comanches and the war between the settlers and the Comanches and the Red's crazy. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And I mean, the middle of this, and I'm thinking like, people always been this horrible. And we're just sort of catching up to it now. Well, you know, that's, it's not taken into accounting. We can't enable the can enable story. Sure. The first two children, one mergers the other. So start this, start it. They start away back. It starts way back with the bag. And you just go, God, if people always been this awful from the beginning, right? Well, you know, there's a little line in the text that he's going to, that, you know, God is going to destroy mankind. No, no, what does he put? What happens here? I think he decides people will only live 120 years at the most because their inclination is bad from the get go. 120 years is enough time to repent and become a better person. Wow. So you're giving 120 years to, you know, deal with what you were born with. But this book, this empire, the summer moon, it just makes me think when you think about what life was like for the people that lived here before the European settlers arrived and how quickly everything went away. And historically, in terms of like the timeline, it was only a few hundred years, and it was just completely gone. Yeah. What a garden of Eden lost. There was also, there was a lot of war. That's the thing that everybody likes to leave out. Like, I'm fascinated with Native American culture. I'm fascinated with this command, she civilization that lived here because this book, empire, the summer moon is just, it's so interesting. They were so fierce and they lived right here. Yeah. Well, there's 29 poi blows in New Mexico. And the play below are peaceful folk, they're agricultural. Yeah. You know, that's been their heritage. Just command sheet were not. And one of the things this book talks about is how a lot of the apaches were not on horseback and they were, and that they were literally wiping out bands of apache. And forcing them to go to Mexico. It's like, this has always been, there's always been, once they've had horses, which is really like after the Spaniards got here. Right. Then they, once the command sheet's figured out horses, they got really good at it. And they were like an impossible barrier to get through this part of the country. Yeah, there's mostly Navajo run where I lived in Gallup. And they were nomads. They raised sheep. Spun. Sure. And then then the eastern side, a lot more agriculture, right? Yeah, well, the space and the stuff. The amount of time that it took for everything to get pushed where if you're a native American and you're, you know, it's 2025 for you and you're living on a red of reservation, you're like, whoa, what happened? You start going into the history of it. Like how many people died? Like what happened? Is there a command sheet presence in Texas? A lot of signs. I'll tell you that. A lot of the signs are like quanaparker lane. I don't know. He was the last command sheet chief. Yeah. Yeah. Well, they always name things after we used to be there. Well, this is all that area. There's a lot of command sheet we're in this area, but it went all the way down to Oklahoma. It was just a barrier that you couldn't get through. Yeah. Well, yeah, it was fun living in Galat. It was mostly Navajo. Yeah. Yeah. Very low key. They come to terms with being, you know, defeated part of it. Yeah, part of it. Yeah. It's crazy though, isn't it? Well, I mean, it like had that all those things had to take place in order to get New York City. Like, yeah. So you have to decide what do you like more? New York City or you want to go back in time and say, don't sell this. Right. You know, what do you like more? Do you like pizza? Do you like to go to a nice, I like pizza. I do too. Like to be able to go to a nice nightclub, have a drink, go to a nice steak dinner in New York City. Or give it all back. Give it all back. Go back in time. Because hey, guys, you're getting robbed. Don't tell us for whatever it was. You can't haul progress. How much did they buy New York for? $27. Really? In jewelry. Fake jewelry even. No. Yeah. Wow. What a deal. $45. What a great, what a great origin story for a villainous country. That their number one city was made through a swindled deal. Yeah. Where it was fake jewelry. Well, that's why I went to medical school. What was the Bronx? Well, you're from New Jersey. Yes. Yeah, that's where I was born. Yeah. I turned in the Bronx. I didn't get to Jersey much. New Jersey is a crazy place. Because everybody thinks of it as just being city. Because it's right near the city. Like hack and sack and Hoboken and stuff like that. But it's like mostly rural. Yeah. Mostly it's got bears all over the place in it. There's some really nice coastal parks. Yeah. Oh, yeah. The shore is awesome. You know, small doses. Yeah. Nice to go down there. So the Bronx was great training. Yeah. Yeah. It's a Shiva. It's like the modern orthopedics, you know, university in the country. Oh, that's where it is. Yeah. And it's the medical school of Shiva. It's called Einstein. And it's in the Bronx. Yeah, and it's the medical school of Yeshiva. Mmm, it's called Einstein. And, uh, I have some of the Bronx. It was great training. We could do anything. We could do everything. Because it was pretty poorly staffed and some in some ways in the 70s. So we had a lot of, uh, you know, duty. When did you first even have the idea to create a study of people doing IV DMT? Like, when did you even... That's a lot of story. It's like a good one, though. It's like a good one. Because, uh, how do you get to the point where you're asking the government to let you do this? And then you get them actually to say yes. Mm-hmm. That's... It was the war on drugs that funded our study. Well, it all kind of came to a head with parents McKenna. We were up in his loft one afternoon. And, uh, instead of saying DMT was a really great drug. And asked for money. We said DMT was a really dangerous drug. And asked for money. Uh, I think you've told me this before. Yeah. Yeah. But it's a good story. It's like, yeah. Yeah. I just want to study it. We just want to study it. It's not better, bad. It's clever, because it's not... You're not lying. I know. No. I knew what I was talking about too. Yeah. Like I had done neuroendocrine knowledge of your research with melatonin circadian rhythm research. Yeah. I was a bona fide investigator. I just asked simple questions. You could be given what happens when you give it. DMT is really strange. The role is played in my life. I've been complaining for years that, um, I'm not complaining for years, but, uh, I don't know. I'm more skeptical of the psychedelic experience than I was before. I don't think it's a... It's a panacea. Well, I think it is a panacea. That's the problem. Um, I think there's an issue with spiritual narcissism. That's a thing that sort of grips people when they start doing it a lot. And then their identity is wrapped up in doing it a lot. Yeah. Yeah. Like, it's a little bit of that that happens with folks. With DMT in particular. Is it? Yeah. Or I or I, Oscar. Like, uh, but once the year I get an email saying something in the subject line, you're booking my son. Yeah. And they say that they just smoke way too much DMT. They were in the hospital or in prison. No, Jesus. Yeah. They just became messianic. Like you were like, like you said. Like you'd believe you no more than anyone. And if they just listened. Yeah. False messiah. Well, that's something that there are some interesting stories of false messiahs. You know, the, at least within Judaism, Messiah is not coming as opposed to Christianity where Jesus was messiah. And so what is Judaism's version of what happened with Jesus? He wasn't the messiah. So he died. He didn't get resurrected. Well, you know, he may have been resurrected, but resurrection curse in the Hebrew Bible. So that's not unique. Right. But what is there take on it? Um, well, end of story, he's killed. And that's it. He don't come back. No, not really. Not within the Hebrew Bible. That's part of the New Testament, the Christian Bible. Oh, oh, that's one thing I wanted to bring up. That is Old Testament is a term that's a little disparaging in a way. It's been a, it's been a replacement by Hebrew Bible. Interesting. Yeah. What was that? It's been building. Okay. So is this like a pronouns thing to prefer this? Uh, it perfectly. It wants to be identified as a Hebrew Bible. They prefer it. I was saying it. Yeah. It could be either. It will interest simplicity. Yeah. Um, you know, like I was thinking of it, well, you know how people put in parenthetical phrases, you know, he, him. Yeah. I was, I was thinking of doing that for myself once it, and it, and it's, and it would be gender neutral. Sounds good. Yeah. Well, that's one of the, or just not ever. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, I was thinking about, you know, you know, does God have genitals? And, you know, probably not. Doesn't seem like it's a likely way we were made, but it's probably some sort of a interdimensional psychedelic equivalent of intercourse that. Well, it, it, higher beings have an interaction with each other. I think it was the optimal form. The optimal form. Yeah. To contain a certain consciousness and do particular things. It's an ideal form. You know, it, it was ideal. So that's, you know, why it took a particular unique shape. You know, form follows function, things like that. Right. Well, I'm, I got confused there. What are you referring to? Oh, well, you know, the specific, well, I think you're, um, I's referring to man being made in God's image. Okay. Yeah. With genitals. Oh, right. Yeah. Okay. But, but I think it, you know, in the animal kingdom, things evolve to do certain things. They have form and function, which, you know, combined determine their range of behaviors. So I think in humans, it sort of was the optimal form as well. Same way perhaps. What do you think happened when human beings had this doubling of the brain size over a period of two million years? What do you think that was? Is that true? Supposedly. Yeah. I think so. I think it was, yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Sounds like a crazy little expansion. Yeah. So, I mean, you could look at it, you know, evolutionarily, you know, theologically, you can look at it too as, you know, finally being endowed with, you know, a human spirit. You know, there's multiple spirits, you know, and even in the Hebrew Bible, there's multiple spirits. So as the brain expands in size, you develop a human spirit. I think so. That human spirit allows for divine communication, at least that's how the theory goes. It's the, you know, the breathing of the soul to man, by God. And it's in man's creation. Right. So ultimately we're going to get to be a gray. We're going to have a big giant head, nor not going to need to talk, because we're going to do it telepathically. Yeah. Okay. You know, telepathically, you think people being able to read the mind as a good thing. And it will be a good thing once that that happens or if it can happen. I think it will be a thing. And like all things, it will have good aspects to it and bad aspects to it. I think reading people's minds will be very enlightening. You're going to learn a lot more about how people actually think versus what they project. You're going to be able to see people's motivations. You're going to be able to still lies. And we might even have a universal visual language that they develop. We might all be able to adopt it really quickly. And kids probably will jump right on board. And they'll be literate in it before we are. What about psychological ambivalence? You know, loving someone, one moment, hating them another. Well, that's what happens if you tune in to one at one moment. You can Vince. That's, you know, solely the case. If you're ambivalent, all ambivalence is a real thing. And you're, you know, you have an unconscious too, where things are kind of stirred away psychologically. Yeah, I'm not saying it's good. It might be hard. Well, I don't know if there is some way where we link up and we can communicate completely telepathically. It could be really weird. But it will be a thing. That's my point. It's like it's, it's, we're going to have to navigate it like we navigated making books. like we navigated everything else. Like if we want to stay alive, we've got to recognize that there's some shit going down. Time, time, shit going down right now. And right, well, there's free will isn't there, you know, forever. You start all these decisions that you have to make. Well, I mean, in this, or is there free will, the determinism people don't think there is. Well, it feels as if there's free will. Yeah. I feel like we respect free will. So it's probably a real thing. We expect we respect a person who's like been a drunk their whole life, who puts down the bottle and starts running around the block. We respect that because it's a real thing. Free will is, there's part of free will. It's like there's something there, there's something there. You make choices. And you don't know why you make choices, but you make choices. That's the thing. There's a lot of factors in why you make choices. And it's not 100% determinism and it's not 100% free will. So it's kind of there's a soup. It's a very. Yeah. Well, to the extent that you can exert free will, you know, you have to kind of do the best you can. Yeah, you have to do best again. Yeah. And even if we're uploaded into the cloud, let's say, like, I mean, how's that time going to be spent? Good question. What is, I mean, are we even capable of imagining what we're talking about? Are we so crude in our understanding of what's to come in the next five, 10, whatever years that we're just, we're just guessing we're silly. We're like writing a bad science fiction movie from the 1980s about the year 2000. You remember those like space 1999? Well, you know, it's it's the one guide and the golden rule. I think that's what will be left with ethically, you know, what the basis of our decision making will be. I've always wondered if we're in a race to avoid catastrophe. And that's one of the reasons why we're so like hyper focused on accelerating with technology is that we kind of always recognize that this species is on a race to avoid natural catastrophe. Like there's just so much potential for natural, natural catastrophe, whether it's super volcanoes, asteroid impacts, so many different things have like almost wiped us out to nothing. That it's like might be a part of the reason why this is like mad rush to make better and better and better technology. It's almost like a game. Like can you get to the final boss? Can your species survive and figure out a way to stop the rock from space? Yeah, you know, the footsteps of the Messiah, that's what that's called. I mean, you want to be around, you want to be around at the time of the Messiah, but not really because things have to get it. Because things have to get so bad. That's one model of the end of times. There's also a lot of people that don't recognize that being a human being on earth is being a passenger in an organic spaceship going through the universe. Like there are real celestial events that they have to keep their eyes on. You know, you have an experience in your life, so like, eh, but no, there's giant rocks that killed the dinosaurs and they're still floating around, same size rocks. Yeah, I know. And they can't stop them. They don't know how to stop them yet. Like don't listen to anything. Look at people. Oh, if we saw it, we would do this and do that and sleep tight at night. No, no, no, no, no. If there was some gigantic state-sized chunk of metal flying through the galaxy, we would have a real problem. Yeah. It might wipe out all of humanity. Yeah, it might wipe out all of humanity. Yeah. And it probably came really close to doing that a few times in history. That's what I think. It's the only thing that makes sense. If we know that we're hit all the time, we all accept the fact that you can on impact that's what killed the dinosaurs, and there's been a bunch of them throughout history. We've seen, we've find creators everywhere. Everyone knows that we've been hit multiple times. The Tunguska thing in Russia. Yeah. Where flattened this enormous patch of forest that's still flattened. Have you been watching season two of, um, um, of Grand Hancock's ancient apocalypse? I didn't watch season two yet. Yeah. No. I watched season one though. Yeah. What's season two about? It's like the Americas, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The Americas are crazy. Yeah, I like Grand. Oh, he's the best. Yeah. He's hardworking. Oh, he loves what he does, man. He really, really does. And the fact that he's finally been over all these attacks, he's finally been vindicated and people are starting to accept more and more things are probably a lot older than, than we want to believe. Especially after go backly, that kind of like that popped the quirk on everything. And everyone's like, okay, well, this has definitely been buried for 11,000 years. So what this is kind of crazy. We didn't know they could do that back then. Well, before coming out here, I asked Chachi PT, you know, how old are some of the stories written down in the text in Hebrew Bible, and at least according to Chachi PT is 10,000 years ago. You know, so you know, something may have happened at that time. That makes sense. Yeah, that's a very interesting finding. Oh, you know, Sodom and Gomorrah, that's a great story. I'm working on this translation of the Hebrew Bible. I've got a suspect now. I've been putting out things every week, a chapter, a week. Yeah. On my translation of the Bible, it's like a thousand pages right now of commentary about the language and the grammar and the meaning that was called the plain meaning of the text. Like there was, I know, with three sons and one on the ark. Yeah, so that's like my big project, but I like to do a smaller one about a sodom and Gomorrah and the figure of lot. I think that's a really incredible story. I've spent about maybe two to three weeks looking at that, you know, a lot his virgin daughters, the men circling his house. They're asking to know him. He ends up, you know, in a cave with his two virgin daughters, they get him drunk and he sleeps with them. Or, you know, they lie with him anyway. Yeah, and I've come to two kids at a certain point and they become very important. Later on, they're the beginning of the Messianic line. You know, so it's a very intricate tale with a very, I think you can make some cool conversations between some of the main personages and the narrative. You know, there was a book called The Red Tent. Can I ask you about the lot, like how old was that story? Well, it's an explanation of sodom and Gomorrah, which is around the Dead Sea. There was a conflagration of some sort there. I'm at any of your guests smoking about the sodom, you know, what actually happened around the Dead Sea. It was quite catastrophic. Well, tell us. Tell us. Well, the story of a lot, yeah, I mean, did there was fire and sulfur pouring down and sodom and Gomorrah? Yeah, it was the end of the plane. Yeah, so that's the southern part of the Dead Sea. You know, it is a Dead Sea because it was high salt concentrations. It was kind of closed off from the coast. So it's at least a description of what took place. What do you think it's describing? Well, I mean, you know, my perspective is it actually happened. You have a people think of a volcano, of some kind of a volcanic activity. We're totally saying it sounds like a volcano, right? And we know that there's been a bunch of those that have almost wiped people out entirely at certain points. The Tobo volcano, you know, that one? No. We got down to, I think we've looked this up before, but I want to say they think we might have gotten down to just a few thousand people. On the whole planet. It was like 70,000 years ago. 70,000 years ago there was a massive super volcano that went off. And it, you know, plunged the earth probably into nuclear winter. And they think that our genetic line entirely of the human race on earth came from this few thousand survivors. Joe, can we take a... Yes, a baby? Yes. We'll be right back, folks. Seriously. We're back. Yeah, so we were talking about the alternative. Yes, explains what you mean by that. Like, these things are happening in an alternative dimension. Right. Yeah, I think they're happening in an alternative dimension. Like when you smoke DMT, you return to the same place each time. So there seems to be some... Some reality, some DMT world that people enter into. And it's... One of my volunteers, one of the subjects in the DMT research, he got a big dose one day. And then a few months later, he got another big dose. And he said that it was very interesting. He said things have just continued to pace since his first exposure. His first entrance into that state. And then had had, you know, gone on in the meantime. And he re-entered near that world. So in that way, there's a... In that same manner, the world of the Hebrew Bible early on, Adam Eve, Cain, Abel, Noah, the Tower of Babel, all that took place. Mm-hmm. On some different level of reality, which gradually made us way into ours. And once it made its way into ours, there's the archaeological evidence in the first temple, second temple, and so on. So there is a transition. Our world in that world kind of merged. But in the beginning, it was an alternative dimension. The same God, I think, but different dimensions. Is this your own personal conclusion? Yeah. Well, you know, I would not have been on the show last time. You're asking if I believe those things took place. And my answer then was I... You know, I take it as if it were true. Right. And then I started to think, you know, how I would do that. You know, like, in what world would that be true? It would be a different world. Right. I feel like I've always believed that they were trying to record something. I just didn't always trust that human beings were completely honest with their recollection of events. So that there's something that they were trying to write down. But was it really coming from God? Was it... Are these accurate events? What exactly happened with Noah and the Ark? What really happened? Well, you know, three stories. You know, three... You know, three levels. You know, two of each, then seven. You know, one pair or seven pairs of birds. Well, of every living thing. Yeah. Well, like, how's he feeding him animals, eat other animals? The whole thing's nuts. You would need a lot more rabbits. You need so many animals to keep just the lions alive. Right. It doesn't make any sense. How's he getting them all from all over the world and to his stupid boat? Yeah. There's so many things that are wrong. Yeah. But the story of him being told that some people have been told that some shit is about to go down. And you probably should, you know, find some way to restart your version of civilization somewhere. There's probably multiple... Like the flood myth that we... You know, whatever you want to call it, the stories of the flood, that you get from Epic of Gilgamesh, that you get from Noah... There's not just those. There's many, many different cultures all throughout history have a flood story, right? So it's probably likely that some crazy shit went down. You know, there may have been... You know, there most likely was a flood. Yeah. So what do you learn from it? You know, like how do you do better or on what basis do you rebuild? You know, so I think there's new different models. You know, the biblical one is interesting because it's a lineage from Adam to Noah. Right. Day Bram, Isaac, and Jacob and the tribes. So when you talk about things happening in an alternative dimension, is that what you think the birth of mankind is as well, like Adam and Eve? Well, I mean... Post-microphone... Okay, I'm sorry. That's okay. It just has an impact in... Yeah. Well, you know, the creation story, your man was created on the sixth day. Right. Along with mammals. It's a cool story. You know, stages. You know, people are say, well, you know, seven days, that's unlikely. Like, you know, that your creation took place seven times 24. I don't know, 148. You know, something... 148 hours, 168 hours, the whole world was, you know, was created. But it's broken into stages, you know, seven stages, which is one of the translations of the word that is usually translated day. It could also mean stage. It's a word, yum. It could mean either day, appear, of time, a stage. So that's, you know, that's the answer that makes sense to me about the seven-day story of creation. Yeah, so, you know, man was created on the sixth day, and then was placed in the Garden of Eden. And, you know, those events took place. You know, the stories themselves are just, you know, they're written down. And so people have been studying them for thousands of years. Who do you think Lilith was? No mention of Lilith in the Bible. Really? Yeah. Where's the story of Lilith the merge? Well, it comes from what's called Midrash. What's that? Uh, comes from a route. Do you are shag, da rush? Uh, it means to, I don't know, explicate to expand upon, to investigate. You know, so what happened after Adam and Eve sinned? You know, did they have sex again? And they do have it, uh, Cain enabled, and the ensuing stories. And, you know, then there's a third son, Shate, who, uh, is the inheritor of Adam's good, uh, of his traits. He's good traits and bad traits. He's like God as well. Yeah, so, there's a distinct lineage that, uh, is spelled out. You know, Lilith was, uh, a demon, you know, that, uh, she slept with Adam after the sin. Of eating from the fruit, of knowledge, of good and evil. Yeah, so there's a story that, that, that, that built up around, um, the biblical story that they were separated at, I mean, need for, you know, we're separated for a long period. And, you know, so who it was Adam sleeping with? Well, I was expanded in the Midrash that there was a demoness named Lilith, who slept with Adam for me, I don't know, a couple hundred years. And then Adam, many of you have reconciled. Whoa. Yeah. So, um, you know, so Lilith is, you know, she, she doesn't appear in the text of the Hebrew Bible, uh, as such. Yeah, so nobody knows, you know, that there's all mythology that's grown around Lilith as well. Well, isn't there some festival, some, some music festival called the Lilith? Yeah, the Lilith fair. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's, that's named after, you know, the spirit that, that, you know, demonesses. You sure wasn't like a lady named Lilith, she came up with it. Are we sure? It was her neighbor. Lilith, uh, Swift, that's his myth. Um, so what was the reason why the book of Enoch, like so it was not included in all the ways included in all the versions of the, the Bible by a decision of like how many people. It was like a few rabbis, right? Um, well, the canon you're talking about, there's 22 books in the Hebrew Bible. Right. Yeah. There, there's certain versions of it that they found with the Dead Sea Scrolls, like the book of Isaiah, that's identical for a beta, which is really amazing, right? Uh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, there's only an Ethiopian version, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, have you looked into the book of Enoch? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. It's like that's the place where Graham Hancock started getting interested in the possibility that they have the arc of the covenant. Right. There's supposed to be a tribe. Uh huh. Any Ethiopia. And they all get counter-ex on the people that are protecting it. They only live like a certain amount of time and then they die. Yeah. Well, that's true. Well, if any of that's true. If any of that's true, if, if, if, somehow or another, there's people on earth today that an arc of the covenant. How could you keep that a secret? That's the craziest thing to be even allowed to keep a secret. Yeah, it's one of those things that you can't even imagine. Maybe you know, you can imagine they open up a door and like there it is. Oh, like like from Raiders of the Lost Ark, melts your face off. Well, it would contain the 10 Commandments. Yeah, yeah, the original tent. Well, yeah, the original tent commandments. Well, what do you think these guys are guarding in Ethiopia where they're getting cataracts? Because when Graham describes it, you're like, if you're telling me the truth and I think you are, because you've never lied to me at, if you're telling me the truth, these people that are guarding this place that supposedly has the arc of the covenant are all getting like radiation sickness? Yeah. Well, yeah, the arc is hidden. I mean, that's what, as you said in Hebrew Bible, is that it's hidden. So we just don't know what happened. I have at least according to the Hebrew Bible, it still hasn't been discovered yet. So it might be in Ethiopia, it got only those. It's just the craziest story ever, because it was... Okay, the Hebrew Bible, it still has been, it hasn't been discovered yet. So it might be any of the opiate cut on those. It's just the craziest story ever, because if it is true, if this, one church has the arc of the covenant, like, hey, guys, let us get a look at it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, I hope they got it right. Oh, yeah. Well, they should definitely make sure someone doesn't steal it. Yeah. Well, the, you know, the 10 Commandments, you're less appearing in, in, in, I'm at public schools now. Yeah. I had a guy, James Talorico on to talk about that, actually, who's a very, a staunch Christian and thinks it's a terrible idea to have the 10 Commandments in class. Right. Who's your indoctrinating children? Because it's like a way to drive them away from Christianity. You're forcing it on them. He's like, we, we, we shouldn't do it that way. And certainly not do it in a way where you're only going to have the 10 Commandments. And you're not going to have anything about Buddhism. And you're not going to have anything about Muslim Islam. You're not going to have anything about, about how anything about Baptist or what, you know, fill in the blank, Mormons fill in the blank, you know, Scientologists, you'd have to have everything. Yeah. Just keep going forever and ever and ever. And then splinter groups. Yes. So he's got a good idea. I mean, I think he's right. I think they should stop doing that. If you want to teach it in a classroom that someone applies for, that's great. But like putting it on the wall of every class seems kind of insane. Apparently, he was saying that it's just a couple of different gentlemen in Texas that are like, super wealthy and super Christian. And they want this to be like a theocracy. Unfortunately, where we heard that before in the Middle Ages. Yeah, baby. Look, I just think of what happens when people get a shit ton of money and a shit ton of power and they start getting older. They need a sport. They need to take up a, take up a game that fascinates them instead of trying to like global world dominate. You know, it's just people get to positions of extreme wealth and power. And they just want to manipulate things and make more money. They want to do it forever and ever and ever. And they can't. You only live to be under and do what? If everything goes perfect, maybe today you might be able to if you can make it to like, if you make it to 90 today, I bet you could live a lot longer. If you lived to 90. Yeah. If you can, I've lived way older than you than my father. And so I think, yeah, I think I'll live a while longer. I married a young woman. I need to stay fit. You know, that actually does help with live a longer time. Yeah. There's been studies to show that men that date younger women, they have more active lives. They feel healthier. I'm more active. Yeah. But it could be those of the kind of women that are interested in dating that kind of guy. I just don't know. Is it very, yeah. I don't know how it works. And the kind of guys that are more active and healthy would also be the kind of guys that would want to date younger women. So it was a bi-a-sample group. Right. Yeah. One of my analysts said it was a mystery. She had no idea and she'd been seeing patients for like 50 years. She had an answer said, no, I have no idea if some mystery. Interesting. And why people get together. Yeah. Well, I think whatever makes you happy. Well, that's it. Yeah. That's the book of Ecclesiastes. It's about, you know, it's emptiness, emptiness, it's all emptiness. But at the end, you should make your wife happy and eat and drink and be married while you're alive. What do you think of that? It's good advice. Solid advice. I was living 2000 years ago. I'd probably say the same thing. Right. Yeah. I think there's modernization. Just no medicine. You have no antibiotics. There's no orthopedic surgeons that are going to put your knee back together again. Yeah. I'd say that too. Yeah. Yeah. It is bad when you have one doctor for every organ system. Yeah. Yeah. They didn't know anything. It's nuts. I mean, how many people died of infection spectra? We're just not alone. That's extended life like just antibiotics alone. It's extended lifespan so much because so many people that would have probably died got healthy again. So many people and those people can maybe figure out some new way to bridge this gap and stop these viruses and stop this and then we just keep getting better at it until we eventually get to the point where we're living as long as Noah. 600 years for Noah. And that's probably when Gog gets fed up. He's like, enough. Well, you fucking animals. Maybe that's like, maybe we're going to repeat that process. Maybe we're going to like figure out some awesome new peptides to keep you alive for 500 years and everyone's going to be addict everybody else. And then eventually God will just have to drown us again. In. I'm in college. We had to read a book about the funeral home industry in Southern California. Yeah. I read a little novel by Alta Sucksley for many a summer dyes this one. It's about these people who live forever by eating the intestinal microbiome of carp. Oh, wow. And they become like carp. You know, a lot of ways. And I tried to get into one of these funeral homes like, you know, asked to be I asked an interview them to see, you know, what people, you know, you did after death and never heard back one of those crazy college stories about um, looking into the funeral home industry. Uh, well, you know, which is a, I don't know. That's pretty big. It's a weird business. You get the business of taking care of bodies. And you don't don't really have a lot of options. Right? Like you're not like, if someone dies, I don't think you're are you just allowed to let them fertilize some plants? Are you allowed to do that? Yeah. I, you know, like, I don't have to put them in for Malta. I do have to do all that stuff. Uh, I mean, I did are not topsy on a cadaver, you know, we're back in the day, open people up and look at them. Well, then there's the surgery which she go through as well. Right. Those are odd pause. Where we go with this conversation? I don't know. Well, I love the Hebrew Bible. I spent all my time in it. Just the weirdest thing there is. Like, do you do um, have any idea why the book of v-nock was supposedly excluded from being included in the Bible? Yeah. Seems to be some debate about that, right? Yeah. Yeah. I know. There's uh, you know, there was a, I think that did see scroll community use the book of v-nock. Right. It was like their Bible. Right. Yeah. Very strange. Well, the thing about the book of v-nock is really, you know, very psychedelic. Uh, but there's not that much. I like, I don't think there's much in it as far as, you know, Judaism itself. I mean, it's that discussion of the righteous being rewarded and the evil being punished, even people being punished. But you don't really learn what it needs to be righteous. And you don't really learn in from the book of v-nock what it's meant to be evil. Um, well, you don't know how, yeah, there isn't all that much information I don't think in there. It's historical and it's really weird astronomical stuff too. Um, but I think it may not have been included in the tech in the Hebrew Bible because there weren't any ethical teachings that one that could be, you know, had by reading it. No ethical teachings that could be had by reading it. What do you mean by that? Yeah. I mean, one of the essences of Judaism, I think is monotheism. Ethical monotheism. You know, that's where, you know, there's the golden rule and there's one God. Yeah. So it's ethical monotheism. Um, yeah. So where were we? Where were we? Yeah. Just just then. Um, we were talking about the Hebrew Bible and we were talking about what else we were talking about. We were talking. Why, why the book of v-nock was in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Oh, yeah. But in the beginning, but it wasn't accepted later. Right. Um, but some parts of the Dead Sea Scrolls, like the book of Isaiah, right? That was the one that was found to be the oldest version of it that was verbatim. Yeah. Well, yeah. I think it's just, it was two psychedelic. And it was a two psychedelic. Yeah. I think, I mean, at least in Ezekiel, let's say, which is comparable, you know, Daniel, two is quite psychedelic. Um, you know, that those were some ethical, you know, some historical narrative. But imagine making that call, imagine making that call how long ago right? A long time ago to take that story out. I'm, I'm not buying this one guys. Leave it out. Meanwhile, that's the one that's the most compelling to me. Yeah. Yeah. So what do you like about the book of v-nock? It was just so bizarre. It's very because it makes the whole thing. It's like, oh, okay. Now I get the big story, the whole story's crazy. And the origin story, the book of v-nock, like as it starts, like in the very first chapter, you're like, wait, what's going on? Mm-hmm. Fornication with humans and the race of giants, like what? What are you guys describing? Things coming down and watchers? What are you guys talking about? Like, what was this? Yes. It's so left field of the rest of the Bible. But it was included in the same like those clay pots that they found in Kuma Ron. It was in there too. Just you don't know what to believe. Like what happened there? Well, yeah, you might not not know what to believe, but you can also believe in one way of doing it as well. One way of doing it? As long as you don't get Dr. Nair. Right. Yeah. Okay. I need to see it yourself. Well, when I think about it, I just go blank. I just try to imagine like, what are they even describing? Like, what does any of that stuff mean? It just seems so alien. There's watchers and they meet with humans and they create the nephalanne giants that consume and destroy the earth. Like, mm-hmm. And so imagine if that was left into the Bible and they taught that in school, you'd be like, what happened? Yeah. It sounds completely crazy. Yeah. It was a mistake. Yeah. That's why there is the flood. As you know, the works was filled with the violence of the nephalanne feeling. I believe the reason of the flood. I mean, look, if we're this size, we have so many problems with each other, imagine something that's like triple the size of us that's running around with us just picking us up and beating us over the head with each other. Yeah. You know, one of the figures in the text is Oghin Sihon, who are the kings of the Emirates and the land before the Hebrews take over. And there were giants that they were believed to be giants. They talk about how the bed of one of these kings, Oghursihon, was like nine feet long or something. 13 feet long. Yeah. You know, so there were a couple still still alive back then. So do you think those are real humans? They were giants. So you think they were real giants for sure? Are you 100% convinced that giants roamed the earth? Like there was 15 foot tall humans, monstrous humans. It may not have occurred. Well, that's the reason that I think there's some alternative universe that says real is this one, which was the, yes, the, the site of the lives afterwards. So when you say there's an alternative universe that says real is this one, do you think we dance back and forth between possible universes? Do you think we're always in the constant same universe? Or do you think like this concept of parallel universes or alternative universes that these you go back and forth between these? Now, no, I think they're pretty well separated. Don't you? So you think that the world was a different place back then and that the, the, the, the doorway to go back and forth was easier to traverse. It was one directional and it kind of was one level of reality kind of, you know, segawing into this one. So do you think these things involved psychedelics while they were doing this? Whether we were writing all the stuff down? No. No. Well, I think it involved being attuned to a level, you know, that level of reality. Yeah, which wouldn't be mediated through DMT in some ways. The visions would be mediated through DMT. Yeah, one of it's possible too. If you're living in a world, like we, we can't even imagine living in a world we're not environmentally poisoned. Like we're, we're constantly surrounded by Wi-Fi and 5G and we're eating microplastics and glyphosate is on every vegetable. And if there's, we're like in a swoop, we're in a soup of toxins. We can't even imagine what it's like to not have that end to not be burdened down by electronics and all the different things that people like they're probably very different back then. Just human beings in general. I bet they're probably very different in a lot of ways. Yeah, that's one of the reasons I like living in Gallup is really kind of simple. Simple. Yeah. Yeah, there wasn't much Wi-Fi in there. Yeah, it was just, uh, simple's good for you. It's not perfect though. She feel like sometimes cities are fun. Yeah, you called me when I was living in Gallup and he said to be why are you living there? You're telling me there's nothing around you. It was like why are you living there's nothing around you? That's crazy. Yeah. Get out of there. It was, it was my monk face. Well, had to go through it. I don't think there's anything wrong with going through phases, but I think ultimately people like to be around people. Just, but it's, you know, there's a point where there's too many people and then people become a nuisance to you. You're stuck on the 405 and like, oh my God, look at this traffic. Where are all these people going? And, you know, then people become a burden. There's a, there's a nice balance to be had somewhere in there. I don't think it's like living in the woods by yourself. I think that's the dream. It was a weird dream. Well, it was an inspired by assets. So yeah, the problem is there's, you're with you're in the woods by yourself. There's things out there that want to eat you. Well, yeah, you're by yourself. They're going to know where you are all the time. Yeah. Well, once I was cross country skiing up in the mountains behind Gallup and I was being tracked by a mountain lion. Of course you were. Seems like it was a big question. What was going across the probably thinking about taking you out? Yeah. Yeah. Probably thinking about taking you out at a certain point. I turned around. Yeah. Yeah. Because if you look like you're out of breath, you look like you're tired. Like if they think you're limping or something like that. Oh, I think I really can't help themselves. And there was really getting dark around me. So it's good to, it's time to turn around. Not good. Yeah. They're fucking terrifying. And people have this romantic idea of what a mountain lion is. You say that until it kills your dog in front of you. Listen to me, those are dangerous predators. California is the most ridiculous way of handling it. Yeah. They have to hire people to go kill them. And when they find that when they do, they find that 50% of their diet is pets. He's got something that 100% eats your dogs and cats and you're allowing it to live in the woods near your house. Like this is kooky. Yeah. And in any of them in the mountains, kids. Okay. Yeah. Coyotes are into pets. Oh, yeah. Yeah. If it cat is lost for more than a few days around our neighborhood, that's pretty much it. If you just let your cat out, you're basically like saying, you're gonna get eaten. Yeah. I know. You probably don't know because you're just a cat. Well, you're gonna get eaten. That's why you put them out. They're everywhere now too. Coyotes are in every single city in the United States. You've seen coyotes. Oh, fuck yeah. Yeah. They'll low across the road. Yeah. I've had coyote problems where they broke into my chicken coop and killed all my chickens. Yeah, I can't just do that. They're smart too, man. They're fascinating. Yeah. They trick dogs into chasing after them and then they all ambush them. Yeah. They're very clever. Clever. Yeah. They used to watch the, you know, wildy coyote. They were very, that was so dumb. Yeah. There's a lot of road owners that are not able to. Crazy. The idea that the road would not be smarter than a coyote. Cotties are so clever. Mm. Do you ever read Dan Flores book, Coyote America? No. It's really good. It's about the origin of the coyote and why the coyote is everywhere now. And part of it is because of the persecution by the gray wolf. So the gray wolves don't mate with the coyotes, but the red wolves do. The gray wolf, so they're from a totally different line. So they just just kill the coyotes because the coyote is just a small wolf. And so what they figured out is that when a coyote dies and like when they yell out, oh, oh, oh, oh, it's like roll call. And if someone's missing, the females produce more pups. So they have extra pups. And then they spread. So the extra pups and then they move to a new place. And by doing just because they were persecuted by the gray wolves, when they started getting persecuted by humans, you know, like so human beings extradited wolves. They, they kill them all off except for a few in the upper northern parts of the United States with strict nine, but they couldn't do it with coyotes. The coyotes just can't move it around except with they just went to different spots. They're very smart. They're super smart. They're in New York City right now. Right now there's coyotes in Central Park in New York City. Little wild wolves running around Central Park. Co-existent. Just big enough where they don't look threatening. They're just a clever little player of nature's game. Why are they coyote? It's a really good book, though, but it's also about like what's it's called coyote America. I could have sworn John McFee wrote about coyotes. Remember John McFee out in that country is Alaska book. I'm sure he probably wrote a book about coyotes, too. This is just different. This is about the origins of, you know, the coyote mythology amongst Native Americans and that there's thought to be a trickster. And it's, it's just a, it is a uniquely American animal, you know, it adapts. Yeah, well, that's too bad of seeing your chickens. Yeah, shit happens. Sorry, here, that's right. Well, it happened. They got, they got, they killed them all. My chickens in California, they got into a chicken coop and they killed like nine of them. So the chicken coop got damaged because the fire, so we had to get another chicken coop set up. And so when we're set up the other chicken coop, it was one that you just buy from like a pet store and it wasn't that durable and the coyotes figured out how to open it. And they just fucked up these chickens. Ooh, it's a mass man. Yeah, it was all feathers. Feathers in blood. Yeah, it was horrible. They just went on up. They just killed them all. They killed them all. They killed like nine of them. But, you know, that's the fucking game they play. And I love that they exist. I'm a fan of coyotes. I like hearing them at night. I think they're I don't want them to eat my dog though. You know, it's like, and you know, they're not going to listen. You know, like, hey, don't eat my dog and we're cool. No, they're, they're playing a game. It's like, wait till you turn your back and they'll attack your toddler. I think besides, you know, movie trailers, the things I watch on YouTube, most are animals killing other animals. Yeah, bear. Why do you do that versus a musker? You know, musker. Yeah, and the grease stories. It's pretty primal. It is. Yeah, I like that. Yeah, it's pretty interesting. These people were in India and they were on some sort of a park drive. You know, one of the wildlife parks and they watched a tiger take out an animal right in front of them. A tiger took out a deer right in front of them. And they filmed it like, what's what's cool. Well, the ones I like are the warthogs. Oh, they're so weird looking aren't they? Yeah, they're vicious. They're huge. They look like a Star Wars character. You know, they look at a real animal. Yeah, it's on kosher pork. Interesting. It's on kosher. On kosher pigs. Yeah. And the things which are kosher, you know, chew cut and have completely split and separate who right. Right. That those are the main criteria for mammals. Do you think that's because of ancient diseases? Because it makes sense that we know that trick analysis, a lot of that comes from pork. Right. It all seemed to me pigs are dirty animals. I had a friend who is consistent that given the choice pigs are very clean animals. So it's hard to say about the filthast back of it. That's domestic pigs. Wild pigs are filthy animals. Wild pigs. Yeah. All of them. 100% of them. There's a difference between like a domestic pig. This is where it gets really weird. You take a domestic pig and you let it loose in the wild and six weeks later, it starts to morph. And it starts to extend it. The snout, it's tusks grow longer. It's fergots thicker. It becomes like a wild pig. That's kooky. Yeah. I guess the primitive or the early stages are really strong. Yeah. It quickly. It happens quickly, later than a month or two. It's really weird. Yeah. I wonder how that works. It must be some metric-rin thing. It must be their, you know, gonads and their tootyrian, their hypothalamus. It's a really good question because like what would let them hit that switch and realize, okay, I'm on my own now. They're not just bringing me my food every day. Fuck. Time to get hard. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it isn't a conscious decision in their part. Yeah. Seems like it just takes over. But I was thinking like if that animal is not like the Muslims don't eat it and the Jews don't eat it. And you would imagine at a time where food was really important. And if you can get pork, that would way better than not having any meat and you can't eat it because of your religion. To me, it seems like I bet at least some of the origin of that was there was a disease that was going through these people that were eating pigs. It's hard to say. You know, the ones that are kosher are the ones which were burnt up in sacrifice as well. You know, this, yeah, they're sheep and cattle. Pull that microphone up to your mouth. Sheep and cattle and goats. Right. Yeah. Those were the sacrificial animals, the ones that were burnt on the altar and also the ones that were eating. But do you think that why do you think pork was excluded from both Judaism and also from Islam? Consumption of pork. Yeah, it didn't meet the criteria. The criteria for what? For a kosher meat. It's used to cut and needs to have a completely separated completely splat. No, I get that. But I mean, why did they come up with that rule? Oh, I think it seems to be that those are the animals that have the most amount of chicken oasis unless you're eating bears. So I don't know if they're eating any bears back then. Probably not. They're probably eating a lot of deer species. And if you try to eat that kind of of wild pork back then and you're eating cookie correctly, you probably get violently ill or die. Well, you know, there are causes, you know, there are reasons for some of the precepts in the text. Yeah, they're medically established. Yeah, like shellfish probably has to do with red tide, right? Well, bottom dwellers. Bottom dwellers. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's interesting when you try to decipher it like why do they have that stuff in there? Well, kind of makes sense. Pork do pigs rather do carry a bunch of diseases that can recumin beings. Yeah. Well, the person then making the dietary laws knew that. You think that's the reason they wrote those dietary laws. Yeah, well, they didn't have meat thermometers back then, right? So I bet a lot of people ate some medium rare pork or rare pork infant and got violently ill violently ill. Like trickinosis apparently is brutal. And you have it for life so that like if somebody eats you, they get trickinosis unless they cook it. Yeah, I had to see diff some years ago. I even wrote a book about about it. What is he diff? It's potentially fatal diarrhea. Oh, no, there's a gram. Yeah, I wrote it. Well, the new that's oh, that's right. That's where I just couldn't do anything for all that's right. That's right. I forgot that you had that. Yeah, so I wrote a book about it. Anybody's interested Joseph Levy escapes death. Maybe that's part of me enjoying watching certain animals, you know, like animal killing animal. It kind of changes you that being, you know, that being that close to the edge. I'm sure. Yeah, you even offered to come out to visit or to you know, do a show at my house. Yeah, when you were real struggling and we were going back and forth, you just weren't sure if you could travel. I was like, I was worried about you. Yeah, thanks. Because you bounded back. Look at you. You look great. Thanks. But there was a time where I was worried about you because it didn't you didn't sound like you were doing well at all. Like, you were really struggling. And so yeah, that's one of the things that pushed well, I began reading concentration, camp literature. Really? Like how bad have people had it and what do they do? Wow. It was pretty inspiring. I liked reading Primo, Levy. He is my favorite author, Ellie V. Zail too. Yeah. Yeah. And Auschwitz and the ended Auschwitz. You like near the end the last month or two. It seemed like it was really something. You know, type this and nobody cleaning up after them for weeks, things freezing and bursting. It was just nuts. So you know, Primo, Levy was a chemist, very clinical, took notes, remembered things in a very kind of dispassionate, almost journalistic description. That kinds of things. People can go through. Yeah, you know, that showed me up in a way. I mean, distracted me like boy, they had it way worse and they had faith and something. So I think that helps, you know, strengthen my faith. Like God wasn't done with me. Do. So did you feel like you had an obligation to get to work once you got healthy again? Like God gave you this chance. Yeah. This bounce back. They're turning the mac. Thank God. Yeah, it's great to see you looking healthy because I really did worry because it's, you know, sometimes people, a bad health trip, take some, just take some down and weakens them so much that they never really come back. Yeah. Well, you think about death. You must think about Health trip takes them, does it take some down and weakens them so much that they never really come back? Yeah, well you think about death. You must think about death. Sure. I think about death. You have to. It's coming whether you want to or not. Be interesting to not think about death. Yeah, I don't dwell on it, but I'm definitely aware of it. Yeah, there is a week or two. Friends came over talking about, you know, their wishes or their interests and medically assisted death. There is a bigger article about that even a couple of months ago in one of the British journals. Yeah, medically assisted death. I called her rabbi and I asked his advice and he said, you know, you might be, you know, you maybe obligated to knock the pills onto the floor. I thought that was an interesting take. You may be obligated to knock the pills onto the floor. From the person's hand who's about to take them. What do they want to go? Yeah. Or, you know, within or more of the equivalent, you know, there might be some drugs going in, I view it. Right. Stop them up. Yeah, you know, so well, yeah, like I feel pretty good. So I wonder, well, you know, what happens if I start feeling really bad? Yeah, so, you know, I feel good. So I figure, well, just keep me out of pain. You can give me enough. You know, morphine. See what happens. My mom died. I watched her die. And we gave her morphine out of hand to like valium. Yeah, it was pretty peaceful. Yeah, it was quiet. Yeah. That's a weird thing because you don't want anybody poisoning anybody. But you do want to give people the option to go out gracefully. Well, I think you just be feeling great. Yeah, exactly. You'd be feeling great gracefully. Yeah. Just one burst. I had a morphine trip when I had my knee operated on once in the 90s. And it was incredible. It was incredible. And people tell me this is not true, but I swear, I remember this being true that you could press the button anytime you wanted more morphine. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's called patient control dandelages or. Yeah. People are like, no, no, you were remembering it wrong. I'm like, I don't think I am. And I really remember hitting that button a bunch of times and meeting Jesus. It was like the most wonderful loving hug by the universe. It was just like this thing in bed while my leg is on this continual motion machine. You know what those are? No, but I can imagine when they do ACL reconstructions, when they do a patella tendon graph, it's a pretty violent operation. They have to cut your knee open like a fish. They take a slice of your patella tendon along with a chunk of your bone from your shin and a chunk of your bone from your kneecap. And then they screw it it all back in place. And to keep it from seizing up while you're lying in bed, your leg is on this machine that goes like this extends it and brings it back extends it and brings it back because otherwise it'll lock up and then you're fucked. Were you awake when this was happening? Oh, yeah, you're awake. Yeah, I was awake for the operation because my thought is I'm only going to have one knee operation. I want to be awake for it. So they did like an epidural. Yeah. So I was awake. I watched it. I watched on a monitor. It was crazy. It was easy to watch this guy open my knee up, screw it in place. The point is while I was in the hospital bed, they had this button that you could press when you wanted more morphine. And I hit that button like a bunch of times and I was like, wow, it felt incredible. And I only did, and I remember also thinking, boy, this could be a problem. Because I had done construction with a guy who had a bit of a heroin problem. And so I was aware people would get like a real opiate problem. And when I was in bed, I get it. I get it now. It feels, it feels amazing. Yeah. Well, I would say cool, but, but also I knew that like my leg was fucked. I knew it was going to take forever for a felt normal again. It was in pain and like just like, okay, I can't do anything, but enjoy this right now. Just like, let me take a couple of taps and we, you know, it's called God's medicine for God's own medicine for a reason. Yeah, it felt like a hug for the universe giving you a hug. Yeah. Well, interesting, you mentioned that one day, you were talking about faith and belief and what you based it on. I was just talking about how when I was living up in Tawa size feeling kind of alone and sad. And I prayed, you know, I prayed to God, you know, helped me. And I felt this loving how you kind of embraced me at the moment. Which must have been, you know, me, did probably Biden orphans too. Right. Because it sounds pretty similar. But it's interesting that we always want to like dismiss anything positive like that. Oh, it's probably just a dorphin. So it's given you this feeling. Right. But is endorphins because of or the source of like which one is it? It might just be a part of it. Like yeah, the endorphins are real, but also is the experience. It's the experience that you're experiencing. You know, the intention that you're putting out there. Right. Right. You're not feeling the endorphins attaching to the receptors. Exactly. Yeah. You feel wonderful. Yeah. There's something real to it. Yeah. You know, drugs are interesting. They are. Well, I just wish they weren't being controlled by the cartels. Yeah. That's what's crazy. It's crazy is like people are not going to stop using it. I don't think I think there's a lot of drugs you should never use kids. And there's a lot of people that should never use any drugs. But the fact that they are always going to and that the only way they can get them is through a criminal organization. And we haven't done our fucking one plus one equals two on that still in 2025. Yeah. Well, a dispensary for everything you want. Well, it's kind of be more than that, man, because some of that stuff's heavy. So it's not just going to be an expense, but it also has to be some sort of counseling center, some sort of a guided trip. There's going to be like very clear ethics. You know, you're going to have people that really know what they're doing and just want to help and don't have any weird narcissistic intentions or anything else. They just want to help people. You'd have to have that too because there's going to be a lot of freaked out people. If you make mushrooms and acid and all these things legal, you can just go get it. Are you 18? Oh, go buy it. Yeah. I think there should be increased access. I think so too. You know, but I'm not opposed to it. I'm just saying the reality of the new interface. If we just have all the sudden, these drugs are not just legal, but legal and available for adults to buy, then you're going to deal with a whole new set of problems that didn't exist before. I'm not saying you shouldn't deal with that problem. I think I think it's inevitable. It's probably going to happen anyway. But those problems will be uniquely inflated by everything being legal because people are just going to go out and go fucking crazy. And why is that? Because if you can go to the bar and you can just go buy acid, do you want people to just go get acid? If you could go like to any corner liquor store and pick up a pound of mushrooms, like if it's just totally legal because you can go to liquor store and get a case of beer, right? You can get a case of whiskey. You can get 24 bottles of whiskey. That is death by whiskey. There's no way you're drinking that tonight. Sir, you can't buy that many. Think I'll tell you that. Good. You want to spend that money? So if you wanted to do that with mushrooms and you could go to the liquor store and buy pounds of mushrooms, I think with increased access, there's increase mortality. And there's not just that. People that just like they ruin their brains. They're not ready for it. They're maybe they're barely hanging on as it is. And then they have too many psychedelic trips. Now they're really fucked up. Well, yes, true too. You'll never hear me advocate for these. So drugs. Good for you. Yeah, I've never said people should take drugs. I say, I say people shouldn't do this. How many people were on amphetamines right now? A lot of people on amphetamines. I've got an amphetamines story. Friend gave me some matter one day. Well, I asked him for it. How lucky he came to leave. He came to leave right away with no prop thing. That's funny. Yeah, he was going to take every ADHD. I said help. And I wrote this review. Well, there used to be a magazine called Chamin's Drum, which you did a book review on the DMT book. And he didn't think you should be called the Spirit Molecule, rather the dream molecule. And I took Umbridge. So after I took the Adder Rail, I wrote a 20 page letter. It was pretty self. It was the word inflated. So yeah, and the next morning. Hilarious. You looked at it. And it was terrible. Yeah. So I didn't send it. All my friends who have done, I've never done Coke, but all my friends who do Coke that do stand up comedy, say you can't do stand up comedy on Coke. They say you have no feeling. You don't connect with the audience. It's like it's like a barrier. You could kind of pull it off maybe, but you never really like walk in. Yeah, so you're not funny on it. Yeah, funny on it. You're probably detached. You're probably self-obsessed. You know, it's a weird drive. I just, what would be like you were talking to yourself and you loved it. You loved the sound of your folk good boy. I think that overalls a lot like that too, though. It's very similar. Yeah, there's something similar to that. Yeah, in my case, so it's just writing, just writing, writing, writing, and it's feeling like, you know, I have a lot to say. But I'm not even saying you shouldn't do it, but journalists, I know do it. I know a lot of journalists who love Adderall. They might not even say they love Adderall, but they fucking love Adderall. I know they do it all the time. And you can, you know, you could blame it on deadlines and, you know, having to write stories and really needing to push through because you don't have enough time. I totally get it. And I'm not saying you shouldn't do it, but it's just fascinating how many people do it. Yeah, it was the case with PK Dick. He was into amphetamines. I'm a diet of a stroke. Oh, yeah, I'm sure you're going to cook those veins. You're going to cook everything. If you're doing amphetamines all the time, you're cooking your brains on. Do you like PK Dick? I haven't read him since high school, you know. Yeah, I went through a phase. You know, well, I was talking about St. Peter Snow. It's written by V&E's Jew mathematician guy named Peruts, who did St. Peter Snow. And I read all of his books. There's like eight. And yeah, it's fun to get to know so much. So once I started thinking about Dick, well, I watched the TV show. I was a man from the high castle and got me interested in reading the novel by Dick and went through most of his work. What was the movie they did based on one of his novels? I love Dick, or I love PK Dick. There was a movie they did based on one of his novels. Do you remember which one it was? Oh, quite a fear. Right. You know, there's one movie that might report. That's right. That's right. Just one for you. Total recall was his two. Total recall. We can remember for it whole, we can remember for you whole sale is the one that was, um, you know, total recall. A playgrounder was amazing. The original Blade Runner would run. The hour. Oh my god. Did you say what about the, oh my gosh, the one with Keena Keena Reeves and Robert Downey Jr. And the rotoscope scanner dark like through the center. Oh, yeah. Alex Jones is in that, isn't he? Yeah. Yeah. So that's a novel. Wow. Very interesting. Yeah. They got with the skin or the suit that changed according to emotions. Remember mood rings? No, remember those? I think that may have been, they had a mood ring. Because you were cool if you had a mood ring when I was in high school. So mood ring, apparently depending upon your body temperature with light, you know, different hues. Mm-hmm. You never heard of it? Uh, not really. I'm Jamie, see if you could find mood rings. Yeah, that may have been from the 80s or something. Yeah. I'm old dude. How old do you? I know it's more serious by then. How old do you know? 73. Okay. You're older than me, dog. I'm 58. So, um, you look great by the way. You really do. Yeah. Well, you really do. And you look so much better than you did when you were struggling. So it's really nice to see you balance back like that. This, uh, mood rings became a 1970 sensation. Here we go. 70s. Yeah. Here we go. So, uh, I went to high school in 81 and they were still down with mood rings if you were in the right circles. Yeah. But, uh, these goofy things, uh, you would wear them and they'd make your hand green. Of course, because they're made out of crap like the metal was crap. But they had these weird rocks on them that would, uh, change color. See, if you find like a photo of one, but like a photo of one changing color, oh, I'm sorry. I mean, you know what I'm saying? Like a show what it looks like. They're kind of dope. That was kind of kind of cool still. Is that a rock? What the fuck is that? What does that? That's a good question. I don't know. What is a mood? Let's find that out. What is a mood ring made out of? What is a made out of? Is it like a, a resin or something? Like a plastic acrylic with frame. Is it an actual rock? Okay. So this dude came up with the mood ring? Okay. Um, okay. Who created the mood ring remains topic some debate. jewelry designer named Marvin Wernick says he invented the mood ring years before 1975 developing the idea after he saw a doctor use a thermo kromic temperature measuring tape on a patient. So he came up with the idea of a mood ring after the stress of working in Wall Street led him to explore biofeedback a therapeutic technique where people improve their health by responding to signals from their own bodies. Huh. So what are the crystals made out of, bro? Crystals. The crystals. What are they? What are the crystals made out? Oh, look how pretty that's pretty, isn't it? Like a dope ring that's a mood ring. You know, that way, like you could tell whether or not your significant others upset it. You're like, let me look at your fingers. You're lying. Yeah. Well, yeah. I mean, it's a form of, you know, global communication. No keeping secrets. I don't think it really works. I think it's only just, if you go to the gym and you slip it on, you look like you're like, really angry. Well, if your answer cold, yeah, exactly. It's not going to work. So it's just dumb. It's just dumb. But people loved it when I was kid. Yeah, I think it kind of passed me by. You got lucky. You missed the dumb mood swing. I was in school. Mood ring swing. When you first, it's interesting is when you first started those studies and you for any published DMT, the spirit molecule, did that have an effect on people taking you seriously with all your other work? Was it one of those things where you got labeled now? You're the crazy psychedelic guy who did that nutty study? Or was there enough people that were like, oh, this is great. Now you have a legitimate academic studying this in a federally approved way. This is actually good for everybody. And maybe this opens the door. It's certainly open up the door to the discussion. Like after you put that book out and people who if you read that book, you'll come to the conclusion that there's something mighty going on below the surface of human life in general that can be accessed in this very weird way within a second or two. It's a big man. I've never done the way you guys did it, but it's just the regular way is bananas. And somehow or another, we're depriving people of this. Well, I mean, shouldn't it be the front page news as you can give this drug regularly and everybody goes to the same place? Yeah. And it's the very weird place? Well, I think I ought to be on people's lips. DMT stopped my fascination with UF house because it stopped it, paused it. I should say it paused it because I was like, no matter what a UFO looks like, it's not as crazy as what I just saw. Like, no matter what, just an actual metal flying disc from another planet, like, huh, yawn, like that's nothing. It's nothing compared to what exists in a few seconds. Yeah. And well, would you say that you went to the same place, you went back there each time? Was it the same place? You could tell me. You tell me. I don't know. I've done it differently. And I've done it differently with sound, with echaros, which is wild. Yeah. That was wild. That was like, like, dancing things. That was really fascinating. When you realize like, oh, that's why the music is made the way it's made. Like, the music is perfect for that. Yeah. You can't. It's perfect for this psychedelic trip. I think it inside into music by seeing it. 100%. I think of music differently from that trip. And then, you know, I think I really want to explore Kundalini yoga. I just have to like put it off forever. Because I've had friends that have done DMT and also do Kundalini yoga. And they'll tell you, dude, if you work hard enough, you can get to that place where you can get to that place with on the natch completely in your own mind without taking any drug at all. Well, you could full on DMT trip. And the guy who told me this was very reliable and had experienced DMT was also a jujitsu black belt, like a solid guy. Like, I believed him. And he's like, you can get there. Yeah. Have you ever done or heard about that holotropic breathwork? Yes. Yeah. It's come. It's, I've done that. And it switched me into a very highly altered state. Very highly altered state. It felt like, you know, as long as we're talking drugs, it felt more like MDMA than did DMT. I've had some moments before I had like a big show or something. And I just really wanted to relax where I'll do deep breathing and stretching, just deep breathing and stretching. And you get high as fuck. It just is weird natural high that happens. Like you alleviate tension in your body and your body rewards you for it with all this endorphin rush and dopamine. And you get so friendly and so sweet. You just want to hug everybody you want everybody to be happy. So like, like releases this like you're carrying around physical tension that manifests itself in the way you view the world. Well, and you can get out of it on your own, which is nuts. Yeah. So how do you think? Well, you know, what do you think it means that that's built into our systems? I think we need physical activity. And I think we always have had physical activity. So it wasn't ever a thing where you had a mandate physical activity. It's like we had to stay alive. So because of that, there's like the body functions in that way. It's only strong if it's forced to work. It only has a good immune system of his exposed to a certain amount of different people and different bios. It's a it becomes just like a muscle does when it gets sedentary. It atrophies and your body actually and so that's the problem with like the human civilization. We get into cities. Everything becomes easier. You're sedentary most of the time. The body decays and you're in a state where you're depressed all the time. You don't know why. Well, it's because your body doesn't it's not designed to work like that for tens of thousands of years. You had to be active. You had to be running around. You had to be carrying things. You had to be getting water. You had to be building things. You had to be hunting things and fishing. You had to be moving because you had to stay alive. And then also you're not. And I think that's one of the great dilemmas of mental health in this country that's maybe dismissed by a lot of people. One of the great dilemmas is your sedentary. I think there were some studies comparing prosack way back when with routine of physical exercise and exercises and anti-depressant. So it's been recent ones with SSRIs that show that it's more effective, more effective than SSRIs. Because we're not supposed to be sedentary and nobody wants to be told what to do and nobody wants to feel bad. I get it. But you have to feel bad for yourself so you could feel better later. You just have to get coached. That's all it is. And don't resist it. Just embrace it. What about ozepic though? I don't think those things are bad in the right circumstances. I don't think if you're a guy and you need to lose 30 pounds you get on that. Come on man. You can do that. You can lose the, I'll be your friend. I'll fucking help you. Just stop eating sugar. Stop eating bread. Get yourself on a workout schedule. We're going to say I'm going to get on the fucking bike in the morning. I'm going to get on that stupid fucking, I'm going to do a Peloton workout every day for a month. You'll lose 20 pounds that month. You could do it. You just have to be focused. Right. But if you're 500 pounds, if you're, if you're, if you're morbidly obese, if you're really addicted to food, you've got a real problem. I think it can help you get to a healthy path. That's what I think it's really the best for. If you can help people get to a healthy path, where they stop overeating, they can get under control, they get new patterns, and then they start getting addicted to walking maybe, get addicted to feeling better, start being able to do things you couldn't do before. There's like hundreds of pages of Instagram people who, during COVID, where they were obese, wind up losing 100, 200 pounds. Do you know who jelly roll is? No, but I've seen some, you know, some stories, some pictures of people that were very, very, very heavy, 800 pounds. Jelly, jelly roll is an amazing musician, an incredible guy who went to jail, he's got face tattoo, but he's the sweetest person that's ever left. He's lost like 200 pounds in the last year or so. Is it year and a half, two years? He looks amazing. Yeah, that's fine. And Noah's epic. No, it's epic. Just doing it the right way, exercising. But I just think the problem, there's always like some sort of a trade-off when it comes to what you're doing, don't do. Look at the size he used to be and look what he looks like now. And then saying, yeah, I'm saying, amazing. Well, the sweetest fucking guy of all time too. Yeah, you know, so you could lose that weight. It's like depression and exercise. But also he's a wealthy star. He has access to great food. He has a reason to believe his life is going to be better. He's got a great life already. Yeah, for most people, I think for most people, like actually developing a real exercise regimen would be way harder than just taking a prozac. Yes, but that's where a guy like that comes and play. We go, well, he'd do it. I could do it too. Like, what do you, what do you have to do? You just have to start slow, keep moving, don't stop, get a schedule, put it together, make some progress, note the progress, get excited about progress, keep going. But if Ozempic helps you, like, fucking them for whatever helps you, man. You know, I've had a friend that was very close to suicide before he got on SSRIs. I'll never say there's no one should ever take SSRIs because I don't know if he would have bounced back, but he did bounce back and then he got himself off of them and then he got healthy. And now he's great. And this is, you know, with a lot of medications, a lot of them are, they have, there's real benefits for him. And I think Ozempic is one of those. I think if you're a morbid little beast, obese person, one of the things that my friend, Brigham Bueller, who is the CEO of Ways to Well, and Ways to Well, is also a pharmacy, they're a compounding pharmacy. So they make some peptides. And he said, you can make it so that it doesn't have all the negative effects by making it for the actual size of the person. So you give them the exact dose and combining peptides that's going to prevent bone loss and muscle loss. Like it's possible to healthily slow the process down, stop the overeating, get the inflammation and check at the diet and check, but it's got to be done like, systemically. And they want you to do it with like a certain amount of exercise per week. And they want you to eat vegetables and me and just healthy stuff only throw out all the bullshit. And let's try to get this trained back on track. Yeah, it reminds me of that PK Dick story. Did you, uh, what's, what was I called the three stigmata of Palmer Eldritch? It's not competition between an extra stellar interest, stellar psychedelic versus a terrestrial psychedelic, which company was going to be able to you know, sell the psychedelic or the worldview of choice. You know, the one that came from front of the earth, it got people into into, um, perky patties world where everybody was this big. And they all lived in this house together and did stuff like when I went to the beach and had burbickeys and things. You know, that was the terrestrial psychedelic that was competing against an interest stellar psychedelic, which was completely horrible is weird. It was like you never stopped tripping. Like, oh, no, oh, no. Yeah. And yeah, that was gradually spreading. Oh, I think that's everybody's fear when they do something. Like, oh my God, what if this never ends? What if this is my new reality? Like, oh my God, I'm done. I'm dead. Yeah. I'm gone. It's always been this way. We'll always be this way. Yeah, that was my worst trip ever. Right. And then for people with severe anxiety, some people just don't bounce back well from something like that. And that's why never advocate drugs to anybody. I never have. Yeah. I know you haven't. Yeah. Well, you didn't even want to admit that you did them when we first started talking. Right. You didn't even want to make you smoke pot. Yeah. At this point, you know, but I think you thought back then like to be taken seriously as a researcher. Mm hmm. Yeah. That's true. But I'm less of a researcher now. So I don't have that same kind of, you know, camouflage to wear. Yes. Well, I'm glad because, uh, look, without you, the understanding of what that experience is would be greatly diminished in popular culture. I don't think people would really understand what it is if it wasn't for that book. And I know you had to really stick your neck out to try to make something like that. Yeah. And it's bizarre because it is a thing. It's a real thing. And you should know about real things. You should know about real things that have probably been in human use for thousands and thousands of years and hidden from you by Nixon. Yeah. The thing I like so much about DMT is that it's endogenous. It's made in the brain. Yeah. Yeah. Do you think it's what we're making when we're dreaming? It might be what we're making right now. Mm hmm. Yeah. Yeah. That's one idea is that it regulates consensus reality by maintaining itself at a certain concentration in the brain. I buy that. But I buy a lot of things. It's the matrix. It's the endometrics. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, um, you know, I'm about the matrix or this red laser and DMT. Yeah. Yeah. Tell people about it because it's nuts. Yeah. I don't know much about it. You haven't done it. I know. So apparently it's a red laser. And if you're tripping on DMT and you look down or below, so you can either look from up below it, look up or from above it, look down. Right. Is that correct? I didn't know there is a directional thing. I think it's a directional thing. I don't think if it's on the wall, you read it. I think you have to get above it and look down. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. But I think that's what they say. And if you do that, you see code code, yeah. Like, let me know like the matrix. Yeah. Well, or Japanese. If there's anybody. Yeah, but I think that's what they say. And if you do that, you see code code, yeah, like, like, you know, like the matrix. Yeah, or or Japanese If there's anybody that you believe that life isn't real, it's me life isn't real that it's not real like that that maybe there is some sort of magical quality to this experience some sort of a very Difficult to grasp aspect of reality that we ignore that's spiritual or mystical or there's something going on outside of just normal physical reality Well, I think that things wouldn't be this way Otherwise, because certain things are encouraged and certain things are discouraged. Yeah, and you know, causing effect goes a certain way It's not neutral right, you know, it kind of pushes you in one direction So who created causing effect? What are causing effects causes? Motivations, but are what are angels and demons? All right, what is what a where evil where does evil come from? We know it's real Where does good come from? We know it's real. It's like everybody wants to be so smart. They dismiss the idea of angels and demons It's really fascinating because they're really just a word for an actual force that creates a damaging terrifying or Wonderful amazing effect Good and evil Right right angels and demons. Yeah, like this would be effect is real and we both know that people are capable of either one It's one of the reasons why we love people though is because we love great people because we know that there's terrible people We love people that are warm and friendly and kind and sweet Because we know that there's people that out there that are self-serving and shitty and mean, you know and That's we need one to appreciate the other and that's what's so fucked up about being a person. Yeah Well in the text anyway angels are intermediaries, you know like you know God has nobody right? Interact with the world Yeah, so the angels are the inter intermediaries That makes sense. Yeah, like DMT in a ways the most spiritual The physical what do you about think about the people to try to connect UAPs with angels? I don't know if you ever had a UAP UFO. I don't think it's an experience. No, I've never known not really What about you now? I'm trying bro. You're trying. I get on the rooftop. I got a flashlight No, I wish yeah, I wish I saw something. I wish I saw something that was like 100% there's no way that's ours All right, it'll be cool. Yeah, that's never happened but I don't think they're all lying I don't think that's the case. Yeah, they're all lying. There's too many of them that tell a story that It just doesn't seem like bullshit Has lately strawberry been on your show no He's an odd one because he's a fiction writer You know not that I don't believe him, but when a guy writes Fantastical fiction for a living and then has a fantational Fantastical fictional experience that actually happens to him that becomes his his thing It's like Arsenio Hall said things to make you go hmm Not saying that he didn't actually happen to him because his his experience It would be ironic if it did because then nobody would believe him because he writes fiction, right? But his experience is mirror a lot of the experiences from the John Macbook You know, did you read that book abduction? Yeah, I knew John I liked him very smart guy those Stories and that was back before the internet really where there was any social media or anything like that back then Those stories were oddly uniform Well, they were and you know John Mac the psychiatrist yeah from Harvard or Cambridge uh, you know, we talked about the similarities between his your subjects reports and our DMT volunteers He thought we had you know come across a technology that would make contact At least the experience of contact You know Something that could be studied scientifically Geez So much at Reagnight that idea right now And surprised DMT is not in the news more Well, there was a study that they were doing in England correct Yeah, there's a couple of groups where they were doing a long-term drip Not like yours. So yours was like one push. I think there's like a drip. Yeah, 30 minutes. Something kooky like that. Yeah, and there's a group in Switzerland John Dean at UC San Diego is gonna start one So there's at least three around the world Hmm It's a real place that you can go to and that's what's nuts Yeah, for people that never experienced anything and their tea toddlers their whole life It sounds crazy. I know it sounds crazy. Yeah. Well, you know What do you think of the beings do you think the beings are Are outside of us? Do you think they're disembodied souls? Or do you think they're inside us all the time? Well, they're inside us all the time then wear everything then inside of us is just somehow connected to every Everything it's we're not individuals at all. We are everything. We're all of us or everything if if they are inside of us And they may be it inside of us. It might might all it might be the idea of like a physical boundary is just nonsense Like who gives the fuck where it's from it's all everywhere all the time you just don't have access to it right now You don't have access to it in your default state because your default Fundamental state is a primate You know, but it's in there and occasionally you have access to it you have access to it near-death experiences You have access to it. Haul chocolate breathing But if you had access to it all the time you wouldn't be able to exist in this barbaric state that you live in Well, I think I has to do with the dose. I mean if it's really high If their levels are really high and then the brain and the mind, yeah You know, this could be just a DMT simulation on them not the first right Yeah, and it could be in which case there's still this cause and effect Well, it just imagine a world where this wasn't reality, but then you got to experience this It would be completely psychedelic. It'd be like what is this fucking crazy world? It'd be different Yeah, it's the 3D in the shadow people just do you know how weird it is sometimes if you just stand on a corner and watch People just walking and looking at their phones Um, yeah, well people look there's a lot of kidnapped and they don't even know it. Yeah, there's a lot of that here Everywhere yeah everywhere Well, I moved back to Albuquerque last year. Oh, yeah, yeah 14 years in Gallup was plenty. Yes. So it's cool better Like a station. I do nice. Yeah, we have a front lawn and a back lawn. There you go. Yeah Yeah, Albuquerque's home to some of the greatest mixed martial arts fighters ever. Yeah John Jones lives in Albuquerque right greatest of all time Yeah, I'm sure not to Albuquerque. I'm a Jack Winkle John in the house Yeah, I love me Mexico. That's great. Well, it's a crazy state with a rich history and beautiful landscape Oh my god I have a friend who just got back from Elkhonting there. He was raving about how gorgeous it was out there The sky is great. We had a pretty cool governor Before she was governor. She was the secretary of health. Oh cool. You know during during COVID So she knows public health and she's a nice lady. Yeah, yeah beautiful Um Thanks for being here man. There's a lot of fun. It always is so it's great to see you. It's been great to be your friend all these years Oh, yeah, it's been great to see you healthy. Yeah, it's great. Yes, and yeah, you like you know pretty wonderful yourself Thank you. Yeah. Yeah It's my DMT in the solar profess. Oh, yeah, it's right here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I'm just pretty old I'm gonna hold that sucker up people can buy it. I'm in came in came out in 2014. Yeah, it's um You know, what's the sole prophecy is that the visions or is that is it the message? So um, then there's the books that are available DMT the spirit molecule Which is what got me into you in the first place. What a great cover to that Alex Gray artwork Well, you know, it's our work as on the second book too. Yeah, right right. Yeah, that's not like great as well He's amazing. I mean that guy there's no one ever of its capture the DMT state quite like him. Yeah You know, he's pretty good. It's just beautiful work like it's like in that crazy chapel of sacred mirrors that he has now The 3d printed like chapel. Do you have any of his original art? No. No, I've got the spirit molecule. Oh It's so cool. It's awesome. It's in the hallway. Yeah, he's been a sweet guy though. I've talked to him a few times All right. Thank you very much. Thanks for being here. I really appreciate you. Goodbye everybody