Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to introduce someone who I consider one of the smartest people I know and whose understanding of the world is matched only by his ability to synthesize huge themes and illustrate them with precise detail. Someone who's traveled the world for 40 years, a man who not only writes about the leaders of the world, but knows them personally, Professor Jeffress-X. Thank you. Thank you very much, Jeff. Thank you. So how long, you were telling me backstage I didn't realize this, for those who enjoyed Prime Minister or Bonnet, I'm one of them. I was, I'm, tell us when you first met the Prime Minister. We met 46 years ago, 36 years ago, 1986, 36 years ago, 1989. He was just getting out of jail at that point. Now, yeah, they were just opening up and this young guy was starting a political party. And he gave me a call and we sat in our, my backyard in Boston for a few hours and I thought, okay, this guy's going to be Prime Minister for most of the next 36 years. It's very, very impressive. And so what about impressive now? So you said that. You saw in him, and it's not just about him, but it's about what are the markers of enduring leadership, what makes, you know, this politician impressive while most of them are not impressive. What did you see in him? What do you see in leaders like him who have been successful? Look, this was 1989. It was even before the Berlin Wall fell, but Hungary had cut the barbed wire. So people were, that was the beginning of the end in 1989 of the Soviet domination of Eastern Europe. And this young guy said, I'm going to make a political party and I'm going to be a leader. And I'm going to make a new hungry. And what he showed was vision that, look, we're a great country. We've been held back for the last 45 years. I'm going to help lead the way. And it was a Fidesse, young Democrats, I think was the translation of it. And he just had the idea. We're going to move forward. He was a kid. And we were all kids then. And you could see that there was energy vision for sight. And it proved right. Yeah. And a toughness. So you heard his analysis, I think, of where we are with the war and Ukraine election of Trump on the basis. In part of his promise to try to end this if he can, you saw the new Secretary of Defense say, no, we're not going to support Ukraine's entry in NATO. Where are we now? No, yesterday was the most important day for peace in maybe decades, actually. This war and Ukraine resulted from a very bad idea of the United States taken in 1994. It's a project. The project was a project to expand NATO forever, anywhere. Keep moving east. Keep moving not only to the first wave, which was the Prime Minister's country, Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia, but then move eastward closer to the former Soviet Union into the former Soviet Union, surround Russia in the Black Sea region. Go all the way to a little country in the South Caucasus, Georgia. It was mind-boggling. Clinton signed on to that in 1994. It became what we call the Deep State Project, meaning it didn't really matter who the president was. Each president would come and basically would be informed NATO's moving eastward, you're part of that process. So Clinton started it in 1994. And as the Prime Minister of Unsaid, he mentioned briefly, in 1990, on February 9th, 1990, in unequivocal clear as can be terms the United States and said to President Mihogor but job, NATO will not move one inch eastward. And if you have any doubt about it, all the documents are now online available. You can scrutinize everything. Hans Dietrich Enchor, the U.S. – the German Foreign Minister said the same thing, same day. He's on tape actually explaining, no, no, I don't just mean within Eastern Germany. I mean anywhere to the east. Clinton being Clinton and the U.S. Deep State being the U.S. Deep State started this project in 1994. They already had the idea, by the way, in 1991, 1992, as soon as the Soviet Union ended. Ah-ha, now we move. Now we move eastward. Now we control everything. Now we are the sole superpower. So this has gone on for 30 years. And each president got into it under George Bush Jr. Seven more countries were added. to Stonia Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Bulgarian, Romania, 9th and 2004. Then in 2007, President Putin said at the summit that's taking place right now, the Munich Security Summit said, stop. You told us no expansion, not an eastward expansion, even an inch, you said. You've now done 10 countries. Stop. Perfectly reasonable. Stop. I don't think our President Donald Trump would much like to see China and Russia building their military bases up from Central America. You know, this was how the Russians saw this. Why are you coming to our border when you pulled us, you weren't going to move? And there was one other thing that was very important in this, which is probably the most decisive thing and almost not even recognized. In 2002, the US did something really, really, really destabilizing. And that is it unilaterally left the anti-ballistic missile treaty. That was a core strategy to stop a nuclear war between the two superpowers because what ABM had done for 30 years was to say, we each have deterrence. You, if you strike us, we can strike back. We'll limit our anti-ballistic missiles so that both sides maintain deterrence. In 2002, the United States unilaterally unprovoked, walked out of the ABM, said, no, no, we're not going to do it anymore. We're going to put anti-ballistic missile systems into Russia's bordering territories. The Russians said, are you kidding? The US said, what's your problem? We do what we want. So in 2007, Putin said, stop already. In 2008, George Bush Jr. doubled down as Americans typically do and said, okay, now we're moving to Ukraine and to Georgia. That was why this war occurred. But Ukraine had one more sliver of life and that was that they elected a president in 2010 that didn't want to be part of NATO. And the public didn't want to be part of NATO. Why? Because they knew this is very dangerous. Why get into this provocative situation? His name was Victoriana Covich. Americans don't like neutrality, but yet Covich was trying to be neutral between the two sides. And the US played a rather unfortunate role on February 22nd, 2014 in a violent overthrow of this person. And that's when the war started. And it's been now 10 years and no president has told the truth until yesterday, by the way. Yesterday is a historic day because the occult took place between President Putin and President Trump. It was the first call. We don't know if there had been a short call beforehand between the two of them, but there was no call by Biden and Putin with war going on for three years, no call. And now there was a call. And the readout from the American side was excellent. What President Trump said in the call was we respect Russia. We hear Russia's concerns. We fought on the same side in World War II. Nice point, by the way. Russia lost Soviet Union lost 27 million people in World War II and was an ally of the United States, the fact that wasn't mentioned for years and years and years by President Biden. And then the defense secretary, heg said the new defense secretary said yesterday the truth for the first time that Ukraine is not going to join NATO. This is the basis for peace. This is absolutely the basis for peace. And they couldn't tell the truth for three decades. They could not admit what any of us knew because I've been around this region for 36 years in detail. I sat with Boris Yelts and I sat with Mikhail Gorbachev. But the Americans would not tell the truth publicly until yesterday that this was so provocative. It was a game. They thought they'd win the game. I don't know how many people here play or played in their childhood. The game of risk. The game of risk was a big game for me. You wanted your peace on every part of the world map. That was the game when you took over the whole world. Hey, Gemini, we now call it. You won their playing that game until this administration. So the two most important, three important things have happened in my view in this administration. So far, first our new secretary of state, Marco Rubio, told the fundamental truth. We are in a multi-polar world. This time the sentence was uttered. He told the truth. What does it mean? The American mindset for 30 years was we run the show. Marco Rubio said, well, we don't run the show. We live with other powerful countries. Great start. Second and third were the two events yesterday. So I'm feeling about peace that this is really something that happened yesterday. If they follow through, we know what Washington is like. There's every crazy idea swarming still. A project of 30 years doesn't go down necessarily in one phone call or one statement by the secretary of defense. But it's pretty important that it was said so publicly and so visibly. And of course Europe is in a tizzy because Europe signed on to the US project. All these politicians in Europe are there where they are because they were part of the US project. And now the US is reversing its project and you didn't tell us and you didn't. What are we supposed to do? We're way out there. And so they're completely befuddled. And I have to say I told them personally, many of these leaders and I need personally one by one for years you are going to get trapped this way because this project doesn't work. It doesn't make sense. It's a game for the Americans but it's life and death for the Russians. So it cannot be won by the American side. It's impossible. And I tried to tell them and nobody in Europe either had the clarity or the guts to see it except the person that preceded me in this seat. Because he was completely clear about this from the first day. Now others are starting but even till today the Europeans can't get it because they're so deeply invested in something that makes no sense. They should have said Russia's big. It lives near us. Let's cooperate. That's how you do it. Your online activity is being watched and not just certain things you search on your private browser. Everything is being watched. Shady big tech companies are constantly hawking or information because their profits depend on it. They get rich by invading your privacy then selling your data. Anybody who's willing to pay for it. It's scary and people need a way to escape from its grasp and that's where ExpressVPN comes in. With ExpressVPN 100% of your online activity is rerouted through secure encrypted servers, making it impossible for data brokers to see what you do online or buy and sell that information. Now unfortunately, live in a world where companies will do anything to invade your privacy and they're doing it right now. ExpressVPN is a way to shield what is sacred to you from rapacious data brokers. Right now you get an extra four months for free when you use this show special link. Go to expressvpn.com slashtucker. We recommend it. I think one of the reasons we went up in this position, we meaning the United States but also Europe, is there's a habit of speech which reflects a habit of mind which is an unwillingness to engage with ideas and instead resort immediately to attacking the other person on the basis of motive. You saw this with the Orban, Europe, Russian stewed, or whatever and was especially hilarious as he explained. He's the opposite of a Russian stewed, of course, lifelong. His country was occupied by the Russians. But you do see it also in the United States and it makes it kind of impossible to have a rational conversation about any. I know you've been the butt of this too, not whining about it but it's like, yeah. Is there even a culture in our foreign policy establishment of having rational conversations the point where we can solve problems like this? You know we've talked about, I think, a number of years who was one of my favorite politicians of American history, J. William Fulbright and he wrote a book in the 1960s called The Air Against the Power and I was a kid then and I read that book like it was the coolest thing imaginable. This was the chairman of the US Foreign Relations Committee saying we're too arrogant to think clearly. That was amazing. He was an amazing person. Now I think that's the fundamental problem. I'm not sure we're properly over it but I have to say that in 1991 we had the chance for global peace, really for global peace. That doomsday clock of the atomic scientists which I'd like to refer to so much which measures how close or far away from nuclear war was the fire this to weigh. It was ever in its history because the Cold War had ended. So I was there as a young economist who actually knew something about economic stabilization and I made proposals and interestingly just as a footnote I advised the Polish government in 1989. I just long story but suddenly as a kid I happened to be there and I helped write their plan and I everything I recommended for Poland was immediately accepted by the White House. It's a very odd thing. In fact I went one day I had an idea of mobilizing some finance to help Poland stabilize and I called the Polish finance minister said you mind if I tried to raise a billion dollars for you today which was a lot of money in those days. So I raised a billion dollars that would be great. So I called Bob Dole, our Senate Majority Leader who I knew because of the Poland work that I was doing and he invited me immediately into his office and he said come back in an hour. So I came back in an hour. This was September 1989 and who was sitting there. General Brent Scolcroft. He was the general who was our national security advisor. I was a kid. So it was a little bit interesting moment and he centered her goals to me explaining to General Scolcroft your idea. So I handed him the paper and this is how you do financial stabilization and here's how you stabilize the currency and Scolcroft looked at it and said well will this work and I said general this will work and dole led me out of the office and said call me back later in the day. So at 5 p.m. I called and Dole said to the White House is called you have tell your friends you have the one billion. So I raised a billion dollars that day. It was good. I don't know. I had nothing to do with me because it was the right idea. The Polish is low-t stabilized. I did a good thing. I was a technically equipped sophisticated manager of a financial stabilization or not manager but advisor on the financial stabilization. Then in 1991 I recommended the same thing for Gorbachev and for this creaking collapsing. So the union Gorbachev wanted to have elections and all of the republics and he wanted to democratize and stabilize so I know something about that as president. And so we met in the Harvard Kennedy School and there were one, two, three, four, five of us. A little team. One of them was the chief economic advisor of Gorbachev. The first one was the dean of the Kennedy School. One became a very senior diplomat. Bob Blackwell that I deal with. One was a very senior economist at MIT Stanley Fisher. We wrote a plan for how the Soviet Union could stabilize and I did the chapter on the financing. Basically the same thing that I had said for Poland. Okay. It was completely rejected within about 12 hours in Washington. I hated this for the next 30 years I have to tell you because we just could not take yes for an answer. Coupled months ago someone sent me from the archives the first time that I'd ever seen it. The national security council minutes rejecting the proposal. Fascinating to read because that's your life before your eyes watching this. There was a guy named Dick Darmon who was a former colleague of mine. The technical term I don't think I can say it in mixed company actually. So I won't say what I would say about him. But it's an unpleasant English word. It's really nasty. Too nasty for polite company. He says in this thing we should do the minimum necessary so that there's not a collapse but nothing more. And quote Machiavelli and we're not interested and we're not going to do this. And it's really watching stupid people taking important stupid decisions. Fools by the way they never called to say can we discuss stabilization. This guy knew nothing. They don't understand anything. They don't care. So what were they doing? They actually reached the conclusion at the end of the meeting we're going to do the minimum possible. I mean, minimum minimum. It's not our business to help. We're not going to do any of that. That's arrogance of power. We don't have to do anything. Why were the United States? We don't have to do anything. They didn't even look. The stakes for the world were very high. You could have a 30 minute phone call to understand financial stabilization. You could say in history when countries are destabilized this way. Here's how stability has worked. That was my specialty. That's what I knew and taught at Harvard and knew a lot about. But they're so arrogant that it's not even to discuss for a half an hour any of this. Then they didn't and they took a terrible decision. And by the way, my point is not that that led on to this and this and this. No. They took terrible decisions for the next 35 years. This could have been stopped at any moment. Not one thing led to the next thing. No. One stupid decision and the next one and the next one and the next one. You have to learn to behave. The way you behave in this world is mutual respect. The way you behave is thinking you're not going to be more secure if they're completely destabilized. That's what you have to understand. And that is not so hard to understand. We teach it to our kids at age four. We start teaching that. And then suddenly if you want your passport to Washington, you have to forget it at age 40 or something. And that's how they behave. So that's my feeling about this. It's just a kind of arrogance. And you can see it in this writing which I find fascinating to go back and watch this tragedy unfold. 1997, another wonderful moment if you want to just watch hubris and tragedy. Very good book. Good in that it's insightful. A book in that it's all wrong. Vice-Big Brzezinski. And many of you have probably read it called the Grand Chestboard. And he could have called it the game of risk. It would have been a little bit more accurate. But it was about how to make American dominance in the world. And he has a chapter about expanding NATO to Ukraine. Exactly that. And he talks about Europe and NATO expanding eastward. And the question that he asks in 1997 is what can the Russians do about it? Because they're weak. And he answers meticulously. He considers would Russia ever align with China. Impossible. He can. That'll never happen. That'll never happen. Could Russia ever align with Iran? No, impossible. That won't ever happen. So you watch, like we watched now the chat GPT thinking out loud, it's all there. It's all wrong. And it was all American policy for the next 25 years. That's tragedy. Let me ask a question though. Like a kind of thematic fundamental question. So a great empire, one of it, you know, empires tend to be arrogant. I do this to feature of empires. That is it. And during empire, so stability. Its goal is stability. Because it understands exactly what you said I thought so nicely. It doesn't help you if your neighbors are in chaos. It doesn't help you. It's against your own interests. So that's such an obvious insight that Roman Empire was based on at the British Empire was based on it. Our is the only empire I'm aware of that has kind of intentionally so chaos. And I don't understand where that thinking comes from. And leaving aside the moral questions is it right or wrong? It doesn't work for you. So why have we done it? You know, the Roman Empire is always a great story for us. And I compare the Ukraine War to the Battle of the Tutanburg Forest, which is AD 9. And in AD 9, the Roman Empire reached its limits on the Rhine. Never tried to conquer the Germanic tribes in 9 AD. They were defeated under Augustus. And there were sporadic border things from then on. But they never tried again. They had hundreds of years where that just wasn't their business. It was very, very smart. Hadrian in the first, second century AD was the emperor at the maximum extent of the Roman Empire. And he basically wanted stability across the border lines. And this was the prudence of the empire. It wasn't Alexander, you know, was very different. Three, 400 years earlier. He wanted to conquer the whole world. There was no limit. Finally his soldiers told him if you go any further, we're killing you. We've got to go home because they were already at the beyond the Indistrover. But the Roman said, no, we're going to put some boundaries. We're going to keep the borders and we're going to not go beyond our means or our needs. I hope what happened yesterday was a good example of that. What Trump and Hegseth did yesterday, if they follow through if the deep state doesn't undermine it, if it's some crazy thing doesn't happen, said we don't need to be in Ukraine with NATO. We don't need to be. It's for us. It's nothing. And it doesn't mean that Russia is now going to invade Western Europe. That's crazy. This was a project going the other direction. So it's basic prudence. And that's what a great power should show. prudence. What are the chances that some you said unless the deep state doesn't make some crazy thing happens, I would note that for a good part of the presidential campaign, the deep state was telling the candidate Donald Trump that the state of Iran is trying to kill you, which is as far as I know is totally untrue. But they were telling him that in order to prepare him to attack Iran, which they're still trying to do. So we know that this kind of deception is just a feature of it. How hard will people invest it in the Ukraine War go? To what lines will they go to continue this, do you think? First of all, the main job of the U.S. president of a successful U.S. president is to put the foot on the break. This is, if you look in history, the good presidents know when to stop Eisenhower was such Kennedy was such Reagan understood this. And all our recent presidents did not up until now, basically. Well, Truman and Korea, George H.W. Bush, wait. I mean, also true. No, that they fought too many wars in mind. Yeah, but they did stop. No, but they stopped, but they made too much Iraq 2003. I mean, there were just too many wars. So the question is, can we learn and can the president keep? who many wars? So the question is, can we learn and can the president keep the foot on the break? If he does, he will have an extremely successful administration. He, I think, understands that all of that YAH, who's pleading and this has been 30 years also, this is another project to go for the US to go to war with Iran is just the worst idea imaginable would be a disaster. And so I think President Trump understands that. I think he understands that a war with China would be a complete disaster, which would be, though there's a lot of war party around on that. The funny thing about our time right now, not funny, the wonderful thing about our time right now is that we're in the midst of the biggest technological boom in the history of the world. So so many good things could happen in the next 10 to 20 years. President Trump has used the expression which I fully subscribe to, a golden age. We could have it. A golden age is not war. A golden age is investing in all this wonderful technology so that we can have health care that works, education systems that work infrastructure that works would be nice if the United States even had one kilometer, a fast rail just saying China just completed its 50,000 kilometer, a fast rail. We don't have one. I can't even take the train reliably from New York to actually from Washington to New York last time it took the Excel that broke down in the middle. And I had to change to a local in New Jersey, which does not happen between Shanghai and Beijing, by the way, just saying. But you missed the countryside. I mean, that is part of it, though. That's it. Not a lot of incentive to stop in New Jersey and other giving you one. There I was. I felt so privileged. And there was the local right on the next. Exactly. And you wouldn't bid and per se, otherwise. Exactly. So, exactly you. It's how it's your blessings, right? So the whole point of market capitalism is consumer choice. You have a choice between products and services. And the competition between companies makes the goods and services better. That's the core idea. Unfortunately, there are an awful lot of monopolies out there. A monopolies are not good for consumers. They are not good for you. And one of the places where there's effectively a monopolies and wireless contracts. But it's not a complete monopoly. You're probably paying way too much to use your cell phone. But now you have a choice. You don't have to pay a hundred bucks a month just to get a free phone. That's not a good deal. There's a company called PureTalk, which we use, that has no inflated prices. With a qualifying plan of just $45 a month, you can choose a free phone, an iPhone 14 or a Samsung gallery. Then you get unlimited talk, tax 25 gigs of data, which is enough for most people, a mobile hotspot all for that low price. And it's got the most dependable 5G network. So you get your free iPhone 14 or Samsung Galaxy by visiting puretalk.com slash Tucker and you switch to pure talk today. America's wireless company PureTalk. It does feel, I'm glad that you are saying this because it does feel like we're not even a month into the Trump administration. I don't think anybody agrees with everything of anyone else's program. But clearly, this is a massive departure from what we had much more than I thought. I feel like I watched pretty closely. I'm amazed by the ambition of what they're doing. And it does feel like the only way to stop this Tulsi Gabbard just confirmed yesterday is the direct response. That's a very big deal. It's unbelievable. It's a very big deal. Tulsi Gabbard's right in the President's Daily Brief. Tulsi Gabbard is in charge of a lot of declassification efforts. Like the whole thing is unbelievable. The only way to stop this is with a war. I mean, that's my kind of simple reading of it. Do you agree with that? I think that is exactly entirely the point. And if, and we had news today, please, inshallah, that the ceasefire will continue on Saturday because more hostages will be released, more exchanges will take place and there won't be a return. Really, inshallah, if it happens and an outbreak of war is stopped because it has to be stopped. This will be such a blessing, not only for this region, but I have to say for our country to the United States. And so this is really the key moment. And I think Trump's instincts are there. And what he says, we didn't even hear Biden or other presidents say, President Trump said many times about Ukraine. Too many people are dying. You didn't even hear those words. I mean, the idea that war involved, by the way, maybe a million Ukrainians dead or seriously wounded, we're going to find out in the next months because finally we'll see what reality is now what the propaganda is, but it's horrible. What's happened? So that instinct is essential. And there are several places where everything could be derailed. This region is one of them. Ukraine is another South China and East China Sea is the third. And if the president gets it and has the basic idea we live together in respect with other countries, the golden age will come. I think, and I'd love your view of this. I think of all the amazing things I've seen in the last three and a half weeks, maybe the most amazing is the emergence of Steve Wickoff. I just tried to say I know personally and liked enormously, but he was a real estate guy. All of a sudden, Trump points him an envoy sort of over and above massive stable diplomats. We have professional diplomats at the State Department to go do effect the ceasefire here in this region. And then sense more over to Russia. Anyone has a meeting with Putin, apparently for several hours. And then all this stuff happens. You've been around diplomats your entire life. You've functioned as a diplomat. What do you think of that? Well, he did the single coolest thing since this administration started, I have to say, which was Trump made this ceasefire. There's no question about Biden would never, I mean, he didn't make the ceasefire because we don't know where Biden was mentally anyway. But his team was completely incompetent, horrible. I'm sorry to say it. It's very terrible. A lot of the rest of us didn't notice that. Yes, it was. It was a completely, you wasn't a completely closely held secret, let's say. So Trump said, we got to have a ceasefire before my inauguration. And he said, with cough, and with cough said to Netanyahu, I'm coming to meet you tomorrow. And Netanyahu said, no, no, tomorrow is Saturday. I can't meet you. And with cough said, I'll be in your office tomorrow at one. And I told him, I don't care. Anything I'm there, we're going to have a discussion. And I would have that meeting came the ceasefire. Now, the ceasefire looks maybe like it will hold this weekend. Believe me, in Israel, they want war everywhere for a lot of reasons. But the president's job, from my point of view of American interest and the world interest and this region's interest, everybody's interest, no more war. Stop this now. So if Whitcoff can keep that track record, that would be the heroic success. Well, what does it tell you that Steve Whitcoff, who I will say again, I'm biased because I really like him. He's got a great personality, super energetic, very straightforward, believable, but zero training in any of this, like not, he's a real estate guy. And he pulls this off. Like, what does that tell you about a professional diplomatic corps? I'll tell you one thing it tells you. Trump can make peace if he wants to make peace. I mean, he needs, he needs a capable guy that can go and read the riot act and say, this is no joke and we're going to have it. And that is basically what good diplomacy is. And again, in the US system, of course, we've got the deep state who tell presidents what to do. We've got lobbies. We've got all sorts of things, but a president's true job is to lead. And if you don't have a president-compassmentist, like I think we didn't have in the United States, you get more breaking out everywhere, like we had in the last two years. Or if you have a president that is poorly directed or poorly, you know, really doesn't get it. And Clinton was an inconsequential president in my opinion because he is so easily swayed. He just made so many lousy decisions. George Bush Jr. listened to Cheney who was really a nonstop warmonger and so on. If a president gets the idea, I want peace because this war is really destructive of everything else I'm trying to do. Then you can have peace, actually. It's possible. No one is going to attack the United States. So peace depends on us. No one is attacking us. China is not about to invade the United States. Russia's not going to attack the United States. Mexico and Canada are not going to attack the United States. Panama's not going to attack the United States. Greenland's not going to attack the United States. I'm sorry to make. I don't want to go the whole list, but I'm just confident about this. So if the president wants peace, he'll get it. If he gets peace, believe me, he'll get all the other things that he wants, like low inflation, being able to pass the budget that he wants, getting his tax policies that he wants. But if there's war, he ain't going to get any of it. That's the basic point. And I voted Democratic in 2020. I voted for Biden. I've had a lot of experience with governments over the last 45 years. So I watched them. And I think I understand a lot of them. And Biden in the first days said stupid things about foreign policy. The world was divided between this and this and blah, blah, blah. And you say, oh my God, what is the guy who doesn't get it? And in fact, he didn't get it at all. And I told many Democratic leaders when they still talk to me now. They don't talk to me. And I don't talk to them. You're going to do something completely almost impossible in American politics, which is you're going to lose on the basis of foreign policy. Because Americans don't vote on foreign policy. And I said, your foreign policy is so bad, this is going to bring you down. And in fact, the Democrats lost their heads in this. And they were so intent on defeating Trump that no matter what Biden said, well, we have to back him up 100%. As he led them off to war and complicity in the war here in the Ukraine war and tensions with China and all the rest. And they created a million of so much unhappiness in the United States, anxiety, higher inflation, big budget deficits that the public said, no, we don't like this. This is so they did really the impossible. But they brought Liz change over to the coalition. Yeah, exactly. And then what's ironic is, this wonderful person who was confirmed yesterday for the head of a director of national intelligence that Tulsi Gabbard, who's really smart, by the way, very honest, very meticulous. I know her extremely well over many, many years. Totally up and up. So I'm delighted she's going to be briefing the president each day. I couldn't think of a better person. All the Democrats voted against her. This is crazy. She was their colleague for decades. She stood up for things that they should be applauding her for every one of them voted against her. She was the vice chairman of the D.C. Exactly. Seven years ago. Exactly. So I guess the question is the opposition you've alluded to the deep state, but there's also the out in the open state, you know, the Congress, for example, the other party, the Democratic Party does Trump's success, not just in the election when the popular vote, but in affecting peace, which is actually popular with people, does that change their views on foreign policy? Like, does he bring people with him or does he stand alone between the two parties as he did in the first time? Well, this is very early days because we're just a little over three weeks into this. But if yesterday, turns into policy, which it could and the Ukraine war ends soon, which it could, you're going to see everybody changing their views. Oh, I didn't support that. Peace is great. The European leaders are going to be saying the opposite of what they're saying right now. Look, in a hundred politicians anyway, three things, the rest line up practically. So yes, they will change their view. They'll complain about other things. That's their job there in the opposition. But this war was a disastrous, stupid project that when a rye should have ended makes no sense. And if Trump pulls it off as he can, if he's resolute now and clear minded and we'd cough does his work because he'll be the one to do it. It looks like and he does his work. Then this won't be talked about or complained about this will pass into history is just another one of those blunders. I mean, we don't talk about the 2003 Iraq war, the 20 years waste in Afghanistan or so many Libya so many completely ridiculous projects that America has been involved in for no conceivable reason other than these weird game of risk ideas. We got to own that space on the board. Turns out the world and that game board are rather different. But if Trump pulls this off, what he needs, I think, and what we need to understand is the American scene it ain't great in general. The budget deficit is enormous. The fragility of society is actually quite significant. There is lots of depression, lots of violence, lots of problems that haven't addressed for 30 years. Big big budget deficit, huge, can't be solved with all due respect to Elon. It's not the budget deficit has very little to do with the size of the civil service. That's not where the budget deficit comes from. That's not where the spending comes from. Spending comes from 750 overseas military bases from wars, from massive outlays, of course, on pensions, on health care, on interest payments, on the debt, and so forth. War derails all of that. We're not with them a buffer. We're not where the US dollar is king forever. It's almost the opposite, by the way, although it's not so clear to people. But 10 years from now, it's going to be completely different international monitoring scene from the one that we have now because the renmin piece kind of play a completely different role. And the way that international settlements will be done is completely different. You can, if you watch like I do, you see all of the stitching together of a new system taking so the US does not have this great room for maneuver and it's all a game and we can do this and we can do that. The president needs to be really accurate right now, really accurate and understand. Also, not don't overplay the hand. The world's not desperately waiting to get into the US market is I think he thinks that these tariffs give all this leverage. No, the US is not the big deal that maybe some people imagine right now. So we got to get our act together and you can't get your act together in war. That's the bottom line. Professor Jeffers-X, thank you very much. Great to be with you, Steve. Thanks. Thank you. That was great. Thanks. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show and one level that's not surprising, that's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that. So in September, we went across the country coast to coast 17 different cities on a nation-wide live tour. And it was amazing. We brought the entire staff with us like we always do because we all worked together for so long and enjoy traveling together. And one of our producers is a documentary filmmaker. And so he decided to make a documentary film about our trip a full month of America was the most interesting people around. Different people join us every single night. Banjino and Russell Brand and Bobby Kennedy and J.D. Vance and Donald Trump, etc. etc. With the best time and the fruit of that is a documentary called On the Road, The Tucker Cross and Live Tour, which is available right now on TCN on the Road, Tucker Cross and Live Tour is hilarious. Do it like it.