Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. And I was like, there's only one way to do this. I have to just not drink for a while. So it took like eight months off. And then I had like a margarita dinner once. So I said, why missed this? And I had a glass of wine here and there. I was wondering how that was going to hold up. Yeah. But you're not, I know that you're not captured by it. No, no. Neither of my. But I was ever religious observance requires it. You require abstinence or drinking? No, we drink. What when do you have to drink? Shabot every come for any Friday. How much did you drink? One Shabot. I probably have two and a half glasses of wine. Was there like a number that you're supposed to head? No, the one is even about to be. What? Well, that's poor. What is we should get into poor room? We're getting into it. All right. Do we need glasses? You want to have a drink? Usually I you want to tend to go a while. So we usually do that at the end. Well, let's let's get some ice and some glass. Are we rolling already? OK, let's get some tell Jeff to get us some ice and some kind of know we were in a bottle of. But it's anything. Buffalo trace. Do you want to wait till I get back to start? Just either have it started or we started. We started. Fuck it. We started. Let's just roll. What did you have to do it? What's that? But I'm going to have head. Are we rolling still? We do and head function. We can. Headphones don't headphones. I go fuck. When we mix it up. OK. You know, what do you do? Are you more comfortable? You got a nice head of hair. What? For me, it doesn't matter. I feel bad when people have worked on their hair real good, especially ladies, and they get it all nice. And then they have to fucking smoosh it with this thing. OK, if you ever did that kind of consideration for me, I'm going to be very disciplined. I thought we were closer. Some people worry about that. I worry about the gray. That you have gray in your hair? Yeah. Well, you're like pretty dark for your age. How old do you know? 60. Yeah, you're fucking dark as hair for your age. If I let my if I had hair and it grew out like my hair, it's mostly gray now. Yeah. Yeah. I should have gray hair in my mouth a little bit. What's up? I should have thought ahead like you did. But shaved it. Yeah, shaved it when it never was gray. Then it's just normal. Because it's very clear if I shave it now. I think you can avoid gray hair with proper supplementation. At least that is the thought today that with enough zinc and copper. And that somehow another that's involved in the diet. Yeah, I'm talking about my ass here. I don't know that much about what causes your hair to go gray. This is Austin. Other than this is Buffalo Trace. But older than America. Really? Yeah. This is a distillery from 1773, I believe they started. Wow. Them apples. It's like that Chinese sounding beer, you and Ling, or something. Cheers, my friend. Buffalo Trace is like you buy is there. They're beard really old. Beer really old. They have an old beer. You and Ling. Is it old as fuck? Jamie knows everything. He knows a lot. You know, people. 1829. You see? People say I have this AI I'm using cloud using jet GPT. I use Jamie. Yeah, sure. He's way better than I. He's way better than AI because he's kind of psychic. You're a little psychic. I think I had a little bit. Well, I'm a adolescent. You talk a lot. My theory is that he also looks ahead. He knows sort of where you're likely to head so he's got it right. Oh, 100%. He knows how my goofy fucking brain works. Yeah, for sure. Good to see him, my brother. Good to see you. Hello, Joe. How was your, what was it exactly? How would you describe it? A speech, a post-station. A talk on dark energy to the carch group at the UTXs. This Austin physics department. This is one I wanted to ask you about. Michio Kaku has been saying that he believes that dark energy is possibly something leaking in from another dimension. Is that look at that face? Look at that face. You can't go on. You can't have a little side on. Well, let's see what he says. James, see if you can find that, please. I think he said it was gravity. And leaking. And leaking. And putting them together as a kid just to see what happens. Did I know I never did that? Oh, why? Just watch them fight? No, yeah. Oh, you fucking psycho? Yeah, a little bit. No, I never did it. You were saying about Michio. Yeah, that he, I just, I didn't even read it. I just saw it and went, oh, Jesus, I got to talk to Eric about this. Michio, she just dark matter, isn't matter at all. It's gravity leaking in from a parallel dimension. And this guy won't do mushrooms. Isn't that wild? What do you think about that? You remember when I was here and I said, get Michio, Kaku in here with me. Yeah. What is, what is about, well, clearly he's a brilliant guy. He, he is and was a brilliant guy. He's decided to do something else and to be entirely honest. I don't love going after other named people. And in general, my stick is that I go hard after institutions. I'm a huge institutional supporter and their worst nightmare in the current world. Individuals I don't like beefing with. I watch all of the energy, the beauty of life lost to beefing with people. Michio Kaku is doing a tremendous amount of damage to theoretical physics. How so? Theoretical physics is in my estimation the most beautiful, most powerful, most economically potent thing you can do with your life. And we are the best. The United States is in my opinion, the greatest nation in the history of the Earth for theoretical physics. Because we are cowboys, we are irreverent. We are the, we are the people who invented the atomic and hydrogen bomb, the semiconductor. This is what we do. And we've lost the ability to do it at a level that I cannot believe happened during my watch, my lifetime. So from 1984 to the present, those 42 years have been the greatest intellectual implosion, I think that I know of where people just got dumber. And what do you think is the cause that I'm going to distinguish quantum gravity? Quantum gravity. Yep. In 1984 there was a result and it's called the Green Shorts anomaly cancellation. And the guy that I've talked to you about before in UFO context, the guy who is Lewis Witten's son, Lewis Witten, happy, happy birthday, turned 105, was the anti gravity guy from the 50s, his son Edward Witten decided that the 1984 Green Shorts anomaly cancellation meant that we should all, all the smartest people should pile into one narrow subspecialty and that that was the future. And because he was so much smarter than all of us, people listened and I didn't. And Michiokaku is part of his wave. Almost all of the people that you have traditionally had on in physics have some connection to this. So you've had on, I don't know, probably Sean Carroll, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Brian Green. Nobody wanted to say what was happening, which is that we were being unraveled and destroyed our ability to be the world's greatest theoretical physicist was being eroded year by year for 42 years. And specifically, the pursuit of string theory? It's not string theory itself that's the problem. String theory is harmless. It's just a bunch of equations, a bunch of ideas, and it's beautiful mathematics in many places. So that's not an issue. The issue is the exclusion of everything else. And this goes into the name tojit or the only game in town, T-O-G-I-T. And it's this idea that only we, the enlightened, can do theoretical physics and the rest of you are just doing finger exercises and you're too stupid to know us. So specifically, what is what's isolationist about string theory? Like what is it about this one particular theory that all this thought has been pushed into that? The claim is that there's this thing called UV complete physics. And there's no way that we can have a discussion about that directly. If I could ask Jamie, could I impose upon you to call up on YouTube, wheel of fortune, and then use, I've got a good feeling about this. I can explain it to you. Wheel of fortune. You got a good feeling about this? I've got a good feeling about this. OK. Is that an episode of Wheel of fortune? It'll be over briefly. It's very, very quick. It's about a minute and a half or something. And the key point is it's a tight analogy for the problem faced in physics that anyone can understand. So I don't, people think I try to make things complicated. I really try to make them understandable. But what I do is I talk about things. I don't know that you've ever had anyone talk about UV completeness on the Joe Rogan. I don't believe so. Yeah. Yeah. So sit. OK, put your headphones on. Yeah. Well, you're not going to be able to hear it. Let's see what headphones on. I know it like the back of my hand. Wheel of fortune. We need to phrase this time. Let's get a good look at this puzzle. And it is a prize puzzle. Oh, yeah. Perfect. Gladly. Man, what do we get here? 500. R. Well, you think there'd be an R in there somewhere. Would you? Oh, I'm going to say, we'll call the Kevin. Oh, OK. 1L. It's really long. What's that? Can I solve? OK. It is a prize puzzle. Yeah. I've got a good feeling about this. That's right. That's insane. That ladies are wizard. That lady is what I want to do with my life. That is what great physics looks like. It's totally irresponsible. And you know, Pat's Ajak is like trying to ask her, like, how'd you do that? And she says, well, you had a good feeling about this. You know, and then the funny part about it is you can figure it out. If you go back, Jamie, can you show the board right there? Yeah. So clearly, that apostrophe is a huge clue. So the idea is that if you read that property, is it I'll? Is it I've? And then there's no R. So think about all of those blank squares as orders of magnitude that you are away from the energies that would allow you to do experiments that would explain physics. And think about the apostrophe, the L, and that pattern, as well as the fact that if there's no R, as the standard model of physics. So right now, what you have is a debate about whether or not we should buy more and more letters with higher and higher energy. Or like should we build bigger accelerators and spend more treasure trying to collide particles? Or should we just Caitlin our way out of this? So Caitlin Burke is my model of what I think we're supposed to be doing. And so an exceptional mind with an ability to see or propose things that other people aren't saying. How I guarantee you that if we studied this, if we spent it a month with the world's smartest people on this puzzle, we'd learn that there are certain things that were present, that the frequency of certain, the fact that there's a single letter there that almost certainly is I or a, she took a tiny number of clues. But here's the really important thing. Jamie, can we show that the filled in puzzle? So you'll notice that the word this could be changed to that because the only letter that's been excluded is an R. So that is what the issue of unique UV completion is. In other words, a unique UV completion would say there's only one phrase that fits there. She guessed, she couldn't have known it is I've got a good feeling about that. Or I've got a nice feeling about this or that. So it's actually not, or I'll get a good feeling about this. But all of those were much less probable because they're just not as natural. So this is a combination of science, guesswork, and raw courage. Like the most marvelous thing about that exchange is she says, can I solve? And there's like, he's not even sure he's hearing her properly. And then finally he says, OK, that's gatekeeping. Can I put this article on the archive? Can I give it seminar in your department? I want to solve the puzzle. And a lot of what we're arguing about is that the strength theorists are the only ones who have the right to try to solve the puzzle at the moment. So imagine that somehow there's a rule that only Rick, poor Rick, who guesses that there's an R. Imagine that he's the only one allowed to solve the puzzle. When she asks, may I solve the puzzle? No, no, no, you can't. That's pseudoscience. You're a charlent. That's you know, that is crank physics. So that's what the problem that we're facing is, is that we've got one group that got control of the gatekeeping who is very good at mathematics, extremely bad at physics. And they've redefined what physics is and what good science is where they're the only ones who are guessing the puzzle. They can't guess the puzzle. And everyone else is like, here's a crazy story from yesterday. I wasn't allowed to say that I gave a talk in the physics department, even though an even normal person would say that that happened. And I wasn't allowed to do that when I visited a physics institution in Canada. I wasn't allowed to say that I was visiting for a week. Nor was I allowed to say that I gave a seminar that lasted nine hours. Well, you just did. Yeah. Are you a lawbreaker? I'm breaking the rules now. because I've now I've had it. I agreed to not do this. And with these missing scientists, I've changed my mind. I'm not going to deal with these people anymore. And whatever is going on with science and the suppression of different ideas is terrifying. Right now we have a situation. I give a talk at the University of Chicago. There's no record of it. Who's asking you to do these talks? And who's asking you to not give a record? You don't have to name names. And yeah, in general, the funny part is that the people who ask me to give talks in the physics departments are the most courageous person in each department. So the problem is that the person that you end up feeling resentful towards, how dare you tell me that I can't give this talk in this department officially is the person who's arranging for your stay and is arranging for the room. And they are under the most pressure from the institution. So the institution is forcing them to say, you're allowed to give the talk, but you're not allowed to talk about it on social media and not allowed to advertise that you're doing it, not allowed to say that you're doing it. So in this case, in the case of UTX's physics department, I was allowed to say I'm speaking in the Karch Group seminar. It's like a condom to make sure that the physics department doesn't get pregnant. What is that really bizarre? Because University of Austin, Texas was supposed to be a university that fixed all the bullshit that was wrong with other universities. Oh, so much more insane than that. This was the home of Stephen Weinberg, who moved from Harvard to Texas because the oil money was used to buy brains. So basically, Texas raided Harvard for people like John Tate in the math department, Stephen Weinberg, who was probably the greatest living theorist. And that was the continuation of the Bryce Dewitt Group from North Carolina Chapel Hill that was set up to do antigravity by Agnew Bainson. So you're right next to an amazing physics department with a crazy history that in fact touched antigravity. This is one of the tiny number of places that has a real legacy in that department. And I was speaking there on gravity, on dark energy, and look, I've been lying my whole life about my relationship with the physics world because of this pressure. They can't listen to me if I say I'm a physicist, so I say I'm an entertainer. Yeah. But people say, well, why would you do that? Why would you say that you're an entertainer when you obviously are conversant in all this stuff? And the answer is, I don't want to die. I don't want to lose my ability to enter a physics department. So I take on this completely wrong persona. And I have the emails. You're not giving a talk. You're having conversations in room 53.08. It literally says you're not giving a talk. I could read what it is that they write to me. But what is the benefit of this formal declaration, or this formal designation of the way you're talking? So when I was at a physics institute in Canada, I was told, we're worried that you're going to use it to legitimize yourself. It's like, I'm going to do that. Of course, I'm going to. I have a PhD from Harvard. You stupid. I mean, like, you guys imagine I'm a podcast guest. This episode is brought to you by Squarespace. Once you've got a great name for your business, you need a great domain. And Squarespace makes it easy to lock in a domain. You just search the name, you want, buy it, and then you're ready to build. No hidden fees, no weird upsells. Go to squarespace.com slash Rogan for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use the code Rogan to get 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. Right. Just a regular dude with some wacky ideas. Right. And so the idea is I have to play that character as opposed to. I have to. Generizing yourself is a very bizarre phrase. Tell me about that. Because it's assuming that you're not legitimate. Do you know what I'm saying? I don't think you're understanding this. But no, I am understanding it. But from their perspective, saying that you're going to use it to legitimize yourself and your ideas is a really crazy way to phrase it. Because they're acting from the assumption that you're not legitimate. So that's there. You remember when, like, I think Rogan thought, I forget who is. Rogan thought there were recallable missiles. Well, you could turn them around. Right. Sorry, we changed our mind. So like a base jumper. Or if that was also a suicide jumper. On second place, dude. Halfway, and he's like, I fuck this. No, I like these people who survived jumping off the gold. They bridge. They learn, like, I love life. Yes. Yes. Most of them. They're reborn. Yeah. So what I would say is the problem is that I am, this is not a boast, as you know, I don't usually put my credential first. I'm probably the most blue chip defector from the institutions. Mutant, mutant ear. Let's put it, call it that. I have essentially perfect credentials. And that's the problem. So it's not a question about you're going to legitimize you. I already legitimized myself by Harvard PhD, MIT Postdoc, NSF, Postdoctoral fellow, ONR, Top in the Country, Sloan Foundation, Grantee. I've been in math, physics, economics, departments. I'm so bulletproof. So that's the problem. That's the problem. That's the problem. It's not that you're a coog that you think you're a boy. So you didn't understand. No, I do understand. You just don't understand why they want to do that too. Because it's bizarre. Narrative. OK. I am the greatest danger to the narrative. I mean, the most followed mathematician in the United States. Maybe the world, honafry, maybe above it. That danger to the narrative is the problem. Well, specifically for people who don't know what we're talking about, what is to make this a standalone show, the people that not wherever you work. What is it about you and your ideas that they are so hesitant to platform or legitimize or why you're such a danger? OK. So in 2001, I said mortgage-backed securities were a great danger to the world. I had one of the first published papers on the danger of the pricing and the liquid securities. I went on Chris Williamson's show and he asked me, who's going to win Biden or Trump? I said, you don't even know whether Biden's going to make it to November. I said that the people represented as the Democrat Party reached out to me and said, stop talking about Biden's dementia. You need your affirmation that you're seeing something real. We've put in three people as a committee to replace the president. And I said, I'm supposed to feel good about that. So I think they told you. They put in three people. They put in a committee of three people. And if you knew who those people were, you'd be pleased as punch so shut up. That's what they said, yeah. Correct. You would be really happy so shut up. Yeah. They didn't even tell you who the people were? I think that they did. And I've conveniently forgot them. One of them might have been the chief of staff. Wow. So it's like, but I say this. And I'm not trying to, I mean, I keep lots of secrets that people ask me to keep, that I should keep, things that having to do with national security, for example. But these people are incompetent. And they're a danger to us. And right now, the string theory narrative is a complete danger. It's not string theory. That's the problem. It's the only game in town. And so there was a, look, people are willing to spend their entire credibility just to make me go away. Could you briefly just describe like what is the, so there's not a problem with string theory or a string theory not complete or a string theory has it reaped actual results? Mathematically, it's reaped results. And string theorists have occasionally done really great work in a subject called quantum field theory. But quantum field theory isn't about the quantum field theory of the world. Quantum field theory is like calculus. It's some thing that's very useful. And it grew up in physics. But we've now found out that quantum field theory has to do with pure problems and mathematics that have nothing to do with physics. And what they haven't done is they haven't dealt with the physical world. So if you take physics, why do we care about physics so much more than really almost any other aspect of the sciences other than biology? I had to give a talk at the New York Deep Tech Week shout out to those guys. And I put it on the slide as three things. There's boom, room, and zoom, easy to remember. Boom is weapons. Physics will create weapons to dwarf everything else with the possible exception of biologicals. Zoom, room is energy. And the story of energy is basically the story of prosperity and control. If you look at wealth and the amount of fossil fuels burned, it's more or less like a one-to-one correlation as to which nations are rich and poor, per capita. And zoom is everything else. It's propulsion. It's computation. It's communication. And those things, if you take them together, more or less define the economy in the world order. Physics is the center of what makes us modern humans. And it became too dangerous in the 1950s. Even the 40s, atomic weapons are extremely bad, but they're not hydrogen bombs. Somehow, in November of 52, everything changed. And we became too dangerous. The community of physicists is the most powerful group of people made into completely ineffectual humans. And do you think this is by design? Partially. And what was the purpose of it? But by saying that physicists became too dangerous, the ideas became too dangerous, is the idea that the weapons would become so immense and powerful, that they had to do something to stop and curb? Well, we didn't know how to control it. So in other words, for example, in 1940, we set up something called the Reference Committee, which I'm sure you're listeners have never heard of. And the Reference Committee lived inside of the National Research Council. Now, why was it important? Because chain reaction physics was so hot. Once the neutron was found, right? So I think about neutrons as bullets, they can go right into the middle of an atom because they're not positively charged, so they're not going to be repelled by the nucleus. And they can bust apart atoms that are base barely being held together. And that's why you get bullets, be getting bullets, be getting bullets, and that's what a chain reaction is. The people who were doing that in the 40s, in the 30s, suddenly found that when they mailed off a paper to a journal, if they weren't part of the secret group in Los Alamos, their paper got held up and sent back for revisions. And there was no money in it. We secretly set up this thing to shunt real research into the National Resource Council. I think this was organized by a guy named Bright, BR, EIT. And that was the beginning of this whole peer review control mechanism. And this control, do you think, is this ego-based, that the people who are the gatekeepers want to remain in the position of? We all want to survive, Joe. I mean, this is a real problem. So you and I can hate on the institutions all we want from the safety of the JRE. But what are you going to do when it becomes really, really easy for people to commit mass murder? If you think about all the really bad math, like the Vegas shooting, they've never really got sorted out. It's very hard to kill large numbers of people using things like bullets. If you want to really kill a large number of people, you're going to go to biologicals, and you're going to go to nuclear. And what happens when that becomes easy? Like, maybe it's a lot easier to build these weapons than the way we currently do it. Right now, we're bottlenecked on things like centrifuges. And by the way, who knows what the next innovation in physics is going to bring? So I always say this thing about it. If you're not tracking everybody at my level, what are you doing as an intelligence? Is this part of your concern about the missing scientists? Yeah, of course. So the missing scientists narrative for people that aren't aware of it. I think they're up to 15 now, and a lot of people say that some of these connections are baseless and that some of them just have to. We're not really up to 15. No. OK. So what do you think we're actually up to? I don't know. Probably five or six. But I saw someone online did a breakdown of it, and essentially they were saying that the odds of this being a coincidence are off the charts. The people that are all involved in very specific types of technological, technological research, different things that are top secret that all of these people either wind up missing. There's a lot of murder in math in physics, first of all. People don't really appreciate that. The unibomber was a famous PhD mathematician. He's a big story, though. There's a lot of stuff. Sure. There was a guy named Cantor who broke into David Rittenhouse Laboratories in the University of Pennsylvania, where I was an undergraduate and shot up a seminar. There was this situation in Iowa, where a relative of mine got a seat in the physics department because somebody was killed by one of the graduate students. I think it became a movie like Dark Matter. So there's an incredible amount of murder. The ball peen hammer killing. I do it students. I think it became a movie like Dark Matter. So there's an incredible amount of murder. The ball peen hammer killing of what's it called, dilu by Strelesky at Stanford. So first of all, there's just a lot of death because mathematicians and physicists are somewhat close to unhinged. And it's a really nasty, there's a lot of nasty culture and sometimes it becomes violent. Why do you think they're close to unhinged? You spend that much time in your head. I'm amazed that I'm as well grounded as I am. No, seriously, you're just way out in the stratosphere. I completely forget who I am, where I am, that I'm even a human being. When you're using your body as an instrument, as you do in combat sports and training, you become a different thing. You know, you know that archery thing where you have to twist your arm. A lot of people don't know that they can do that initially. Like just a small thing like that or you know, you're talking about archery thing that you twist your arm. If you have an old style bow, you often get burned by the, oh, the you have to twist your arm like that. Yeah. It's just like, yeah. So you're not like this and get fit. But you don't see it. But then you twisted your wrist, you can't your wrist straight. Just I don't do that kind of archery. That's why I'm confused. Well, okay. Sorry. You do real. This this kind. Yeah. Keep your hand like that. Okay. That's a torque issue. But like if you're if you're if you're a sniper, you know, there are all sorts of things about breathing in your eye, how you adjust your eyes and right. You use your body as an instrument as a mathematician or physicist. One of the reasons that I wish I were in better shape is that in order for me to keep my mind in a particular way, I have to not think constantly about suppressing food. You know, so what you're doing, you're doing a very unnatural thing. And that unnatural thing, not everybody can handle it. Right. And we snap. And also our minds are more perfect. The messiness of the world and the perfection of our minds is at odds with each other. And I love disappearing into math and physics because it's perfect. But how's our lead to violence? You're upset because people are lying. You know, you're like the unabomber had a had a really interesting point. It wasn't a dumb guy. He was really correctly. You know, he has an amazing story called ship of fools. I highly recommend anybody read it. Just the way Charles Manson's look at your game girl is a great song. Yeah. It's a great song. Okay. Yeah. We're not comfortable in part with coming back to the half measures and the special pleading that sort of characterizes normal life. So to get back to the missing scientist narrative, um, I don't think they're 15 missing scientists in this data set. That's bullshit. But it seems like they're adding as many as they can. Yeah. They're trying to make connections that don't do that. It's like it's like the junkification of the UFO narrative. All of these narratives have a junk to them so that and I believe a lot of the junk is a fix to the narrative so that those who want to follow the institutional instruction to ignore the fact that this is happening can point to the crappiness. Right. And so that's the out. And the really difficult thing that you do and you do really well is you try to piece together. Okay. What's bullshit? What's real? There's a lot of real in the UFO story and there's a lot of nonsense. There's a lot of real in the COVID story and a lot of nonsense. The same thing is true for physics. But physics is more dangerous. And the fact that we're not tracking, like I always wonder why they allow me to come on the Jerry and say stuff. I know a lot of stuff that I don't know what it unlocks. Wow. It's easy to dismiss anybody who comes on here. Sure, but China is smarter than by the way, the LLMs. I mean, look, there are a lot of threads here to get back to the physics. And I'm giving a talk tomorrow on at the UTexas Austin on supporting science, math and physics and renewing our commitment to it. I don't want to give the impression that it isn't dangerous or that the gatekeeping is stupid. It's really important to do great gatekeeping around mathematics and physics. It's cryptography, it's weaponry, it's propulsion, it's sudden change in the world economy. If you've figured out how to do fusion, it would have immediate geopolitical results. So these specific scientists that are missing, whatever the number is, five, six that you think legitimate, what specifically are they working on that's so dangerous? Well, the fusion guy, obviously, is at MIT is anybody who might, I don't know, fusion isn't my thing, plasma isn't my thing. But that is unquestionably dangerous if you imagine how much depends on oil. And is it a good assumption that if you have one incredibly brilliant person that's at the head of this thing and they make a breakthrough, if you kill that guy, the whole thing is in disarray because the people that are under him, whatever people he has working with him aren't as fully immersed in it as he is, that you can kind of like handicap a problem. It's like, let's say if there's- Top five people, it's an energy thing. Let's say if it's an energy thing. Let's say if someone has some new technology that's going to completely disrupt the fossil fuels industry and they go, listen, we can kill this fucking guy and it's still coming down the pipe, but we'll delay it by 10 years and make $15 trillion. So this is the question about the far right tail, like the extreme right tail of human intelligence and ability. And if you think about certain areas where you have a dominant figure, Rodney Mullen in skateboarding, for example, what percentage of all tricks derive from Rodney Mullen? You couldn't have stopped skateboarding, but you could certainly have held it back by getting to Rodney Mullen, right? When it comes to, you know, guitar, the amount of impact that Jimmy Hendrix and Eddie Van Halen had is just wildly disproportionate. You know, when I was doing my podcast, I was really excited to do Rodney Mullen and Eddie Van Halen together. I wanted to get them, you know, totally different sports, but those two guys are sort of the same. They just created so much vocabulary. You can't even imagine it. And Eddie Van Halen doesn't get the credit he deserves either. Oh, tell me, talk to me. Well, it's just Van Halen became Van Hagar. And it became a different kind of music. And I think a lot of the original hardcore fans left, but a lot, I think it got more popular with sure Sammy Hagar, but it was a different kind of music. And not that it's bad, but it's different. And then I think a lot of people just went, yeah, but like if you go like to, you know, some of the like big Van Halen with David, I think Van Halen with David Lee Roth in his prime was a literally a perfect band. It was phenomenal. That was, they were the shit when I was in high school. I mean, it was everybody had Van Halen on their notebooks. They made the VA. I remember it. They were awesome. And they were so good. And Van Halen and Eddie specifically could shred so hard and some of those classic riffs. I just don't think in the mainstream world he got the credit that he deserves. I see it differently. Well, people mentioned Clapton who of course is a great wizard. Always it's number one is Hendrix. Most people have Hendrix as number one because he was so revolutionary. Well, nobody's going to say Alan holds worth. Yeah, I don't know who he is. Exactly. Yeah. I mean, my point is is that David Lee Roth kept Eddie Van Halen from becoming Alan holds worth. And that's who his Alan holds worth? Oh, it's interesting. Alan holds worth. Like if you talk to your hot shit guitarist friends, they will very often like everybody will just pause and say, well, yeah, that's Alan holds worth. Really? Yeah. And it's sort of like listening to a modem for normal human beings. Right. That's why it's just not popular. So Eddie Van Halen was this. Who is he play with? I don't know Alan holds worth. Just by himself. Yeah. Okay. Can we just actually weirdly put Alan holds worth just like choose something with it? Yeah. Yeah. We'll listen to some of his music. So we might have well edited out of the episode because otherwise we could ding. Okay. Why don't we play it? Okay. But like play it. We'll play it. And then we'll just come right back to it. All right. Let's do that. Give me some Jamie. Was it any specific song that you'd like? No, it all. It's all mind melting. It's not going to see if he's got anything popular. We might have known so I could attack tapping at that. But I don't see nothing. Like, is there a song that you like that you could recommend? I just listened to a certain amount of it. And then I don't listen to it again. I'm not at that level where I need Alan holds. Okay. No one was that me. Thank you Jamie. I'd rather see some guy flying through the air with like his pants on fire than listen to Alan holds. Okay. Here we go. Live in Tokyo. 1984 live in Tokyo dream. See if you can use the histogram to figure out like where the nerds are going. Histogram? Yeah. It shows you like where people spend their time on a video. I would go right in the middle of it or something. Check what you're doing. So nothing's going on right now. Put it in the middle Jamie. What is it? You've heard this before though? Yeah. What is that a base? What is the other guitar I'm hearing? Because that is not matching up with what that base player seems to be playing. Do you hear that extra guitar? Slower at all times? I don't know. That's a base I think. My guitar is friends are just salivate. And I'll look at them. They won't help. It sounds like jazz. Right? So it's like jazz guitar. Like there's no there's no singing. If I put on if I no more G.R. Jerry. I've had it. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. Jamie, you were going to have so much nerd hate. That's good. I mean, I agree with you too, I believe. Oh, 100%. That was my camera. That was my point. I think David Lee Roth had some had some comment about it. If it weren't for me, the brothers would be playing biker bars in the far valley or something. You know? And so David Lee Roth came up with what we would call the Syntactic Sugar, the thing that made Van Halen fun and listable and danceable like dance the night away. Yeah. Just I didn't like Van Halen. I love I saw. I never liked Van Halen. Oh, how dare you? Well, but I loved Eddie Van Halen. And like Van Halen, I didn't you want to that I'm not even embarrassed about that. The one I'm embarrassed about. I completely dismissed ACDC in real time because I'm an idiot. I've never been more wrong about something in my life. How did you dismiss ACDC? Good question. They had a dumb thing going on with the school pants and the dirty deeds done dirt cheap and fucking song. Great song. Well, you know, like musically, hot for teacher is an amazing composition. Yeah. Unbelievable, right? But it's the key thing that they figured out is making things marketable, right? Right. And that's David Lee Roth. And I think it's David Lee Roth. It was so hard. It was so bad. I can did jumping splits. Yeah, it was amazing. Amazing. And he had a secret weakness for old timey music. Right. Right. Like just a jigolo ice cream man, all that kind of stuff. So he's like almost a throwback to 1930s, you know, even early Rodville. He's an odd guy of your met him. I've wanted. I've wanted to so badly. I'm so jealous. But I don't think you ever really get to him. It's always the show. Like in podcasts, it's a little like I really enjoy dog and doing, but it's a little odd. I've seen I didn't love the way he was. My feel like I would I would go the Jewish angle. I would connect to him based on shared cultural heritage. But what I think about Eddie is that Eddie wasn't just a guitarist. He was an electronic guy. He was a keyboard player. He was handsome as the day is long bursting with charisma. And like you and I mostly don't know whether guys are good looking. I know Eddie Van Halen was good looking. Tell me more. He was the whole thing. Yeah, for sure. Right. Yeah. And so my feeling is that those two guys really, you know, it's it's one of those things where you have two guys in a band that, you know, both of them are one of one of the billion kind of people and that happened to me. I'm happy to be wrong about Van Halen, but I didn't do it in real time. I came to it later. But I remember the first time I heard Van Halen one, I had the same mystical thing. What is that? Nothing sounds like this. I've almost never had that in music. You know, the first time I heard smells like team spirit. What is that? Those, you know, they're these moments where something discontinuous happens. But you heard like ain't talk about love and that never got you. Now Panama doesn't get me. Hey, talk about love. The fucking jam. What was last time you listened to it this year? And nothing. It's like that. Well, okay. So part of the thing is, is that do you, do you play an instrument when you play an instrument? Problem. Yeah. I don't play anything. You know, the thing about it, even Halen is, is that he accepted the geometry of the neck of the guitar. And very often you see musician say, I don't care what key it's in. I can figure out how to do anything. And even Halen didn't do that. He said, look, there's certain things that this thing makes possible. And I'm going to, I'm going to accept the limitations of the instrument and figure out how to push it and all sorts of ways. Another quote of his that I just love is this thing about if it doesn't cry weep, moan. I don't care. He wanted all of those noises and figuring out how to get those noises, figuring out how to make the guitar into more. This is a thing that obsesses people like Jeff Beck or Roy Buchanan or Eddie Van Halen where they're just, they're in some other space where it's no longer an instrument the way you and I see it. You know, I've never wanted a whammy bar on my instrument until I saw Jeff Beck do crazy stuff that just isn't possible. I never tell you I drove him around. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We had that car on air. And that, you know, you've never had Derek trucks on the program have you. Did she trucks? Yeah. No. That guy would not a human. Oh, he's amazing. Amazing. And there's a bunch of different people saying songs. So yeah, I look, I care tremendously about the guitar. And the funny thing that I realized is that I stupidly mentioned guitars on Jerry and I got sent amazing guitars and I had Jamie sent a quad cortex. I should have mentioned like Lamborghinis or like jewels or something. It doesn't work. I know. Okay. But I became friends with like the greatest guitarists of our time and they're all suffering because nobody cares. And I heard and I haven't seen it that you had Marcus King. Yeah. And I talked about the death of rock. Well, I talked about the death of rock before and Marcus reached out. And that's why I had a mom. He's like, man, rocks and I did. We're doing it every fucking night. And I was like, all right, come on man, let's talk. And did you get to the blues which he excels at? Well, we mostly just we're talking about just music in general in his life and he's in it. Boy, did you give you a nice guitar? Yeah, it's beautiful, right? He's a cool mother fucker. He's a cool guy. And he's super talented too. Never met him. Well, it's like these these this is what my conversation was about. Like this is what's what prompted it rather. When I was a kid, rock and roll music was the big popular music 100%. It was all rolling stones, AC, DC, these bands were huge, Zeppelin. They were fucking huge. They were the biggest bands. That's not the case anymore. That's right. And that's weird. And I what I said is I don't understand how a music genre that's so popular can stop being popular when it's still so good. Like when we have protect our parks and you know, we'll play pre bird. We still go nuts for that guitar solo. What happened to free bird? I'm pretty sure if you looked at Google's data. Free bird was in it went away for a long time. And then it got resurrected as a meme, right? Because you can feel all right this insanely long intro. Just so luxurious. You can't believe anybody would put up with it. Right. And then two different songs. Right. Lord knows I can't. And right now he just becomes alive. Right. Fly high free bird. Yeah. And then suddenly you're on fire. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's just like you want to fly an American flag. You want to shoot lasers, whatever it is. That feeling, I think, went away. And I think that I think that free bird if I'd love to see the data, it came back. And in part it was probably Trump and Elon and this re we're in a masculinity crisis world over. And the masculinity crisis originally killed free bird and it brought it back. I think free bird was brought back by protect our parks. You think so? I mean, as Google Transits has never really gone away. Wait, wait, wait, wait. What is his opinion? He's a peaking around December 9th to 2010. Wait, wait, that's 2010. That's weird. Something could have. We could look it up. Wonder what it was. Probably was in a movie. Yeah, it seems pretty steady. Well, the reason I said that is that I would make this reference because you used to be able to refer to free bird. It was a mean. Right. Everybody knew it. Yeah. People would yell at that. And then there was a period of time when no young person had any clue what I was talking about. And I know, oh, that's interesting because they still knew stairway to have it. If you remember these like top 500 songs a little time. Yeah. And then it would always come down to the last two and it would always be free bird and stairway to have those would invariantly. Right. Then suddenly nobody knew what free bird was and now everybody knows again. So I yeah, I will be I will stay uncorrected, but there was a period of time when young people didn't know it. Well, is this Google trends? Is that what that is? Yeah. So just people looking at it. I could even go like that's probably when they put the video on YouTube for the first time or it became available on Apple for the first time and download and it was right on Appster or something like that. To go back to the the blues aspect of it. It's blues based rock that feels like that thing that you and I relate to. And this episode is brought to you by Man's Scaped. Wondering what to get your dad on Father's Day. The beard and dome bundle from Man's Scaped is a really solid option. I've been using their dome shaver for a while now. And the thing I like about it is how easy it makes everything. You don't have to think about it. Just glides over your head, gets everything clean. No weird patches. No going over the same spot 10 times. Honestly, it's so much better than any of the other brands I've tried. And then there's the beard hedger. It's got the zoom wheel with 20 different length settings that's built right in. So if you want to get your dad something you'll actually use, the beard and dome bundle for Man's Scaped is an easy pick. Get 15% off plus free shipping with the code, Rogan15atmanscaped.com. That's 15% off plus free shipping with code Rogan15atmanscaped.com. You know, we're not most I'm really into the blues, but that's it's its own controversy because when black audiences stop showing up to blues shows, the performers got worse because the audience was a huge part of the experience. I tell you about this argument I got into with John Mayer about the blues. No. So I ran into John Mayer, San Vicetti bungalies. And I've been an awe of that guy intellectually. When he talks about music, I get so much out of it. It's just very perceptive, very brilliant guy. And so I was really excited to meet him. And we get into this discussion. And I said, you're like a huge Stevie Ray Vaughan fan. And I said, I really don't get it. I like him. I think he's great player, but I don't understand the focus. And he said, Oh, I can explain that. He says, I came from the MTV generation. And he was the blues packaged for us, like a genius guy for sure, but packaged for MTV. He said, but you know, blues isn't really, blues isn't a real musical form. It's an ingredient. So what are you talking about? He says, well, you would never go to a blues show. I said, I can't believe I'm saying this to John Mayer. But I don't think you know what you're talking about. House of blues, it's literally well, he meant some of the bunch of things. So the thing is, is that I caught the end of black audiences, like old black people listening to the blues and paying for it. So there's who pays and who plays and black people are still paying for blues. But a lot of them aren't it's are still playing blues, but a lot of them aren't paying for it. So when I go, for example, to see Cadillac, Zach's Maui Sugar Mill show every Monday night, I go occasionally in in Tarzanah. It's like 70 year old and up white people. So you see like hot chicks in their 80s and crop tops dancing. And that's what it is now. It's like a really old crowd keeping this thing alive. And I can't understand it because it feels great, Joe. Right. And, and that's the thing. It's just like, bottom off, he does these cruises keeping the blues alive. My feeling is like, F that we've got to actually get people back into understanding what it is. So if you picture those huge bands in your youth, stop thinking about the band on stage rocking out and pan in your mind into the audience. And what do you see young people, young people? What are they doing? Dancing, how fun? They're dancing. There's some there's some chicken a crop top on some guys shoulders rocking out. Free bird. When when hot chicks stop dancing to your music, it starts to enter. It's death throws and that's true with jazz. It's true with traditional R&B. And it's true with the blues. It's true with rock. And so the important thing I keep telling people is that you have to get people dancing. Once you start becoming intellectual, like Alan Halder, nobody's dancing to Alan Halder. Maybe you are. It's not much shit. You have no idea. It's true. Jamie, what do you think? Dude, I'm an honest to you guys. It's not an old to share it. There's so much music and rock music and arenas right now. What is rock in me? And it's like there's a bunch of bands. I could select battlements, bare tooth, corn, just post it a video in front of like Sao Paulo Brazil, 50,000 people going crazy. Yeah, well, like Ms. Sugar, it's out there. Yeah. But it's not what you got. You guys like it either. Yeah, but it's not it's not the big popular music that it was when I was a kid. There's only for five artists in the world that are popular like all over the place now. That's right. Because it's down micro, right. Right. Because there's too many bands, there's too much music. It's also the control of the institutions to tell us what we like has slipped. Right. And so in part, you know, like it was our version of Paola that, you know, when I was growing up in in LA, it was KMT and KLS that determined or KROQ. Those are the three stations that mattered. And they told us, here's here's the offering boys. This is what's on tap right now, you know, are you into math core? Do you think that's it? It's the death of because wow, now that you're saying that, I'm thinking the death of radio and the death of rock and roll, they sink because radio really stopped being a thing early 2000s, early 2000s, radio stopped being a thing. Well, remember when the line wire came through and everybody could get all the songs that they wanted. Right. That was an issue. But it felt like if anything, I thought at the beginning when like Metallica was Rayleigh and Laurel's Lars Ulrich was Rayleigh against Napster, I'm like, these are just your fans. They're just your fans that are getting your music for free. Yep. You're going to have to adapt, but they still love you and you know, don't you make most of your money touring or I don't know. I don't know what the dynamics of it are, but they're going to change. This is a new thing. Right now, micro markets, you know, just just in Prague, metal, there's so many different flavors. I understand. But what we're getting at is that the radio sort of dictated what became popular a lot of ways. Now, maybe a game's become popular in more of a sense of a viral way. Sure. Well, one thing is that these clips, if you clip gets picked up by TikTok and Instagram reels, that's, you know, some tiny fraction of a song is the catnip that leads everyone to your door. 100%. I've downloaded many, many songs that way. But I was hanging with Misha Mansour who was making the Jamie claim like you got old grandpa. And his point, yeah, the thing is I have at least the courage to hang out with actually cool people. He said, you know, his point was you just not even watching it correctly. And I said, what do you mean, Misha? He said, video games, video games, the music and video games matters much more than you imagine. And it's like totally right. That makes sense. And so, you know, what we are thinking about in get off get off my lawn mode is there was something lost. And it hasn't been reborn anywhere. So that's the part that young Jamie is not getting correct. Something was just lost. Now, lots of new stuff sprouted up. But like EDM and DJing is really where a lot of that dancing hot chick energy went. That makes sense. Yeah. Right. And then like, you've ever heard guys want to go where the dancing hot chicks are. They will follow anywhere. Right. Right. And you know, that's the whole I was in was this Jamie? The dancing hot chicks are. They will follow anywhere. Right. Right. And you know, that's the whole I was in What's this Jimmy? It's a ZDC Vegas, 2026. It's just just the example of what you're saying like is this a electronic? Yeah, yeah, this is like as big as it gets. But look at the stage. Look at all these lights. I wonder if Molly didn't exist. How much of this would be? I mean, it's a good question. Right. LSD didn't exist. How much of that music wouldn't have gotten big too? Oh, a lot. Yeah. But yeah, this is all the same. Right. So like I found myself in in Vegas. It's a for L.A. Langley knows sort of antithesis to that. But what is L.A. Langley? What's that? She's a biggest country artist and almost ever now. First female with like two top 100 songs ever. How much so out of the loop? What is there? Which is the Texas? Oh, I know that's what. Yeah. That sounds great. Yeah, she got another one now. And has she been around for a long time? Nope. Pretty new. She's 24. And she's killing it. Murdering it. So part of what's going on is there's no way to monitor like even if you have really current young people, they're monitoring a subset of what's going on. Nobody nobody's tracking the whole thing. Right. And why country though? Why is country exploding? It's exploding. Well, because we're all in a meaning crisis. If you think about the way in which country music, for example, can develop a story through tropes very, very quickly. Yeah. Right. And so in part, the idea is that story songs and a return and try that in a small town is transgressive. Try that in a small town is a really powerful message. Right. You don't have to say a lot. And we all want the cowboy. We all want the girl at the county fair. You know, we just don't know how to get back to her. Right. We don't want to hold some existence. You know, I got a barbecue stain on my white t-shirt that's Tim McGraw. Right. Like, you know, she's killing that miniscirt. You know, hard don't forget something like that. Beautiful story. Very, very quickly told. And that's old now. But the point being, hip hop and its storytelling and the return to spoken word and poetry and then the legacy of the talking blues had a had a great run spread worldwide. You know, you talk about whites taking over. What do you mean whites? Like, tammels and, you know, indigenous paruvians have taken over hip hop in their local sectors. So hip hop was just this great platform that once every local culture figured out some version of that. And I talk about, I'm going to enter Bollywood. There was a song. I'm a daketerman to begrudge. I, you know, mama look here's your child is being ruined. And it has this like, hey, mom, hey, dad, don't moan and groan. Why don't you learn to live with the times and please leave us alone. And it goes every generation's passage. Yeah, but it's like it's delivered in, you know, boogie, wiggie, reggae, rap, rock and roll and bunga, you know, and it's like trying to, it was the first lame attempt at rap that I saw on a Bollywood film with Jackie Schroth. And they've all made it theirs. And so I was hanging out in India now with the DJ on his program, untriggered. And it's changing the developing world at a level that rock and roll changed us. It was a, you know, the music of liberation. John Mayer's point of course is that the guitar, the electric guitar retains the stylistic characteristics of cars in the 1950s. And that thing was the twin experience of having a car and having a guitar was, was personal expression and liberation for, for American males in the 50s. So yeah, I, but I think a lot about our guitarist friends because they're suffering. The world's greatest guitarists are living today and nobody cares. They all follow each other. The funny thing is if you start following these people on Instagram as I do, I look to see which of my friends are following the great guitarists and it's other great guitarists. It's none of my normal friends. Like how many of my normal friends know who Tim Henson is a great Texas guitarist? This man. What kind of music? Paul, man, I couldn't even explain it. He pretty much invented a genre that only he mastered and is can explain. It's like Tex-Mex melodic. If I had a glass and I broke it, if I took Tex-Mex and I broke it on the ground and I reassembled it from different things. It's completely angular and an idea will last, it's like a psychedelic thing where it'll last for five seconds and it'll be on to the next thing and it's just angular and fragmented and sewn together and beautiful and inspiring. Give me some, James. Yeah, I don't have to, I have to play for you because the drummer and bass player also awesome but pretty much revolted from the guitar. And you see the thing is that they're so tight with each other that you know a better example, even than this would be this thing that they released called a goat which was the thing that put them on the map. And that was great. It was right. Also Tim is just like the loveliest human being. Paul had Tim before he got all the crazy neck tattoo. Oh, let's just broken out. I don't know. It's that Tim isn't. This is a different human. Let's hear the song. I think that's someone posting a riff. I was there, Count. I know, but maybe he just put it up there. By the way, you hear the Mexican influence? Yeah, definitely. So like this is very unique, very unique sound. This is who I hang with. I love these guys. This is, this matters to me. And this is new, right? And just the way this, what Antoine de Putre and that's taking over the the world is basically you hear the Middle East. But these guys are basically into microphones. If you take 24 beats, you can divide it by sixes. You can divide it by fours. So the mathematics of rhythm, you know, the stuff that like only Vinny Kalyuda was able to do before people are sort of getting hip two things that were happening on ood are now happening on micro tunnel guitars. And what it is, as I see is this is like this violent birth of people bored by standard Western forms. And I'm for this. I'm not for all of the slop that, you know, like young people are always into the coolest stuff. No, they're not. They're lame times. They're cool times. There's really cool stuff happening now. But it's it's it's the fact, particularly this Quebec kind of thing that broke out with these guys in costume. Um, huh, you don't know this. Antoine de Putre and something like that. There's some big costumes. Yeah. Like you remember the residents who were this art group from San Francisco and nobody knew who they were. They would have giant eyeballs as heads. And they would play completely insane things like Johnny Cash's Ring of Fire. But in angular bizarre ways, I missed that too. Okay. Did you miss it? So Antoine de Putre is this thing that took over, which doesn't sound like anything. It's like that new thing. So, you know, because so look at that guitar is frethes. Now, the mathematics. So good, Jamie. The mathematics of this is that there's this freak fact, which is that if you take the octave, which is doubling a frequency, um, you take the twelfth root of it, break it with 12 semitones and then take 19 of them stacked two to the 19 over 12 is equal to 2.996 something. It's almost three. And that means that you can force people into this quantized music where you come up with this number, number 12, which is magical for number theory reasons. And you can fool the ear into thinking that 19 of these 12 semitones is a complete tripling of frequency. And because of that, we've been in even tempered music since the time of Bach. And these guys are breaking us out together with Jacob Collier. They're saying, why would you accept that as a prison? And so how does stuff like this become popular? Is it just viral? Yeah. Because suddenly you see two guys in costumes, don't look anything like anything you know, making music. There's a moment where it switches into six beats per unit into four beats per unit because it's on a 24 cycle. And suddenly you just feel good. And also, if any of these guys get cocky, you can just swap them out, put a mask on some new guy, get them in there. But it's anti-agolic. Right. So in part, it's like, Buckethead, Buckethead didn't want to be like, you have trouble being Joe Rogan. I even have trouble being Eric Weinstein. I'm a fraction of a Joe Rogan. It's hard to be well known. And these guys are erasing themselves. And that idea of, you know, it's very funny, Tim Henson, I think has a song called, Ego Death with Steve Vi. Um, Ego Death is really hot because people are racing themselves is what everybody isn't trying to do who's chasing clout. So, and people like that. Yeah, because it's a form or they don't just like that. They also don't mind if you're chasing clout. And you say, I'm chasing some clout. Right. I'm trying to get that bag. So what they don't want is somebody saying like Bill Gates. Right. I'm just trying to help her humanity. Like, a little health. So what I'm doing, I'm engineering ticks so that they bite you and you get allergic to red meat. And I'm dropping them off from helicopters. We're going to administer vaccines involuntarily through ticks. Yeah. And mosquitoes. Yeah. So all of the stuff really bothers people. It's the decision of jet. What's the decision? So he doesn't have any friends. You know, and he can't get any pussy anymore because he keeps getting caught. He can get it. But if we were smart, we'd feed that guy, pussy. We did. We did. We, I wasn't involved. Neither was I. Yeah. Allegedly. Many people that just lived. I didn't go to that island. You didn't. No. No, you don't want one of the people that saw through him right away. No, but he offered me partnership. And I didn't take it. And I regretted that for a while. Because you would have been chitching. I would have been made rich or deceased, probably both, probably both. Yeah, a couple of times I've been offered real wealth and with crazy stuff. But the Epstein thing, I don't know that I've actually said that on a podcast. Yeah, he offered me partnership. And the only condition was that I had to get rid of my existing partners. Like I just stabbed my partners in the back in order to become his partner. Oh, yeah. So you don't own. Yeah. Yeah. It's like show me that you're I want to sidetrack this. I'll go back. But these two are 333 year old aliens. Time travelers. Yeah. So they cannot be easily replaced. Yes, they can. That's horseshit. But look, I'll make a prediction. If these guys haven't been unmasked, you're going to unmask these guys and you're going to find out that they've got Middle East. Well, he's still unmasked. And they already unmasked. Banksy. Yeah. We have some fucking mysteries. We have our masked dammit. I think they're cool. I like that music. That was fun. I like viral things too. I like things that just spread just from weirdness. You know, someone sends it to me. That's one of the things that I love about Spotify. If I'm listening to something weird, it'll suggest something weird. You know, like that I've never heard of before. Fans have never heard of before. And also I click on it. The suggestion thing. That's how I get new music now or I use, what's that fucking app? Shazam. I use a Xam if I'm at a, you know, pool hall or something something cool comes on. Like, what is that? See, I do that, but then I end up in these ruts. Like, for example, I really like songs that go between A minor and E major. And that is, so it just gives me more and more of your nerd. Your music nerd. Listen, that's your algorithm. There's only wrong with that. Okay. You're a mixed martial arts nerd. I am. I know. And also, there's a lot of things that are way more boring than that. Pool. I watch professional pool probably three or four hours a day. Yeah. Yeah. That's how I escape. I escape in the geometry and the movements patterns. Dude, you should have seen the comedians in the physics department. Oh, this is a, a fun, it's been amazing. Duncan and Kurt together. First of all, together, they are the fucking dynamic doer. They are such a good duo because they're both sarcastic and they're both like, you were so well saved as far as they could. Yeah. But then, um, I don't know whether I can tell these stories. Tell these stories and tell them what happened. What did Kurt do? So part of the fuck I love that guy. He's so awesome. So I love some experimentalist. Real person. Whenever he comes into the mothership green room. Yes. Give me a drink. I got real. He gave me some wild anti Israel stuff. I couldn't tell whether it was pro or anti. Um, he, so at the end, there was an experimentalist who was like, come to my, come to my parlor. I'll show you my etchings. No, no, cryogenic, giant vacuum tubes from hell or whatever. So we all went down there. That's where in the basement of the physics department, you can tell the difference between the theory floor and the like the part where they actually do things. And these guys were just, you know, effectively at 77 degrees before I was above absolute zero with conditions that only occur in deep space inside of this thing coated in like 10 foil. So these guys are just cracking jokes about growing weed and, and, uh, but happens if you put hydroponic weed in the chain. But the other thing is that comedians are really, they're really intellectual nerds and a lot of them, not all of them. Those two guys are for sure. Yeah. And they really wanted to know, okay, what is it that you guys are doing down here? And how do I understand the good ones are very good. Duncan's amazing. Very curious. Although he drew it completely pornographic. I know. He's like, no, it's yeah. We send it to Jamie because Kurt said it to me. This is the notes. Duncan was taking during the physics. Because I'm like doing battle a little bit with the, there's one extremely smart string theorist in the audience named Jacques Dislur. And so almost all of the interactions between Jacques and myself were, we were both being very collegial, but it was, you know, it was pretty, pretty hot. I said to Jamie. And, uh, it's so, it says, well, you were doing that. I did a little sketch of you. I can figure out your exact anatomy. It's a gift. Well, you need some to like that. This is the last talk he's ever coming to know how I'm getting everyone. No, actually, I was really trying to hook. So he's taking notes. Oh, no, please. Show. Thank you, Joe. Hey, guys, I got some other things to do this afternoon. It's been great. Okay. Bye. So Jesus, but yeah, I wanted, you know, CP so snow did this famous essay called The Two Cultures. And it was about how literary intellectuals and scientific intellectuals used to be one group and then they moved to part. And so now we can't hear each other across the chasm. I really wanted to create a pipeline of not the seven scientists we see on all of the talks on the podcasts, but like choose who you want to talk to who's doing cool shit. The comedians belong in our science departments. Otherwise, how are people going to know what's going on? There's this funny shit happening. Well, and by the way, the UFO thing that's now blowing up, there's going to be some crazy science collision with the UFO narrative. There's no way of stopping it at this point. So you've turned a corner on this. Let's talk about that because I saw you on Jesse Michael's show. And you were talking about how just a few years ago, you thought the entire narrative was complete nonsense. Probably five, six years ago by now. And what changed? There was no way to explain. So Jesse was going on and on about it. So Jesse, you're a smart guy. I often would call him the back alley scholar. So he knew a lot of stuff that was sort of forbidden knowledge. And he wouldn't be quiet about it. So I said, okay, I'm going to disabuse you of the idea that you're actually into something. And I realized very quickly at a minimum, there is a massive denied program, like usually called a special access program. One or more, there's no way to synchronize that number of people who've had experiences that are so similar. And there's lost stuff that it couldn't make sense of. And what attracted me in a certain sense was I couldn't come up with any explanations. So rare. I usually have exactly the opposite problem, which is I come up with too many explanations. I can't come up with a single explanation that makes sense of what I now know. And also the fact that the government outreach to me and to Sam Harris and Alex Friedman. And there was this thing where these guys who checked out said there's going to be a massive disclosure. And we need people to disseminate these things to the public. And you have a share of the public who listens to you. And we need to get you informed so that you can help mediate the disclosure. So what prompted this change in narrative? What's the way on behind the government? Yeah, we don't know. We don't know. Look, we don't know what the thing or things is are yet. Some of it is again, so low quality that it's embarrassing to be seen with it. So my colleagues who don't want to take this seriously use that like, okay, so you're you're you're now on the little green men train. And I said, no, I'm on the special access program. There is there's for sure special access program or programs that have UFO on the side of them that may or may not have aliens or craft or non human intelligence in them. It may be that it's decoys. It's maybe I don't know what it is. There's no way to deny that there's like a giant lump under the carpet. And what what prompted you to change your opinion and decide that there is some sort of a special access program? When I started coming in contact with totally sober people from reasonable walks of life who would say the craziest things to me and a lot of them checked and they didn't yet know each other. Like what kind of crazy things? Let me take somebody who's public, Brandon Fuego, for example, was at a dinner where he started talking about being visited by a craft a few feet over his head. The came over the Mesa and his head of security was catatonic standing in the back of a pickup truck unable to move. And it was just way too specific and a shared experience that multiple people had had. And so the joke of course is that the secrets of skin walk or rancher or whatever this is. There's real stuff going on there and there's nonsense BS that the history channel has packaged to come up with a salacious series and there one is funding the other. So I don't know what that is but like some of these injuries are real and you know, you know, like Gary Nolan talking about people reporting, you know, Gary Nolan told me a story that somebody had said that a ball of energy would come and enter the body and move around and then leave and he said, you know, the craziest thing is that when I think it's expected the tissue, there was a path of necrosis that can't be explained like something that shows up on imaging. And that's Gary's a really smart, serious guy. I can check a lot of the things that he says scientifically. Why would he say something like that? I didn't see it myself but well, he's also done some very strange work on material science. Right. It worries analyzed particles or little pieces of metal and alloys that have come from packages from the 1970s and 60s. Yeah, that I don't know the Providence like he'll carry around a little thing and I'll show it to me. I'll say, you know, you know, there's no combination of materials and alloys that this matches that we know how to produce. And I say, okay, it doesn't mean anything to me. Again, it's just, it's all, I have no, at this point, I have no primary contact with anything anomalous. I just have all sorts of secondary stuff. And by the way, the thing that you saw with the Jesse Michaels and American alchemy, boy, did that get a response inside the government, that particular episode. Wow. So I had a lot of people who would stop talking to me about UFOs who suddenly, you know, I had like eight calls immediately after it aired. Hey, Eric, just thought I'd catch up with you. I was like, oh, okay, there was a huge discussion inside. And the first without getting into particulars, the first official outreach, like really official outreach, the checks and the wake of that episode. And I'm not under any NDAs. Nobody's told me anything that I can't discuss, that that may change. Um, one thing that's very clear to me is that when I hear something from many sources, I don't need to protect it anymore. It's already out. Okay. I have now heard the white sand story from many sources. This is the one where the crafts hovered over the base, shut down the nuclear program. Is that it? I'm just going to say what I can say that's fuzzed out that can't be traced to anybody. Okay. Um, I was very upset with this shutdown of the El Paso airspace. That was recently. Yeah, I was supposed to be supposed to be we had a problem with cartel drones. Right. I don't believe that. I think Texas is another name for New Mexico. I think El Paso's a name for white sands. Can we get a map of the United States that can focus on white sands in El Paso? I think we have a problem with lost control of our airspace. Do you think this was part of what happened in New Jersey as well? I can't say as much because what I know, no, what happened around New Jersey? I don't have from as many sources that I feel comfortable saying this is fuzzed out. I can fuzz out the El Paso store. Nobody has told me that the El Paso was shut down because of the problem at white sands. Okay. People have said things about New Jersey. That is. All right. All right. So there's El Paso here at white sands. How far away is that? My guess is about an hour by driving. See, it's probably 60, 70, 80 miles most. Okay. So I don't know what's going on, but my my guess is so on Pierce Morgan, I said this thing, which is that New Mexico is the connector of the nuclear story, the Epstein story, and the UFO story. They're all going to come together. Remember we're only talking about the island? Somehow, I think I was the first person to seize on this. There's this thing that isn't an interview, which is Steve Bannon trying to train Jeffrey Epstein how to respond to rehabilitate it. And if you can find this, this is I've seen it. Okay. Very weird. So he says, you want to know about why I got Zorro Ranch in New Mexico. Can we play this clip? Can you find I think Jesse repackaged it after I pointed it out, but this is the story that like somehow that we were so hung up about sex. We're either angry about trafficking or we're getting off on the idea all these rich people are going to get their come up and so you know, we keep turning the Epstein story into something other than a scientific espionage story, which is one of its one of its facets. It's one component. It's one component. Yeah, but it doesn't excite us that this is a guy spying. Control of science, Joe, is not something that is officially a big issue, and it is a massive It's not publicly a big issue. Correct. Yeah. And he clearly had a let's back up big interest. So why did I buy a ranch in New Mexico, 1993? So that's gives you some sense. So I would have funded it in 1990. Los Alamos, which was the high energy lab up in New Mexico, was losing all its scientists. And it was most it was were Oppenheimer were the were the a lot of the nuclear weapons for the bomb. That's from Manhattan Project Manhattan Project was yes, Los Alamos and you brought your property out in New Mexico to be near that. Yes, because the scientists were going to be they cut the funding for high energy physics, but the people who worked in Los Alamos would still be in the Santa Fe area. They cut that because the end of the this was the Cold War dividend, right? I don't remember exactly why it was because again people thought there was that physics and high energy physics really wasn't that important because that was about nuclear weapons. No, it was because they were trying to they decided was it maybe not right. This was the same time that Murray Gellman came up with the term quack QU ARK. He picked it out of an old poem, the word quack, but it was something it was mysterious. So they were starting to understand in the 90s that in the world of the physics world. There was things that were just unexplainable. They called it strange things. You gave it a name. You gave it some characteristics. You called it had cham, it was one of the the sort of had a cham and had a flavor. It had a color. They called it strange things. They gave it a name. You gave it some characteristics. You called it, had cham, it was one of the sort. It had a cham, it had a flavor. It had a color. But nobody really knew one. Mr. Bannon understood what it was, just like the financial system. And you wanted to investigate that. I wanted to see if we could build tools so others smarter than me could help investigate it. And that was the beginning of the sense of the Santa Fe Institute. Yes. And Santa Fe Institute was founded to do study in this type of, can you, can these areas of strange things be described by some form of mathematics? OK. Now, what you're seeing there is fascinating. Like just take, by the way, very well isolated, exactly the bit that I wanted. In that interview or that training, he claims to have founded the Santa Fe Institute. Was founded, I think, in 1984, not 1990 or 1993. Bannon clearly knows more about why these scientists were being defunded than does the person who buys this property. Now, that property is not only close to Los Alamos, it's also close to Sandy and National Laboratory. What you, like people said to me, Eric, you said he was an idiot, he's clearly very knowledgeable. You can see there that you were wrong. That is an actor. That is not anyone smart with proximity to Murray Gellmont and others. Like he knew Murray Gellmont well. Murray Gellmont didn't name quarks in 1990. That was close back to like the 60s when George's wide called them aces and Gellmont called them quarks for three quarks for Mr. Mark that came out of James Joyce. So he's, he's just repeating stuff that he doesn't understand. And why did he buy the house or a ranch to be close to the scientists whose funding was cut? The people who make weapons and who do high energy physics, who had the rug pulled out from under them by the United States when they won the Cold War by putting this pressure on the Soviet Union. Like there's nothing more important than theoretical physicists, you idiots. And you don't fund these people and you don't watch them like the Department of Energy is supposed to have counterintelligence to stop creeps from hanging around the national labs, which is America's secret university system, hello. And that's what he was doing. He was buying a property to be close to the national labs in New Mexico that make the weapons and that are in charge of trying to figure out the future. So if you think about the national labs as this parallel thing to the university system, but it's the secret part where you have to be American and you have to have a security clearance and all this kind of stuff. Epstein's set up a listening post. Now what's the UFO story? The UFO story is all about nukes. And what was Epstein doing in Cambridge, Massachusetts? The analog of Zora Ranch is named one brattle square. It's right in the heart of Harvard Square. I know it like the back of my hand. It's a seven minute walk to the science center. The Harvard Science Center on floors three, four, and five is where the math department is. And who was Epstein's initial contact in the math department? It wasn't Martin Noac who he funded. It was a different guy named Benedict Gross. Dick Gross was an expert in number theory and an elliptic curves. An elliptic curves are what power the cryptography behind Bitcoin, behind public keys. You're talking about a guy who was setting up listening posts next to extremely sensitive stuff that we've stupidly left unprotected in the open university system or defunded it on our national labs. When you say listening posts, like what do you mean? Bugs go to holes? No, no, no, no. You just remain in contact with these people? Joe, you've got real money. Guys with real money use dinner. Dinner is an incredible thing. I watch Peter Thiel use dinner. Fly people in for dinners. You put people up in a nice hotel for three nights. Serve them amazing food from a private chef. You get a black car to collect them, and let's tell you anything. I don't think that Peter was doing this in an evil way, but I watched dinner after dinner after dinner as people discouraged all they knew because they were so happy they're getting a $200 bottle of wine and being treated like humans, you know? Like respected. So in part, you have to understand that dinner in and of itself or a mansion or first class ticket is all it takes to get people to start talking. Jeffrey Epstein was CIA, the Communications Network at Zora Ranch Provet, the DOJ's own file showed Epstein built a military grade encrypted link to satellite orbit at Zora Ranch. The contractor who built it now holds a Pentagon missile defense contract. So remember, Jeffrey Epstein is a construct? You know, there's this whole question about like, why won't Jews talk about Jeffrey Epstein in the sex shit? Like as if I haven't been on this since 2004. Yeah, no need to accuse you and not talking about it. If they can, they're just being ignorant. No, they're being a bitch because they used to be super dangerous. This was like one of the really costly things is to say. So what do you think that was though? This satellite encrypted. All right, let's go there, but I'm a little bit nervous. Why was Jeffrey Epstein able to get all of these people much richer than him into his orbit? That's the question you should be asking. So here's my theory. Oh no. Just be careful. Okay. What happens when you become a billionaire? I don't know, not there. No, we're close. What happens is that you find out that it's not what you thought it was. First of all, you now have staff everywhere. You can't move around easily because you need a security detail. All right. My first met Peter Thiel. I said, wow, your security detail on this beach is amazing. I can't even tell where they are. He says, am I supposed to have a security detail? I'm like, Peter, you've got to be kidding. Now he's got one. So the first thing is that you find that you lose your privacy. You lose your freedom of movement. You've got to retinue of people who have to be constantly maintained their under your roof. You know, this isn't what I signed up for. I wanted to be rich. I was like, well, you are rich. You can buy things. Well, you can't buy privacy. You can't buy freedom. You can't buy anonymity. All these things that you want. And you can't buy the ability to do fun naughty stuff. I'm not talking about little kids. I'm saying, like, if you're going to take drugs, you're at risk of having everybody want to tell the story. If you want to have a manage, you're at the same risk. So the question becomes, what do I do to get what I thought I was going to do, which is the right to have freedom over my own life and to misbehave in fun ways, whatever? Nobody can figure out how to do it. Jeffrey Epstein could do it. Now, why is it that you could do it? Who's spoken to the contractors who built his island? It's the most obvious thing to do. If I was an investigative journalist, that's what I do. I talk to the plumbers, the maids, all of the people who are just working for a living, those are the people who constantly leak information about their employers. Well, who's the only person who has the ability to build something? The CIA has its own construction company. Sovereigns, countries, nations have the ability to do stuff where they know how to keep things under wraps. If you think about S4, I guarantee you, there's a men's room at S4. Well, who cleans it? That's a really important question, because that's the weak link. And so rich people haven't figured out how to be rich. That's what everybody was attracted to in that upper income bracket. That he would provide them with experience. He would provide them with things that they couldn't figure out how anybody could provide, because they were dealing with a state. I assure you that the Sultan of Brunei knows how to do stuff, because he's both an individual and a state. Most of us are either in this sort of black ops world, or we're dreaming about being very rich, or just normal human beings. The very rich are very disappointed. Epstein felt rich, as I said before, in a movie sense. He had freedom. He could say and do things that other people couldn't. Now, Elon is constantly tripping over the fact that I think he's a wild guy. I'm up for wild guys. I want cowboy billionaires, cowboy physicists, cowboy, everything. But in general, we don't want cowboys. And again, this is nothing to do with little kids. That's a different thing. Right. But if you want to go take drugs, take drugs. If you want to have a manage, have a manage. Fine. I don't want to hear about it. I don't spill the tea. I can't stand this culture. Epstein knew how to keep quiet stuff quiet. And why is that his product, as I've said before, was silence? If you want a really dangerous question, ask the question, what did the people who are in his direct orbit have an unusually high number of disappearances around them? Did they? I don't know. But it's a dangerous question. I've never investigated it. Have you ever seen, yeah, everybody talks about eyes wide shut now? You notice that nobody talks about crimes and misdemeanors? Where Woody Allen is directly in his orbit? I don't even know. I've seen that movie. There is a scene where Martin Landau and Jerry Orbox characters are a pair of brothers. I think that they only meet on screen once. And Martin Landau is having an affair. And the woman has decided that she has rights. And Martin Landau is a very wealthy ophthalmologist or something like that. And he has a brother who's a stalker. Stalker is being the giddish word for a tough guy. And it's one of the most, can we find Jerry Orbox, Martin Landau crimes and misdemeanors? It's the most blood curdling so well done. What's up? I've just seen description now. You didn't really get to it. Well, they're only in one scene together. They'll be at an even seen at an age. But my memory is that they're at a house walking around a pool and then they walk inside to the pool house. And there's a resentment that the brother who's in the life is only called to the house occasionally. And it's this way in which the Gentile and the people who can get things done that you're not allowed to do within the law are connected. And so Woody Allen is clearly writing this from personal experience. He has some interaction between being in high society and knowing starkers. And I actually knew his old Woody Allen's old producer is the father of a friend of mine. So it's a guy named Jack Grossberg. And Jack Grossberg was a pit of me of a tough Jew in Hollywood who would deal with the teamsters or when there was a labor dispute. And he wasn't in the life, but he was a guy who could stare down him off he also. I think that in part Woody Allen is writing about what Jeffrey Epstein was providing, which was a measure of silence. No, no, no. No, we're looking for Martin Landau and Jerry Orba in crimes and misdemeanors. I don't know what's going to be hard to find because it's that one. I think that this is the scene that nobody's talking about. He's killing me. But I mean, have somebody talk to her? Like what? Stregner out. What are you, shredner? That's all I need. How else do you expect to keep her quiet? You turn that up? I know. I know. It's a lot less like we get it, unfortunately. OK. Well, right, Jack, why did you suggest? What did you call me? I don't know. I hope you got more experience with something like this. You called me because you needed some dirty work done. That's what you ever called for. Look how bitter you are. You've staked me plenty of times. I don't forget my obligations. Threatening when only make it worse, Jack. OK, forget about it. What do you want me to say? How the hell can I forget about it? I'm fighting for my life. This woman's going to destroy everything I've built. That's what I'm saying, Judy. If the woman won't listen to reason, then you go on to the next step. What? Threats? Why not? What are we talking about here? She can be gotten rid of. I mean, I know a lot of people. Money will buy whatever's necessary. Not even going to comment on that. That's mind-boggling. Well, what did you want me to do when you called me? Not to do dirty work despite what you think. It's got beyond just a million now. She's talking financial do what you say. Not about who he is. You know, you're not aware of what goes on in this world. I mean, you sit up here with your foregrists. Don't sit in here. And you're kind of alone. I want to hear about my sense. And your rich friends and out there in the real world, it's a whole different story. I've met a lot of characters. But when I have a restaurant, I've heard these stories before. From seventh Avenue, from Atlantic City. And I'm not so high-class that I can avoid looking at reality. I can't afford to be a loof. When you come to me with a hell of a problem, and then you get high-handed on me. I got only to be high-handed. I haven't been sleeping. I'd say I never love a whole kid. OK. OK, forget. I said anything. I mean, you just get something straight here. Am I understanding you're right? I mean, are you suggesting getting rid of her? You won't be involved. But I'll need some cash. Why will they do? What will they do? They'll handle it. I can't believe I'm talking about it here when it being. Actually, it's not an insect. You don't just step on it. Playing hardball was never your game. You never like to get your hands dirty. But apparently, this woman is for real. And this thing isn't just going to go away. So while everybody's watching Kubrick, this is a guy in Epstein's director. This is what Epstein was. He was a stalker. He was a science spy. He was a stalker. He had buttons. And we're just all pretending like we have no memory of this, no idea about how we're all connected, how the highest in society are connected to the people who get things done. And blackmail. Blackmail is a lot like we're over indexed on, in my opinion. OK. Who am I? I'm just a guest. But this is this assumption. Well, I was very early on saying he was a construct when nobody would listen. Here's the next piece of it. I think he had buttons. He had button, and it is control. He made problems disappear. Things went away. That's how you make sure that you have the experience of being a king rather than a billionaire. The billionaires had more money than him. But they didn't have the ability to make their problems go away. And by the way, they're not suggesting that all the people in his orbit were availing themselves of this as a service. But if I was a competent investigator, I would be talking to Woody Allen and saying, what did you mean by that scene? Look, because you think that scene is directly connected to Woody Allen's relationship with Jeffrey. No. I think that that scene is directly connected to the connection between Hollywood and Teamsters and unions and organized crime. There are people who know how to make things happen that aren't within the law. What is the mafia? We go. We watch all these mafia pictures. The mafia is about contract enforcement when you can't use the courts. That doesn't sound like what the mafia is. But that's what it is. It's a business. What happens when you're in an illegal business and you can't enforce a contract? You have to use muscle. So we use Gen Teal. He like he says, she can be taught, she want me to talk to her. We can handle it. This is the Gen Teal language of roughing somebody up, killing somebody, and making problems go away. So the mafia is about business. It's not about violence. Okay. So his connection to scientists, though, was the purpose of that? We don't know, but I keep saying- What's your assumption? My assumption is that he was a clearing house that somebody set him up at fair expense. I'm going to say nine figure expense. So I think this was a nine figure fortune, hundreds of millions. And what it had was it had the trappings of multi-billionaire. It had a trillionaire written all over it for a nine figure fortune. So it's orders of magnitude off of what it was. And I believe that that was only possible because there was a collection of sovereigns behind him. I don't think it was one nation. I think it was a bunch of countries. And the most obvious country is not Israel. It's the US because it was operating on US soil. Do I think Israel was involved? Certainly. Do I think that the UK was involved? I do. I think that this was a massive piece of structure confused with a sex scandal and a blackmail operation. We're all sort of taking the bait. So the sex scandal and all the sex stuff was sort of to keep people happy and give people a place to go to where they could have these experiences. If you're dealing with physicists or some high end scientist guy, they don't have access to this. They've probably never been with a beautiful one in their life. All of a sudden they're hanging out with them. We do better than being up to you. I'm not talking about you, bitch. No, I'm not talking about me either. I'm sure you're fine. Ain't talking about love. But let's be realistic. Most of these guys aren't, they're not hot. And then all of a sudden they're around tens who are giving them back massages and drugs are being used. And there's this feeling of anonymity, of safety. Get away with this. Everybody else is doing it. It's been going on for decades. It's fine. This is a place you go. And it's fun. And they look forward to it. And they probably also do have intellectual discussions because you are surrounded by who wouldn't want in. Right. So that's how he ropes you in. That's right. So what is his why scientists and what would be the benefit of having access to these scientists and having this place in Zorra Ranch and being able to talk to these people? Think about it from the perspective of who is doing the constructing rather than the constructed. So he's the construct. He's an incompetent. So he just lied to Steve Bannon. You see him touch his face classic tell of lying. Touching your face is a classic tell of lying. If you looked at what he just did, he did. Yeah, yeah, yeah. OK. 100%. So he's lying about the information or he's lying about his death. He's lying about his death of knowledge. Yes, he's lying about his death of knowledge. OK. So how did I know he was a construct in part one of the things? Like they're dumb tells that we give away. One of his was he was supposed to be a currency trader. When we say we're trading currency, we're not trading currency. We're trading what are called spot contracts that are to be settled with an exchange of currency in two days time. So in other words, if I do a Euro trade, it's really a dollar Euro trade. And you and I are going to trade dollars for euros and we agree to do it in two days time. And then if you want to keep the position on, you exchange that contract for a contract that will follow to erase that contract and form a new contract which pushes it out two days. You call that rolling things over. OK. He didn't know that dollar Canada was on a one day contract rather than a two day contract where everything else. So in other words, there was an anomaly. And anybody in currency trading would have known that. Or forget whether he didn't know that trading pounds for dollars is called cable in the business. So there were just dumb tells that he didn't know about foreign exchange. Yeah. So he's claiming to be an FX hedge fund manager to me. And there were stupid tells like that. And then he knows way too much about my exactly particular specialty in mathematics. The number of people could come from would be five or fewer. So technically what I did my thesis on is something called self-dual Yang-Mills theory, which is about every force other than gravity is a Yang-Mills force. Except my thesis was really about gravity. And I didn't disclose it. And only people very, very close to me knew that that's what it was about. He was obsessed with gravity. And he shows up, I think, in the Harvard math department, in 2002 with Dick Gross. And clearly he was talking to people in the Cambridge Mathematical Physics world who would have been, you know, there's something called the Turing Simon's theory, which is mistakenly associated closely with Yang-Mills theory, but is really all about gravity. And that my work really shows that there is a parent theory that has churned Simon's theory and gravity as its two consequences. He knows about that without knowing anything about the structure and the subject matter. He knows about the history of my stuff and something called cyber-guitian theory. He doesn't know anything concrete. How does he know all this stuff? He was in my world. And he was very focused on, I met him through Jess Staley who was at J.P. Morgan. Now, Jess Staley is deeply implicated in this. I didn't know that at the time. And Jeff Epstein has been mirroring my entire life, everything that I do. And I became well-known when I was writing these essays for edge.org. And he was in with John Brockman at the Brockman literary agency. When I got married, the rabbi came from Harvard Hill L, which was a building now called Rosofsky Hall, which he put together with less Wexner's money. He was funding probably the conference at the perimeter institute that we did on the financial crisis. At every turn in my life, since I was a young man, Jeffrey Epstein was there in the background, even though I only meet him once. Why do you think that is? Because we're interested in the exact same thing. The most powerful stuff in the universe. Why is he interested in that? Why doesn't know the same thing? So what do I care about? I care about finance and financial markets. I care about the CPI. I care about the fate of Israel. I care about evolutionary theory. I care about mathematics that goes geometry, like the geometry of elliptic curves, but really more in differential geometry. I care about physics. Every time that I care, and I care about the world's smartest people at a functional level, not the people at the highest IQ, but the people who are irreverent enough to actually move the needle. So he and I, we're interested in where's the action, where's the high end intellectual action in the world that actually moves things? And quite frankly, he was meeting in my offices in San Francisco while I was nowhere in 2017. I didn't know that. Meeting in your offices. Yeah. He went to your office and met with who? Oh, with Peter, that's in the records. About you? No, I don't know. He hopefully not. I know that I'm in an email that he sends Peter late in the story, but I'm not going to discuss specifics. But no, I was telling Peter not to deal with him and Peter thought I was overblowing the danger. Yeah, he scared me because I know what element he came from. That was not a refined person. That was a scary, scary person. That was a person who came, you know, like the Hess character on the Sopranos or Mo Green in the Godfather. Yeah. That's that element. And you recognize that immediately. I, that was my point in bringing up crimes in Mr. Meaners. It's not like I don't know people. I understand that all this. But what do you think his purpose was? Like, so getting connected to all these scientists, being around all this knowledge, the New Mexico, I still don't understand like what was the end game? Can I get another drink? Absolutely. Thank you, sir. I can share this article with you. Please do. Okay. This was the one I just pulled up a second ago. If we could get another ice cube too, that would be great. I'll not just. Jeff, can get us a nice cube, please. I would just down here. This kind of, this is a long article. I believe this most of this comes from the Epstein files that came out on the DOJ's website. This, the woman who wrote this, she's a former Boston Globe and New York Times reporter. Also LA Times. The summary here is what I was kind of getting at. Because it kind of, it's two or three paragraphs, but it explains a lot of what you're asking here. Standard framing of Jeffrey Epstein's, as a Mossad asset is well supported. Robert Maxwell, Glenn's father, sold Israel back toward promise software to send the national laboratories in 1985. His eldest daughter, Christine Maxwell, built the FBI's post 9-11 counterterrorism data warehouse through her company, Chilio. National Laboratories in 1985 is eldest daughter Christine Maxwell built the FBI's post 9-11 counterterrorism data warehouse through her company, Chiliod. Isabel Maxwell, Christine's twin sister co-founded, ComTouch with Israel Unit 8200 alumni, Galaine ran the Human Intelligence operation, the Israel Intelligence Network around both Maxwell and Epstein is documented and but the Intelligence Infrastructure supporting Epstein and Maxwell at Zora Ranch points somewhere else or to somewhere additional. It points the United States military intelligence playing it simple. The contractor who built his encrypted link to orbit is American, headquartered in Georgia, now holds a missile defense agency contract. The satellite uplink was authorized by an American FCC license. The project was managed out of New York office. The man who recruited Epstein as a child served in the American OSS and his own son was in charge with the federal justice department when the Epstein died or didn't and it's custody. The man whose ranch provided the ideal relay point was OSS built American missile guidance systems and military drones and just up the road, another former OSS guy Carl Ingwer sold his New Mexico ranch to the strangest duo of all time Donald Rumsfeld and Dan Rather. So this is what I've been trying to say all along. The only country that I'm absolutely positive was behind Jeffrey Epstein as a U.S. You can't operate here. Look, right now we are in the middle of endless anti-Semitic Christmas. It just goes on forever and you can, you look at Jeffrey Epstein, I have no question he was directly connected to Israel, you know. But first and foremost, I believe that he and I hate when we use the word asset. You should use a vague word because those technical things like who's an agent, who's an operator agent is a word used differently by the FBI and CIA. Every time we try to sound like we're cool, like we know what the intelligence community actually is, we make mistakes because we say something that becomes deniable, you know. So like there's a concept of knock, non-official cover. You know, if you say somebody, you know, is a knock and you're, and you, you guess the wrong distinction, then you can say, no, it wasn't. Was he an asset? Well, I'm sure that has a technical meaning. You don't mean it technically. You mean, was he in any way affiliated with the intelligence community and it's not just the the intelligence community, one of the ways that the intelligence community functions as a cover for the special operations community, right? Covert operations is something the CIA does through ground branch that is not intelligence. So we call it intelligence and we give them a free pass all the time. No, those, those are the guys who do the wet work. That's a paramilitary organization. Right. So my claim is that Epstein is a major piece of structure and having nothing to do with the actor that they hired. Okay. So you think Epstein is essentially just a construct figurehead of an intelligence gathering organization. No. No. Epstein is a construct. First, first of all, second of all, there is an intelligence part of the intelligence community and there's a covert operations part of the intelligence community. Okay. Covert operations is not intelligence. I know it's under that roof. Right. That is totally wrong. Got it. Right. Okay. So if you want bad things to happen to somebody, you don't call intelligence because that's just human intelligence or signals intelligence or whatever. You're not going to call a cryptographer to make a problem go away. Right. What does this have to do with the science community? One, we have huge amounts of power. The United States is terribly configured because we pretend that we're okay doing everything through our university system, which shouldn't be done in an open setting. Like you have to be honest about the fact that we're badly configured. What do you mean by that? We didn't know how deadly physics was. When Rutherford in 1911 said that there's a neutron, nobody, I'm sure nobody said, oh my God, you've ended the plant. No, the humanity is doomed. So it used to be the case that physics was something that was like interesting and fun. But now it's like the most deadly thing you can imagine as well as being interesting. And a quick timeline too. If you stop and think about that, 40 years. Yeah. So we're literally, yeah, 41 years. So my claim is that we are walking around right now with all of these extremely deadly ninja prints, priests in our physics department, in our math departments who don't even know that they're deadly ninja priests. They've never worked on something classified. They've never solved problems for our government. But in part, we fund our scientists as part of a complex cryptic arrangement worked out by Vannevar Bush that is now remembered by essentially no one. So the idea is, you people tell her Ulam, Feynman, Oppenheimer, von Neumann, you are dev group. You're, you're, you're SEAL team six of the human mind. You're Delta. And most of the time you're going to teach classes. You know, it's like Indiana Jones, you know, an archaeologist with a bow tie, and then he's running around with a whip and, you know, killing people. And, right. Okay, that's what physicists mathematicians are. That's why we're funded. That's why the Department of Energy funds physics. It's not the Department of Energy. It's the Department of Nuclear Weapons. It's the Department of Physics. So they let the physics people work out all these problems and then they take whatever their findings are and apply them to weapons. Boom, room, and zoom. And that changed the economy. It changes the ability to compute. This is what, this is who I really am. This is what I really do. And I will not mouth this narrative that all of my colleagues will mouth. Physics is interesting. Yeah, there's a lot of the time it's dull. You know, physics is international. Oh, really? Why do you think the American taxpayers funding this international effort just to educate Chinese? For all I know, we're trying to sterilize the Chinese and the Indians with string theory. So because nobody's talked to me about this, I can speak freely. But if you ask me, you know, the Indians are some of the most aggressive string theorists on earth. And my question is, do we import them in such large numbers so that they'll go home and be ineffectual? That's crazy. So that's a real possibility that string theory exists as a distraction. Joe, what do you think the odds are that a scientist can say, my failed theory is the only game in town and not get laughed out of town? Not so good. Yeah. I would imagine in a free thinking world, not going to free thinking world, I would say, Edward, and you're full of shit. Who talks like that? You're not, you're the smartest person I've ever met and you have not earned the right to say that you're failed theory. You're disaster of a catastrophe of a theory is the most failed theory in history in physics. And you're saying it's the only game in town? Who died and left you king, sir? I want to bring you to one of the weirdest theories that you have, which is you talked about this very overly supported physics department in the substrate university, upstate New York that's attached to a hedge fund. SUNY SOTY Brooks, mathematics department and physics department. Yeah. Yeah. This is a weird one. All right. Because it's attached to a hedge fund that does Bernie made off type numbers. Bernie made off is a loser piker. Joe, Bernie made off was regular and that's why they called him the Jewish tea bill. Tea bill? Yeah. It's a tea bill. A treasury security that allowed you to just earn some very boring, very high rate of return where you were supposedly having your money at risk, but you essentially never, there were like almost no down months. Renaissance technologies is like, no, no, no. Oh my beer. We're just going to make numbers like nobody's ever made in human history. There's nobody in second or third place relative to Renaissance technology, medallion fund. And how is it connected to this university and what do you think is going on up there? One, I don't know, but something weird. It's weird as hell. I know I knew Jim Simons personally. Jim Simons is a genius, but a lot of other people are genius. I hate to say it, but you can't swing a cat in my world without hitting a genius. So he was, he was great, but he wasn't that much smarter than every other genius at that level. So I would say, you know, top hundred minds in mathematics and physics clearly better than that. Jim started off working for the DIA, the Defense Intelligence Unit, supposedly quit out of outrage over Vietnam, becomes the super young chairman of the SUNY Stony Brook Mathematics Department, holds a lunch center seminar with a guy who will become the world's smartest living physicist, a guy named C. N. Yang. And they discover over lunch a connection between differential geometry, Jim's specialty and C. N. Yang's specialty, which is the standard model. Jim then quits forms a hedge fund long before it's cool with the father of another guest of yours on this program, Brian Keating, and the two of them both have metals, so they call it medallion because they have one prizes. So it was his name, James Axe, not Keating. And the two of them start this thing, and it takes off at some level that nobody's ever seen numbers before. And then they institute this policy, which is we're not going to hire financial experts. We're only going to hire meth, physics people. So we're going to hire geometers. We're going to hire particle theorists, general relativists, and machine learning people. Who came up with this story? Do you buy this story? This is so strange because it's sort of also mirrors a second story that was not associated with Brookhaven, which is the National Lab near SUNY Stoney Brook, but associated with Los Alamos, which is a story called the prediction company. Except in that case, the name of the person isn't Jim Simons. It's Doyne Farmer. And the prediction company is the analog of Renaissance. So what you see is that once people have a pattern, it seems like these patterns repeat. So my point is, if you ask the question, do we have a Manhattan project in the current era? We don't know. You don't know. I don't know. But if we're allowed to speculate, the question would be where would it be located? So how would you find, for example, the existence of a boy's school in rural New Mexico, where all of these super smart people are holed up? It's a real puzzle. How would you figure out that Los Alamos was happening if that was your goal? You'd look for indirect evidence. Can you, Jamie, can you call up an article called Forbidden City from 1944 by a guy named, unfortunately, Jack Raper, RAPG. He's called yourself rapper at a P or something. So in 1944, the craziest thing of the one? G. Raper. Right. Exactly. Here it is. Okay. So this article appeared Monday, March 13, 1944, Santa Fe, New Mexico, the story of a secret city with a mayor who is the second Einstein working on a doomsday weapon where nothing leaks. And this is from what year? 1944. Okay. So the entire Manhattan project leaked because a Cleveland journalist named Jack Raper happened to vacation in New Mexico and stumbled on the greatest secret ever kept. Really? How can we not know this, Joe? Wow. It's all about Oppenheimer. Residents must stay. Dr. Oppenheimer's Harvard graduate, tenant Cambridge. She's a PhD from Goddingham University in Germany, Germany, Professor of Physics, University of California, California Institute of Technology, and is a fellow of too many organizations to enumerate. And so they were recognizing that Oppenheimer was doing something. They knew that he was working on a doomsday device. Uncle Sam has placed the city in charge of two men. The men who command the soldiers, I can't read it. We see that the garbage and rubbish are collected. The streets kept up, the electric light and plant and the water works functioning and all of their metropolitan work operating smooth is Colonel somebody. I don't know his name, but it isn't so important because the Mr. Bigger the city is called as Professor Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer. Called the second Einstein by the newspapers of the West Coast. So what I'm trying to say is Jack Raper never got a Pulitzer Prize, died in obscurity, Leslie Groves, who was the other guy who was running the town, decided to send him to the Pacific to punish him for being the best journalist in America. And when he found out he was 60 years old, they decided, okay, we're just going to ignore this story and hope everyone else does because it's too crazy to be real. Now what I'm telling you right now is, Raper never figured out what Los Alamos was, but he knows that it doesn't make sense. I'm telling you Renaissance technologies doesn't make sense. So these different what? Another widespread belief is that he's developing ordinance and explosive supporters of this guest argue that it accounts for the number of mechanics working on the production of a single device and there are others who tell you to minister's presence have been heard. Oh, that Jack Raper with his overactive imagination. The problem with conspiracy theorists is that they say the darnedest things, Joe. Okay, so what do you think they're working on? These people at the sub-state New York University. Well, what are we not working on? In other words, how do you discover what we're actually up to as in part you listen for the holes? What do I work on? I work on the ability to get out of the solar system. That is my life's mission. I think Elon is a bit of a pussy. Okay, how's he? I don't know. He won't meet with me. Well, it's okay. Maybe because you call him a pussy. Yeah. No, but it's busy. Maybe he's trying to make chicks pregnant. No. He's something he does to the recreation. Elon's a genius and Elon is trying to replace scientists with Grock. And one of the things that was on an Indian podcast called the guy's name is beer biceps guy run via the Joe Rogan of India. And what's his name? Ron Veer al-Abadya. Can you find who shot off to Ron Veer? Yeah, so Ron Veer is a friend of mine in Fiersova and I went on his podcast and I before SpaceX and ex and XAI merged. I said, I said, look, I don't think SpaceX is Elon's space program. His space program is Grock. Elon doesn't trust scientists for good reason because they're weak. So he's building his own scientist from when when we were strong. He's going to have it read the corpus of physics done by competent physicists who actually care about the physical world so he doesn't have to deal with any of us. That's why he won't meet. It's not because he's not interested, not because he doesn't know. I invited him to the talk as I did you yesterday. The goal is to get out of the solar system and we're so far away from everything good that there's no way of doing it under relativity. So why are we not researching the only thing that can save us, which is diversification? We need to spread out to the largest number of habitable worlds possible. So this implies some sort of a new propulsion system. This implies new science. Stop thinking technology. There's no way that you can't engineer your way out of a science problem. You have to science your way out. And what would be that science? Post Einstein, post relativity. That's what I do. And how would that apply to us leaving the solar system? We don't live in space time. Space time has a speed limit. Explain that. If you can only go the speed of light at your best and you can't even get anywhere close to that. Are you going to get to something four years, light years away in a fantasy world. By the time you go and come back, even something all, no, everybody. So you can go and under the speed of light just under you can use time dilation and relativistic effects to your benefit. But it's going to cost you eight years to go and come back. Right. Okay. I don't want to do that. If I'm going to explore the cosmos, I don't want to use, I don't want to live in space. So what are the alternatives? The observers. The successor to space time, happy to predict this on your show, will be named the observers, which is a combination of not just using a four dimensional space time manifold, but a 14 and a four dimensional space simultaneous. This is what I was talking about at the University yesterday. And how would that like when you say the difference between science and technology? So how would that science be applied? If we look at the surface of this table, I can't do this to it. Can't spread it apart. Right. Right. Called pinch to zoom. It's a multi-touch gesture invented around 2003 or something, debuted at TED. But if I come to this device, I can do that. You're phone. Right. So imagine that this is space time. Okay. And this is the observers. So if I want to go to a distant star, there's no way I'm going to just go really fast. Right. And I need an energy source. And I need to do things that we can't normally do. You have to jailbreak space time. If Einstein is in force, we all die. If we go beyond Einstein, some of us will live and some of us will die. And what would be the energy that you would need in order to do this? So how do you unlock this? One is maybe it's not that energetic to do these things. Energy is technically time momentum. You can talk about momentum in the x direction. Momentum in the y. Momentum in the z. What's momentum in the time direction? It has a different name. We don't call energy time momentum, but that's what it is. So first of all, I don't believe that there's one direction of time. There's no arrow of time. That's not true. I believe that time is multi-dimensional. The only dimension that has an ordering is one dimension. So in other words, if I say to you, Joe has two cigars. Eric has none. Who has more cigars? Joe. Okay. Joe has two cigars, but Eric has three glasses and no cigars. Joe has one glass and two cigars. Who has more stuff? Well, now it's not clear because Eric has more glasses than Joe, but Joe has more cigars. So in two dimensions, we no longer can say this is better than that for things where you have more of one and less of another. Okay. Time is like that. In one dimension, there's an arrow. There's an ordering. We call it, it's, it's, it's, you know, like a well-ordered set or something. In two dimensions, all bets are off and two and higher. The number of dimensions in total is going to be either five or seven. And each of those dimensions has a different kind of energy. So in other words, energy is unique because there's only one time dimension. But as soon as time has multiple dimensions, you can talk about multiple forms of energy. Just the way you can talk about momentum in the x direction, momentum in the y direction or momentum in the z direction. So in part, what I'm trying to do is to jailbreak space time. That's what I'm actually doing. And I'm doing it with zero support with no confirmation that this is real because something has controlling my entire community to make this funny ha ha just like Forbidden City was Jack Craper, Jack Raper has gone mad. He thinks that there's a city in New Mexico where there's a mayor who's a second Einstein developing a doomsday weapon. Is that funny? I'm going to alloon that guy. What an idiot. That's what's going on, Joe. So how do you think that technology could be applied to these ideas in order to create some mode of travel? Pinch to zoom, Joe. Right. But how, how would that be done? So right now we're in a four dimensional world. It's called that flatland. Okay. Imagine that there are 10 perpendicular dimensions called symmetric two tensors. Four of those are spatial directions and six of them temporal or four of of them are temporal and six of them spatial. I can't tell you one of those two. Okay. But they're additionally either four or six extra time dimensions or six or four space dimensions. We have to gain access to break out of flatland. We live in flatland. We don't know we live in flatland. And I know what that technically the name is fiber dimension. What it is, we have to gain access to it, which is discovering that somebody gives you an obsidian rock that has a property that you've never seen before called pinch to zoom. So I need to make the distance to the nearest star small. So I can go with reasonable speed or instantaneously. I don't need instantaneously. If I have something four light years away and I can make it 100 feet away, I can walk 100 feet easily enough. You know, I can push something. So the idea is I can gain access to the fiber, the distance becomes relatively immaterial. So if you think that these physicists are working on this and all, all these. No, I didn't say that I think, okay, I'm saying if anybody is working on either one of two things is happening. Either we are become the stupidest nation on earth destroying our own ability to do physics. We gave away the store where morons, that's possible. Or we're doing it in private. And you feel like it's possible to hide all this from the general public? Well, my point is you're not going to hide it. They know no, the thing way they did it before would be spoiled by satellites. Right now, if you tried to do Los Alamos, you couldn't do it because of the satellites. Right. So it has to be hidden in plain sight. It has to look like something that it isn't. So if you asked me, let's imagine you asked me a different question. Let's imagine you asked me, Eric, nobody's willing to give you money. Nobody's willing to employ you. Nobody's willing to have you speak at their seminar. You, despite the fact you have complete blue chip credibility, how would you organize a secret team to get control of our adversaries, the world and the ability to traverse the cosmos? I'm sure it sure as shit wouldn't build a chemical rocket company. It's dumb. But I do it as cover. And I sure as shit wouldn't do things in an open university department. Here's what I do. I build an organization that could rationalize billions passing through it with almost no footprint because what I really need is whiteboards and coffee and smart people and a secure campus and a story. That's all I need. God, wouldn't you love to have access to what they're doing? No, because I'm going to do it myself. How you going to do that? Because I know, I know really smart people, Joe. Don't you need to contain them out some money in a laboratory somewhere? You know what? It's funny. Like Sam Altman is racing. Dario, I'm a die, is racing Elon Musk for super intelligence. So I asked myself, if you could have premium subscriptions to Grock, Gemini, X, AI. Sorry. Grock, Gemini, clawed all of them. Or you could have Edward Frankl's home phone number, which would you choose? I choose that Frankl's home phone number. So I get to call it Frankl whenever I want to. That's smart. Look, there are people that you don't even know about who are just terrifyingly smart, who allow me to assemble that team. That's what you know, is that literally what you're trying to do? Oh yeah. And how are you doing it? I don't know. I stayed with Ed for five days in Berkeley. I got him and another colleague who's also terrifying. I'm using Soviets, Joe. X Soviets. Okay. Because those guys haven't lost the magic. And, you know, I had Frankl and the guy named Misha Capronov come down for five days to kick the shit out of my theory. It was crazy, absolutely crazy. We were drinking vodka, like 10 a.m. having insane meals and just working our asses off the way we're supposed to. How to go? Amazing. What do they think about your theory? So far all systems go, Joe. Okay. So in other words, the story, can we just pull up? I just want to do this for my own reasons. Can we pull up the lead, the pinned tweet on my Twitter profile, which by the way, thank you for retweeting. No problem. Yeah. Love you. Love you too. What is it? Go to it real quick. So first of all, I want to show off the header. Can we go up to the top of the header before we do that? Those two formulas, the bottom one says CFJ. See his Sean Carroll, the middle F is field and J is Roman J'keave, a professor at MI. John Carroll, the middle F is fields, and J is Roman Jekyve, a professor at MIT. Sean Carroll's second most cited paper has this as its action or Lagrangian. Right above that is my action or Lagrangian. And what you see, all those zeros are things that Sean Carroll doesn't know how to handle. And that thing where you see a P, you see star parentheses, P in the bottom line, and at the second from the bottom, is Sean's relativity violating hack. Sean Carroll did not disclose that geometric unity is a direct competitor to his most cited work. So now if we can roll the clip, it'll make more sense as to what's going on. And let's blow that thing up to the screen. For the portrayal of the situation is nearly constant. For reasons that completely elude me. Sean? The good news is I have read Eric's paper. Here it is. I actually have it here, right here. First thing you got to do is make sure that your theory makes contact with modern physics as it is understood. If you have a new paper out, business are going to look at it. They're going to look for, you know, where's Lagrangian? So this is for people that are just listening. This is showing that you have Lagrangians in your, these showing Sean Carroll lying. Right. Did you, the interactions are in there as well. But you call, did you call him out on this on the show? I couldn't believe that he'd do this. So he does. He's stunned. Protones to believe that's in there as well. So essentially he's lying to make it seem like your theory doesn't work. When you have all the things he's saying your theory doesn't have. One of two lies. We don't know which lie. Okay. There's a lie that says, I read your paper. So I'm willing to entertain the fact that he's lying that he read my paper. Okay. And I'm willing to entertain the fact that he's lying that he read my paper and he's going to deny that these things are in there. But he's, I don't know which lie he's telling. Right. One of them's a lie. One of them. Either he lied saying you read your paper or he lied saying you definitely lied saying those those things aren't in there because he did say those things aren't in there. That's a lie. Right. Just says there's none of that none of that none of that none of that. Right. Okay. So my claim is respond like right there. Joe, what am I just let's just one more second. I'm in a world that makes absolutely no sense and I don't want to disappear. I'm not suicidal. I have been the major competitor of string theory for 42 years. I'm not a podcaster. I'm not a guest. I'm not an entertainer. What I really do for a living. I'm not paid to do. Okay. I understand that when he's saying I don't know what to do. You just didn't know what to do in the morning. I mean, what do I want? Do I want a legal battle? I've got a defense contractor. I'm one of the world's largest companies is a defense contractor which has a campaign against me for reasons I don't understand. Just no clue why anyone would say you don't have a Lagrangian. And you see, he's attached to a defense contract? No, no, no, but there's a, there's a by virtue of the fact that the conspiracy against me and I literally mean technically a conspiracy is organized through these discord servers. And there's an engineer at Google who, for example, can't get a paper against me that lies about what it is that I'm up to published on the archive, which is where physicists share their stuff. So the engineer will say, how, how about you do a talk at Google to be in a house in Felder and so P is a house in Felder will come to Google. And she'll be given her thing if he will be allowed to post an anti-aric screed or paper or whatever you want to call it against me. So what I'm trying to say is I'm acting as Jack Raper in some way. I'm doing stuff and saying stuff like Epstein, is it at is a construct? Well, okay, now you can say that, but you couldn't say that when I started saying it, you can't say Ed Whitten is driving theoretical physics off of a cliff. You can't say, you know, the reason that we have the particles that we do is that there's a 10 dimensional fiber and a fiber bundle above space time that is in acknowledge. For some reason, the things that we're talking about on this show are dangerous. We're having dangerous conversations, Joe. That's what JRE does. And sometimes you go all the way and sometimes you push out, but like, this is a dangerous place because they can't tell you what to do. And that's why they put you in like a different color on the screen during COVID because you went against the narrative. The narrative was go get vaccinated. The narrative was if you think that COVID came from anything other than a wet market, you're a racist. Every time you've gone up against the narrative, they try to destroy you. You're still here, but you've been badly, badly bruised at various times. You are a danger to the narrative as I am a danger to the narrative. That's one of the reasons why this is like, I don't know what is this, my eighth sixth, some large number of appearances. We are scary to the narrative and the narrative can no longer be held together. I want to bring you back to the technology that's involved. So when we're talking about this program that may or may not exist, and we're talking about UAPs for lack of a better time, do you think that these are connected? And do you think that? Yes. So one of the things that I've suspected, and I'm not the only one, many people suspected this, it's very odd that a lot of these sightings that these Air Force pilots, Navy pilots, that they find they're over and near military bases. That's right. Which is where you would practice or restricted airspace, which is where you'd use your stuff. And when they see these things and they have these experiences with these things, the people that they report them to don't seem shocked. Right. Yeah. I mean, this is what Ryan Graves experienced. This is what Commander David Freaver experienced. That they tell these people about these things. And no one is like, what the fuck are you talking about? Right. Because they know because this might be ours. So some of this is ours. Okay. Some of this is foreign nations and some of this is not understood. That's what I believe. Okay. So some of these things they're seeing is a part of some undisclosed program. I believe that for example, some of this is not craft, but the ability to create the illusion of craft. Okay. Some of this, I believe, is craft. So the ability to create like a hologram? I don't know. Like a whole class like, yeah, projected plasma. That's right. Okay. Which we know they can do. We've seen them. We've seen limited versions of this. Imagine that those things scale up. Okay. Okay. If there were no aliens or craft, I would want to create a program. If I was in the disinformation business, I would want to create one of these things. Right. Because there's a God shaped hole in all of our souls and minds. And so aliens and spacecraft fill that hole. Right. So there's like a trade deal. Yeah. Yeah. It's God free. So first of all, I would think that we were incompetent if we didn't have something that created UFO ghost stories. Why wouldn't you? Is that? I also believe that there are foreign nations that may have leaped frog this. You know, clearly we saw that where we invested in aircraft carriers and other people invested in drones. And they realized that this was a bad economic warfare costs too much to shoot down cheap stuff to make. So we're in the process of having our Suez moment, if you will, in Iran, if we're not careful, where it is revealed that are relieved in aircraft carrier groups is not what we thought it was. So we can get to Iran in a second if you like. But what I believe is that we've been dumb. We've been extremely stupid since the end of the Cold War, Bill Clinton and Dick Morris ushered in an era of stupidity that I cannot even believe is so antithetical to my notion of my belonging to the smartest nation on earth that we've just basically gutted our smart people. The smart people don't even know each other. Now what is going on with the technology and what we're seeing? We've lost control of some airspace. That's what I believe is. I don't know that to be true, but I believe in very high problems. And you think that's what San Antonio is about? San Antonio. No, I'm sorry, El Paso. Yeah, I believe that El Paso is not about cartel drones. That's true. Okay. I mean, that's not to say that there isn't a cartel drone here or there. But I don't think we shut down airspace. Right. El Paso to deal with cartel drones. Right. So when what were the experiences that people were reporting and like what like what do you know about what happened in El Paso? Well, there's what I know, which is all secondhand. So what I know what I can say in the first hand is the reporting of various things by various people. But I probably had five plus conversations about white sands. People who don't know each other are not connected. So whoever is supposed to be keeping white sands a secret failed. Okay. So I believe that white sands has an infestation problem with stuff that is either not ours or is being blue team red-teamed ours and not told to our people. How would you deal with the following puzzle? So maybe we're putting our own one group is putting our drones or something in the air. Right. And another group is being told how would you deal with this problem? We've lost control of our airspace. But something is going on in New Mexico. What was the descriptions of these drones? What does this say? airspace of the center of the brief but highly publicized incident February 11, 2026, FAA abruptly announced 10 day shutdown of the airspace over El Paso International Airport. The restriction was lifted after just a few hours. Pentagon anti-drone testing. The Pentagon was testing high energy laser counter-drone technology out of the nearby Fort Bliss military base, the FAA grounded commercial flights out of an abundance of caution because of the unannounced testing. Cartel drone activity. Officials in the Trump administration cited incursions from Mexican drug cartel drones breaching U.S. airspace as the primary reason for the defense systems that the defense systems were deployed in the first place. Lack of communication. White House officials later noted that the FAA administrator implemented the surprise flight ban without notifying the Pentagon. Department of Homeland Security or White House officials, that seems crazy. It's the story doesn't hang together. That part doesn't hang together at all. What's the thing? FAA administer implemented a flight ban without notifying the Pentagon. The Department of Homeland Security or the White House officials, that doesn't even seem legal. Joe, but I don't know. You and I both have at least 105 IQs. These are like 65 IQ stories. Yeah, well, the Mexican drone cartel one seems like a dopey narrative. But maybe there are actually Mexican drone car drones. I'm sure the cartel says that drone. Okay, so there's a car tells of drones and we're going to use the fact that that's what was close to white. But what was the reported drone activity? Do you know anything about it? Like what's supposedly? Yeah, not going to say. No, I'm serious. Hardly being mysterious. I'm saying as much as I can. I understand. Here's the thing. I'm joking around. Okay. So I mean, I'd like to know like what? Right. But I'm. Tell me later. No. No, it's not like that. Look, I'll fuck you both. Let's play that awesome music again. They're the lumps. There's a video from the people about just four days ago that says there is cartel attacking lots of people. Well, I'm sure there's car told drone. What I'm trying to say is that no, no, no, no, no, no. Yeah, every single person who knows how to keep a secret knows how to use the truth to hide a lie. Right. Okay. And that's always been so the thing that I'm doing is I am. I am an American. I am. I am so grateful to this country. I love my country. I am going to maintain the ability till my dying day to help my country and advise my country. My country is a bitch. I don't know why she's acting this way. I don't know why she's been stupid since 1992. Right. But she's been acting like a moron since the Clinton administration. We're bad at being American. And I can't stand it. So I'm going to, I would love to tell you everything I know. I would love to penalize people for being bad at their jobs. But I'm going to retain the ability to advise my government till my dying day. And so I'm not going to say what I know. Okay. This is from New York Times inside the debacle that led to the closure of El Paso's airspace, FAA citing grave risk of fatalities from a new technology being used on the Mexican border, got caught in a stalemate with a Pentagon which deemed the weapon necessary. Whatever. Okay. Who knows? It's how many stories you get spin right through them all out there. Right through a bunch of them. Look, our press was a largely set up in World War II to go to war. And it's been that way ever since. And during the Walter Cronkite era and the Eric several rides and all that kind of stuff that nobody really remembers. We had a measure of freedom to talk about things. And I got too much. And in the middle of the 1970s, we had the church and Pike committee hearings. And we freaked out. We found out who we really were. We are both the super naive squeaky clean state and the baddest of the bad MFs. We're both things. We're a hybrid. We're extremely Machiavellian. We're extremely naive. There's no way of stopping that being what we are. So you think that it's very possible that there's a foreign nation that has some sort of technology that can invade our airspace it will. And that was what the shutdown was. I believe that somebody may have leapfrog us as they have leapfrog us in drone technology. So they may have leapfrog us in some propulsion technology. I believe that there is a nation in Asia, China, which puts on amazing drone shows and buys up our academics who aren't being paid. Because we're sitting around bitching. What have you technical people done for us? Why do you deserve to be paid from taxpayer dollar? And the answer is, oh, shut the fuck up. We created your economies stupid bitches. We're the baddest of the bad. We are the source of your wealth and your strength. And you come to us bitching about your taxpayer dollars. You deserve to lose to China. You little. I have no words for the also the new crop of tech billionaires who are bitten by COVID who think that well, they think that Anthony Fauci is a scientist. And so they believed in science before Fauci. Now they don't believe in science. I don't know what you're saying. Oh my God. I literally don't understand what you're saying. Silicon Valley had a huge about face when they figured out that Fauci was full of shit. A lot of them bankrolled our universities. They supported science. They were Democrats. And then somehow COVID happened. And because they had this child like, I believe in universities, science and the Democratic Party, they ran to the Republican Party like children, not understanding that Anthony Fauci was not a scientist. COVID is a giant lie. Collins and Fauci and Ralph Barrick and Peter Dajek are menaces to the credit of science of science. The credit rating of science went into the toilet with Silicon Valley. And a new idea was born, which is that the engineer is everything. The scientist is nothing. Everything should be a for profit, not a nonprofit. If artificial intelligence should replace our best people. I mean, this is the spell that many of our, like I would like to think that I count Mark Andreece and Peter Thiel as friends, Sam Altman as a friend. I don't know what happened to all of these people. They're just wrong. And they're rich. And somehow we like our public intellectuals became our billionaires. What does it all say? What does Elon say? Everybody's talking their book is now our public intellectuals. And quite honestly, they're all brilliant. But they're all highly motivated. That's fact. Yeah. Where are scientists? Where are intellectuals? Where are people who care more about? How do I say this? Glory and immortality rather than private jet travel. You could not give get me to give up my claim on immortality for private jet travel. I don't understand the fascination with private jets. They're cool. Mildly. Well, it's not just private chats. What is it? I think they attach monetary gain to success and above and beyond needs. So it becomes a way of measuring success. They look at numbers above and beyond everything else. My craziest brilliant friend who's completely insane is like I named Michael Vasser. Michael Vasser had made a point to me as he often does, which is really dangerous. And he said, when did the world's smartest people stop caring about their own game and their own prizes and start focusing on the prizes of the people pursuing wealth and status? And he said, somehow when scientists care about McLarens and Lamborghinis, something terrible has happened. Boy, is that like a splinter in my mind turning over? I can't get rid of it. He's right. He's just right. By the way, this is a guy who also told me that Dario on the diet was like a really important person. I needed to pay attention to him when he was just some guy that I knew. Vasser's point is the scientists stop having their own own game with their own prizes. And so they've started caring about things that they should be completely ignoring. I don't have a McLaren and I couldn't care less. I do care about a mortality. I do care about recognition. I do care about my name being removed from things that I've done. And other people's cherry topping going on top of it. Quite honestly, we're a different game. We're a different species. There's a, you know that song One Night in Bangkok. It came from a musical about chess. And he says in the lyrics to that song, which we don't remember, he says, I have, you know, something like I have your over. I would invite you, but the queens we use would not excite you. So you can go back to your massage parlors in Bangkok. The whole point is that the chess world doesn't care about who got laid. Chess world cares about the evergreen game, the immortal game. What did Fisher do to Spaske? What's going on with Magnus Carlson? Somehow the science world stopped caring about our own stuff. And we got to make sure that the public intellectuals are not dominated by billionaires as much. I love these guys. They're my friend. I think you're right. Yeah. They're smart as hell. They wouldn't have gotten to be billionaires. Other one. But they're always talking their book. Always look at, you know, people are like famous libertarians and they become surveillance people, you know, they, they, they, Bill Gates, you know, what, is he just buying farmland for right to be? He wants to make sure that we have a steady supply of a food of something. We've got to stop the addiction to billionaires is the only people we trust because at least their rich. Let's end it there. Got to wrap this up. But I appreciate you very much. This is very good. Yeah. Yeah. It was a good one. Great seeing you John. Great to meet you too. And I think you're the last point is that should resonate with a lot of people. Instead, right before to see