The Jerogan experience. It's kind of stunning, spoken. Well, you see how little England is. Yeah. You know, that, I mean, it makes sense when you're talking about with pirates that, like, they had to be the most horrific monsters to try to control the empire. Well, it's also insane. By the way, so I did this special in Spain. So I love history. So do you know what year they finally unified Spain, where they got rid of the moors and they finally, the Castellians kind of pieced together what we consider modern day Spain. Do you know what year they did that? No. 1400 and 92. The year that Columbus. So they literally finally kicked the moors out. By the way, they were really not nice. Moors are evil people. Well, no, no, they were not nice to the moors or the Jews, like they got that was the moors, though they were conquerors themselves. They were conquerors, but like, they, but like the, I mean, I performed a Morocco. It's like amazing to think that like, you know, we think of the colonizers as these Europeans, but the Arabs were colonizers too. They colonized Morocco. So like there's the Berbers, and I'm sure I'm pronouncing that wrong, that, so the Moroccans that were in Spain were part of, you know, when Muhammad and all these guys rose up, the great Arab power was they took over and they got all the way into Spain and stuff like that. But it's insane to think that, I mean, this was a joke that I had when I went to Spain, like Spain took all the gold, all the gold from Central and South America, all of it. So like there wasn't really that much gold in North America. There was gold in Central and South America, and the Spain took it all and they spent it. And so one of my jokes when I was in Spain, I'm like, where's the gold? Where is it? Like they literally, like one of the things they did is they built a navy and they got their ass kicked by the British. You know, so it's really fascinating to see what, how quick these empires come and how quick they disappear. Yeah, and that's the strange thing about where we are today is that we wanna think that the United States is gonna be around forever. And that, you know, the power and influence we enjoy over the rest of the world will continue this way. And there's no way would ever live under the thumb of a ruthless dictator, like they did, you know, back in the day and this part of the world, without part of the world, like that's been the standard way that human beings have governed forever. Yeah, the Romans were like, we're good. No, that's gonna take over. Yeah, come on, we got it. Yeah. The Greeks the same way, I mean, they started with democracy. Yeah. And it all fucking fell apart. I mean, the Romans were like so confident. They're like, you know, Constantine's like, you know what? I don't even wanna do Rome anymore. Let's go over to what's present day is Dambal. Like he switched the capital of Rome. That's insane. It's kind of like, if a president was like, you know what? I think our capital should now be in, let's now put it in Vancouver. Yeah. Yeah. Like in a different country, right? This Roman Empire, it was named after a city Rome and he moved it to an, you know, essentially Asia. It's like insane. Why did he go there? I think that Jax, I think that I think that was, that was modern, maybe. I don't know. Oh, interesting. I don't know. I dank Garland would know. Yeah, he'd be the guy to ask. How does that guy know so much? He's just consuming. Yeah, well, he worked so hard on his show. To call his show a podcast and to call this a podcast is really kind of hilarious. Cause this is like, we did zero preparation. I haven't seen you in two years. Yeah, yeah. We talked like through text messages only. And then also we're saying they're talking, we have no idea what we're going to talk about. And we've been talking for hours. Dan Carlin, when he does a two hour podcast, he will research that for months, months and months. Like we'll he'll do a thing like the Wrath of the Khan, which is a spectacular five piece series on Jengus Khan. When he did that, it took like six months to prepare. Wow. Yeah. And then he puts them out and you can get them for a dollar. They cost a dollar each. And it is like literally some of the most spectacular historical entertainment. You'll ever get in your life. Is your paint person enthusiasm to how he does it? He's amazing. He's an amazing. And he's so humble too. He always says he's not a historian like picture or a film. Yeah, he always says that. Yeah, I'm saying that. He's if you met him. I have a man. He's a great guy too. He's been in the podcast a couple times. And so what is so is the length of his podcast or astronomical? Yes. Yeah. They're like four hours, part one of Caesar conquers the world. You're like what? He's like, let me quote from this book that I read. I'm like, dude, I haven't like reading this dense information. He goes, soccer cleaves wrote this thing. And you're like, how do you know that? Yeah, he and he covers so many different topics. He had a great piece on Martin Luther and the invention of Lutheran and the time in history where making a version of the Bible that was a phonetically readable that people could understand, like a phonetic interpretation of the Bible where you could say the word. That didn't exist. Like they all read the Bible in Latin. And if you don't understand Latin, you were. Most people didn't read. Right. You were at the whim of the priests. And Martin Luther came along and said, actually what God said, you could probably interpret it yourself and not leave it to these people. And like they came real close to killing him a few times for that. It is amazing how consistently of the messages and the teachings of Jesus are like, like humans can't grasp it. Like they're like way off. Like, oh, we're supposed to take care of the poor. We're supposed to help the needy. We're supposed to do all this. And people were like, does that mean I should get another car? Like, don't even come close. I'm like, I'm going to get a Jesus tattoo. Do you know what I mean? Like, we don't. And I'm talking about people that embrace the Christian faith. Yes. Like, get it wrong. I'm not talking about people like, I don't believe in that stuff. Right. People who proclaim to be Christian. Again, humans are pretty dumb.