Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. What's up bro. So your boy Tommy was awesome. He was good. He was really cool. Yeah, I actually listened on the way out to that one. He's really fun. Tommy Lee's fun. He's like a big kid, man. He is. Kid. Yeah, like a 15 year old that just never, you know, had to grow it all the way up. It's no, because he didn't. I mean, this when he was 18. Exactly. So he really never had to grow up. He just stayed Tommy Lee. I'm glad you finally got to have him on. It was very cool. So it was good. He's really in a bonsai trees. Oh, big time. Crazy. He brings him up. He's got like 100 year old you are. You're buying them at his, uh, his, make him yourself. His yard. He sets up like a whole like Zengarden type of thing. He's pretty wild. But he's, he's been into those and he likes to trim him up. And, you know, it's pretty, pretty wild. He's just, he's a positive energy nice guy. Like he's never, never been. And my, you know, what do you want to say? Interactions with him. Never. He's never been a dick. He never. He's just, he was cool to work for. Well, I only work. I met him rather when you were working with him. When you were his bodyguard and then, uh, this is the other time I met him. So he's super cool. Nice. Good. I remember him in the car going on his, in the car. What is he doing? That's God's number. His packers as tall as you are. I remember him when he spoke to him. You did. He's got a lot of advantages in this life. Doesn't he? Good Lord. God damn. I'm throwing person. And one of the greatest drummers of all time. That was one of the first sex tapes. Oh yeah. That was right. He did. He's so clever. He's not a member. He's not a member. He's famous after one. Yeah. Well, they were already famous. That was why I was crazy. Both of them were super famous. Right. But I mean, allow the, like, to keep the catapult them until like a different stratosphere. Right. Well, anytime one of them celebrities is dating another celebrity, they're fucking superpowers unite. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He was, what had their lock clear to you right now. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, who's a fun dude? The, the, the trees thing is wild though. I didn't know that these people, they have like 100 year old trees, 200 year old tree, 300 year old bonds I trees. And they pass them down through generations. They have like paperwork. So you know, like who's the guy who first started the tree? And they've got these trees that are like several hundred years old. and they're like this big. And they're in like a pot. And we use a really cool trim and edge. It's all like an artistic thing. They're trimming them in certain patterns. And every time they try to grow you trim them down and they just like tighten up and it makes a weird form. Yeah, it comes in a straight. Pretty cool looking. Yeah. Actually, you know, I wanted to treat likes it though. Yeah. I thought she was like, hey, no, fuck, I thought I'd grow. Yeah, three hundred years old. Sixteen inches tall. This is what we're talking. I think for him though, he's had such a crazy high paced life that. Yeah. That's how he relaxes. I love hearing it. It sounded perfect. I was like, oh, you found a great thing. And you see he's a gear head too like you. So yeah, it's had a little. Yeah, it's talking about something on the cars. First car as he bought. He bought an old Corvette. He got a fucking supercharger put on it. Yeah. He's a maniac. He's definitely a maniac. But he's a very nice. I mean, you're a man. Oh, yeah. Guy was the drummer from Motley Crew. I don't can't even am at 18. Can't even imagine what that one's been like. Must have been insane. A lot of these guys, they don't want to stop touring. All these rock and roll stuff. Why would they want to be a shoe truck that is going to be. But some get a rock shirt though. Some of them. Some of them. I saw some clips. Who the fuck was David Lee Roth? No, I think it was the guy from AC DC. Brian Johnson. I don't know if this is your great. Yeah. It's bad. It's pretty good. Through AC DC. All favorite. One of my favorite all time bands and Brian Johnson struggling. I mean, but that scream and style he has. Wow. You're going to keep that going. Keep that going. Like no acting or vocal coach would ever tell you you could sing like that. I don't think so. You just can't sing like that. Yeah. You can't fucking scream like that. What if they get like 60 year old groupies? 100%. 100%. 50 year old groupies in that flame. Oh my God. They've been keeping that flame lit since the 80s. Of course. But did they have like new groupies though? Of course. Of course. You know, there's no way they know like doesn't. What's this? What the what is his name? Jesus Christ. Rolling stones. I forget what makes jagger. Well, I know Mick Jagger has a kid that's really young. Like Mick Jagger just had a kid like really recently. Wow. Yeah. He's like it is 80s. I was thinking of someone else though. Someone else is another. Oh, there's a bunch of guys like that. Like Al Pacino just oh, yeah, that's true. Yeah, true. But a lot of older guys like that, they wind up having kids. Like they're still obviously getting young chicks to fuck them. It's kind of irresponsible. I mean, I mean, I mean, but maybe he's probably his greatest. Yeah, he should take care of the kid, but maybe it's the young chick that wants to kid. But as yours, but it's still if you did not purpose, if you're the guy and you did it on purpose, that's wild. Yeah. No, you don't even want to be around. Yeah. You have this kid at 80. It's more important than my genes pass on than I'd be there for my child. Think about that. But it's time for your 85. You're probably gone. Yeah. Yeah, by the time you're 85. Yeah, you don't even see your kid go to school. You'll be five years old. Yeah. You know, the kid will be five years old and the dad dies. Maybe the maybe the wife wanted it. Well, sure. You leave something behind that thing. Look, it maybe it's better than not doing it. Maybe. So if you're a fucking rational, eight year old, yeah, like, bro, you probably have some tickets. So you even keep your own shit in your pants. You're going to be raising kids. Both of them. You're going to take your guys your diapers. You're going to get to the kid to the park. Right. You're on the kids diapers at yours. You're going to break a hip and your toddler is going to be screaming and no one will hear it. Right. And you're going to be alone with them at the park. You'll be lying there bleeding internally from a broken hip. and the kids going to walk off. You're going to watch the kid five years old. Yeah. Three year old wander off in your age. Oh, nuts. Oh, yeah. By the way, long ago, you got him upset because he's like, man, I've been feeling good. He's like, you know, I'm at the gym every day. You're fucking like, I turn on roll gun and he's pitching about being 58. I'm like, what the fuck? He's 68. Oh, so he's like, yeah, yeah, yeah. He's playing around. He's 58. He's really 68. He looks great. He looks great. He looks great. He looks great. Oh, dark ass hair. I know, right? He don't have regular hair. He's looking. He's looking. He's looking good. That's great. And then he asked me about it. What the fuck do you want? I'm on long ago. I brought a regular dark hair like deep in here. Like the second is my shit is all white. If I had hair and I grew it out, it would be all great. Really? Yeah, mostly. It's like my face. It's like my stubble. It's like at least 60% gray. Yeah, mine is all gray now. Yeah. It's weird. There's something about a gray beard that's like, you're just saying, fuck it. Yeah, that's why I just started turning it down. I was like, you know, this is ridiculous. Yeah. I don't like it with it. Look, but I see myself in the mirror with a gray beard. I'm like, who the fuck are you? Yeah, yeah. I'm supposed to have a dark beard. For sure. I had a dark beard most of my life. I'm looking at pictures. I'm like, like, a couple years ago. It's dark now. It's all gray. Like, what the fuck happens? I mean, we had a thing on A&E with me and George. And they had a short eclipse of me and you talking. I still, we both had hair. Are you talking? Yeah, we're crazy. It looks crazy. It's weird. You look, you, you look, you want your just slowly slipping into the grave. We're looking good though. Can we look a lot of that as well as we can? Yes. Compared to people that don't take care of themselves and also compared to people from the past. Oh, that's what I'm saying. The city of New York City. I was just saying that by the way. I was just saying that by the way. I was just saying that by the way. I was just saying that by the way. I was just saying that by the way. But think about like in the 80s, 40 year olds look like in 80s. Right. Yeah, it was. I think the like martial arts also helps. We just had a, an event, Hanzo's 30th anniversary for his academy in the US. And they invited all the OGs. So we, you know, we were, I've seen God's hadn't seen in decades. Got a fifth degree. But yeah, I got a sixth degree. I got a sixth degree. I got a sixth degree. I got a sixth degree. Look at that. I mean, we were talking like almost everybody looked good. Everybody. Everybody. Everybody. And there was 15 yards range. 60 guys there. It's the thing is that you got to maintain. And if you don't maintain, you're never getting it back. You don't, you don't, you can't like at 50. You can't take three years off. Right. It's just too hard to get back. And if you never worked out before and you're like 46 and you're starting now. Yeah. That's a hard road. That's a hard road. You'll never worked out before. Like first of all, go slow. Yeah. Yeah. Break everything. Well, that's a problem. People want to jump right in and then you get hurt or get busted up a little bit. And then you just, the feeds, you know what I mean? You're like, fuck right. So much of the big, right out of your shape. Not get injured. The big reality about age is how long it takes to heal something. My kids get hurt. They just fucking heal up like Wolverine. It's not like with a few days. Not my shoulders line again. Like you fucking just a backflip. And then your shoulder. You're right. I would be fucked up for a year. They just, they just heal quicker. They're alive. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's the fucking truth. That's the truth. That's the number one thing that happens is you get older. If you're lifers like us, you just got to be smart about your training. 100. Like, you know, I got young savages. I don't want, I don't fucking, I choose what I want to roll with. Like, you know, you don't got to be that guy to fucking just slay everybody on the mat. Because you're the sense that you're going to break. You're, you'll break. You know, it's like you, you have a Corvette. You take it around the track. You can only do so in your laps. Every car, even formula one cars across 100 million dollars. They're, they break. You can only go so far so fast, so long before you blow a rod. You got some shit go sideways. Everybody I know is that surgery. Like, yeah. Like for me, like when I'm in Philly with the crew Brady and Pfeiffer and them, like it's hard being in a room with these guys. Cause they want to grab you and do moves on you. And I'm like, chill out man. You just grab one of the younger guys. Bro, the last guy you want, grabbing you is Brady. Yeah. Jesus Christ. When he gets on top, can you just start squeezing you? Well, yeah. Yeah. His, that fucking fight with Joaquin Buckley, I was like holy shit man. He ragged out. Bro, it was the level of domination was like shocking. I was like, okay, so this is his best form. Like this is him at his best. At his best is fucking terror. He's a little inconsistent. Like the Morales fight was tough. But when he said, it's like his head wasn't in it. But when his fucking head is in it, and he's like dialed in. For sure man, he's like when he grabs you, bro, like he'll squeeze you and you just start making like little noise like he did a Leon. And when he did to Joaquin, you're like holy shit man. What is that like? That was beautiful. That's beautiful. It's like explosive and athlete is the fucking. Like everywhere they went. He was just following him one step ahead. It was like no escape. Yeah, yeah. He don't want you outman. Smosh. Yeah, just get smosh. The shak is so big he just gets so much coverage over you when he's on top of you. And the balance. It's just every, it just like so many steps ahead of them on the ground. That one time it really looked like a cardio drill. Like he was on top. Like he was just, it looked like he was just, it looked like he was just, like a plastered face. Yeah. Super calm. I believe when they were, he wasn't allowed to do the 12 to 6 elbows. Oh that's so crazy. That's where I write a role. Something like this. So this place I think Jersey's still like that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's a lot of places that are like that. And then it's so dumb. I understand using the old unified rules. It's so dumb. Like that rule doesn't make any sense. It would be nice today. I get it if it's, you know, soccer kicks. Okay, you want to have a debate. But if you can elbow this way and this way and this way, but you can't go this way, that's just retarded. And everybody else is doing it. So why would you not do it? It doesn't make sense. And you have to remember what state you're at. That's right. So like when you're in the fight and you're on instinct and the guys like this, but it's wide open for a 12 to 6 elbow, you're supposed to throw it in. Yeah, yeah. That's what it's for. Yeah. They're for safety sake and the fighters of the, and the referee's ability to make a decision have consistency in the rule set. It's just another elbow. It doesn't make any sense. Like there's one elbow that's outlawed. That's crazy. Right. I don't know why you can, you can need the hell out of somebody in their first place. You can run and jump and kneel in the face. Oh, God. And some of the craziest knockouts we've ever seen come from that. Like we were just talking about MOSVIDAL versus aspirin. Oh, man. For hey, he's supposed to be wrestling again. And I'll get to go now. Is that a good idea? No. I was talking the other day. I went with me out when I heard that. When he was talking, he was coughing a lot and I was like, you listen, when you're people who are athletes and they're afraid of wrestling because it's exhausting. They don't want to feel that burn in their lungs. You really want to push yourself like that. Yeah. I worry about it. I just want them to get totally with you. I mean, he had double lung transplant surgery. Like how long ago? Absolutely a year ago. Maybe two years ago. Maybe two years ago. Maybe two years ago. How'd he be worried? He was just about infection. Yeah. I'd be worried about everything. And I would also be worried if you're doing that. I think you have to take immunosuppressant drugs in order to keep someone else's organs inside of you. So you're going to go out to a giant cell out of my friend C.T. Fletcher. Yeah. C.T. Had a heart transplant. And he has to take medication to keep this heart in his body, keep his body from rejecting it. And he has a bunch of complications in the medication, like makes him swell and he posts videos and pictures about it. It's a serious thing. And he had to be real careful during COVID. You have a heart transplant and then you're on immunosuppressant drugs and also, or a bad flu. Like anything bad will fucking kill you because your immune system is working in a weird way because it's trying to keep someone else's heart inside of you. Yeah. Your body's like, who's this fucking heart? Right. Not a heart. Because you're about your body's like, this is a disease. Which is wild that your body knows. Yeah. Like it recognizes that it's from another daughter. And we're just like, no, we can hack nature, shove it in there and give you some drugs. Make your body stay alive. I think it was below Muhammad. Yeah. It's below Muhammad. Maybe he has like an agreement that he didn't know you were trying to go. They did use the training yesterday. So their friends, maybe that's the deal. We were just reading about this last night. Two people have had pig hearts transplanted in their bodies. No way. Yeah. One guy stayed alive, I think, for 60 days and one guy stayed alive for 40 days. Did they gain a lot of weight? Yeah. They're going fast. They're stuck. They're shoveling their face in the trash. Oh, wow. That's the way. Yeah. You're coming over. Who's that? Yeah. Was it to put a pig heart in another human being? That's fun. There's a bunch of doctors because apparently pigs hearts for some reason are similar in function to a human heart. See that? It's about a sheep's vagina. Yeah. Don't they? They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. They do. That's what I heard too. So a pig's heart. Yeah. It's that's fucking crazy. It's crazy. And so they did it on two people. Yeah. But either way, the whole thing of transplanting organs from other people is like super risky and dangerous. And once it's working, the number of, like we looked at heart transplants. It's been a period of years. And so it's like 91% of the people survived the first year. And then it starts going down. So 9% of the people die after the heart transplant. But then it starts to go down after, you know, that's for the first year when it gets to five years. Then you're in the 80s or the 90s and then the 80s. And it keeps dipping. It keeps dipping until like at 10 years, it's like half of them are dead. Jesus. Yeah. So you're buying some time. Right. But you know, it's also. It's a good question. Like so what is it like for double lung transplant? I don't know. But I would imagine it's fragile. You want to put that in the fucking red? You want to push that? Well, you're breathing. I mean, it felt like yesterday he was making laps around the hospital floor. Right. And that's a dude. He's a winner. Right. And that's the problem. Like sometimes when you're a winner, your will is so strong that you think you could force your body into unrealistic expectations. There's gotta be some of greeners. Yeah. And that's just in my mind too. But also you cheated. I mean, you basically cheated death. Yes. Your family now, you have your family back. You understand you have a second chance. Like why would you put that at risk to do something? Maybe him and blow. But you have nothing to prove to have like a friendly. That's kind of what I'm wrestling role. Yeah. You got a friendly wrestling role. I don't think that. It looks an animal. Yeah. And as friends are fucking out. I don't think that they have an agreement with each other. I think that somebody told, but I'll hate listen, man. Don't push this dude. Right. Like I saw an interview where he said, bro. Like his first question was, what are you talking about? Can he wrestle? You know what I mean? That's even been cleared. So I would not accept that if I was below. I would not accept that if I was below. I would not accept that. I'm not. The pros. And this is no disrespect to aspirin. It's like, I think that guy's an animal. Like I was one of the biggest promoters of trying to get aspirin into the UFC when he was the champion of Bellator. And then when he went over to one. And the argument was like he was boring. And I was like, no, he's not boring. It's crazy that he could do this to these guys. Yeah. He could take guys like Douglas Lima and just ragdome to the ground. And they can't do shit to him. Boris Goff, Henry, did his hair. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He wasn't boring at all. He was destroying guys. Yeah. Dalling these guys. They had zero chance in him not taking them down. It was zero chance. And it was beautiful. Right. It wasn't like Alex Pereira flying knee in somebody in the face, but it's still another way to win. What if a man and a child? Yes. Yeah. It was crazy good. He was crazy good. And then we got him like a little late. Right. We got him when he already had hip problems. And he eventually had to get a hip replacement after he got to the UFC. You know, he had already been 15 years in combat sports. And then all the years of wrestling. And like, but those days when he was running shit at Bellator, he was a mother fucker, dude. He was a mother fucker. Flight night is here. Title shots, debut killers and the rising contender. Nobody's talking about yet. And only draft Kings has you covered every step of the way. The draft Kings app is now available in all 50 states and includes all markets, bringing the games straight to your fingertips wherever you are. No matter where you're watching, you're always connected and in the game with one app. New draft Kings customers sign up with code, Rogan spend five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days. That's code, Rogan in partnership with draft Kings. The crown is yours. That's with DK Sports book. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler 1 800 My Reset. Connecticut call 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. On behalf of Boothill Casino in Kansas, that tax pass through may apply in Illinois, 21 and over void in Canada. Event contract trading with draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss, availability varies, bet to get bonus bets that expire in seven days, trade to get $50 in predictions dollars that expire in one year, issued every seven days via click to claim for 21 days, one non withdrawal reward redeemable predictions offer void in New York. And July 19th, terms at dkng.co slash audio. It's fight with Demi and Maya was fucking awesome. Amazing. That's a great note with some powerful thing about that fight is that it's almost like the closest thing to style of her style that we could have nowadays. Yeah. You know, they're both so brilliant at the way they use their art with him with his wrestling and him with a jujitsu. And in that fight, you got to see some of that with Ben, you got to see the date downs. You got to see an Uma platter reversal. And like actually reversal, I mean, beautiful jujitsu. Yeah. It was such a great fight. Do Demi and Maya got fucked harder than anybody ever got fucked by a referee's decision tomorrow. Yeah. Ever. Nobody got fucked harder than Demi and Maya. Was it her who was it? I don't know. I mean, we should even per her name. I don't remember who it was. But do I think as a guy who doesn't do it in the UFC anymore? But he had him on his back one hook in over under. and he got into a position where like you are fucked. You're dry. And you got the best back specialist in the UFC. Demi and Maya was the way you ran through Neil Mackey. Oh, shit man. His jujitsu is so high level. And for you to get off, get him off and come on, it was one boss. Right. Was to take a choke. Yeah. I was not Alex Lisser's brother. So it's like how many years ago was that? Like, now you're fighting Demi and Maya and he's got your back. You're in danger. And the referee separated him. So crazy. Never got to that spot again. Kamal played it nice. He fought a great fight. Won the fight. And you're like, damn, Damian had him. He had him in a like not night out of 10. But he had him in like a six out of 10 spot. Yeah. Like half the time, he gets your back and your dry. And you're not at his level of jujitsu. You're in fucking trouble. You should never. You should never separate anybody from that position. I know you're a big proponent of not standing people up, but especially specialist. Physicians did it requires time to get to 100%. 100%. The idea that a guy can defend it for a few seconds and the crowd booze. And that's enough for you to make them neutral again. Fuck you. I know. It's so hard to get to Kamaru. Kamaru. Yeah. I know. It's back like that. And the tightness is what keeps that position. Right. The tightness space he makes and Kamaru's gone. And even the amount of times in the history of Kamaru's entire, all the user competition where people got them in disadvantageous grappling positions. I can't think of this very few. Very few. Very few. We on top down. Yeah. It's about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Chamaia. But my, if he was winning the third round. Oh, well, he, well, for. I mean, the most one that fight, it came like that's a fight. We're having one last. Hey, here he is. Here he is. This is crazy. Oh, shit. Do I need heads up? Who is that? No, no, no. No, no. All right. So it sucks. Back it up again so you can see how good the position was. A little further hook. Yeah. Can you get it a little further back? Yeah. So I would want to see like when he starts in tangling. This is so bad for Kamaru. You have to understand how bad this is. Yeah, this is bad. This is, this is not just simply he's like behind you. And mine. I had that. The progression. Yeah. He was just about to beat that wizard. Yeah. Bro, look how good this looks to. My is just a gorilla. His wrestling was underestimated too. Like he was just a good guy. So it was technically everything. And this use of leverage and his positioning was always perfect. It just was so beautiful to what? When you see a guy just super high level, you did see in the UFC, you're just like, oh my God, this is beautiful to watch. Yeah. I love how methodical he's working the way it's way into this. Dangerous. Look at that. He's got the, oh my God. He was got a stepping down. Yeah. Look at this. That arm is the only thing. And he's just about to beat that arm. And only that from here he could just start beating him with the right hand, which he'll probably start doing. So if the referee really stands him up from this position, like this is a crazy way to separate people. This is bad, man. This is like for tomorrow, this is super dangerous. He's got half the round left hanging on to that wizard for dear life is the only thing he keep in from getting this guy on your neck. Oh, that's true. And that wizard is like at 40% power now, because look how far back is. Yeah, yeah. Not much into that. There's not much. It's hard. It's hard to generate power like that. What come on? I mean, he's got full double under hooks. How do they break this up? How do you break this up? This is crazy to break up. Like this is such a dangerous position. Oh, this is bad. I don't recognize the ref. Yeah, I can't remember. I recognize I'm not going to say his name. There's no need to. But this is a giant mistake. You're clear. Sometimes you're going to hurt, though. So many times in fights, man, these guys listen to the crowd. Yeah. It's kind of hard not to write anything irresponsible. Yeah, they do. And in the organization, I'm sure they feel pressure. Yeah. Because the organization wants like fast action fights. But there's certain situations where you got to just accept the fact that sometimes the sport is not the most exciting for moments. Because it's so exciting in other spots. Punch it as a mess. Oh, that's crazy right there. That's fucking crazy. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's the worst fuck word that anybody's ever gotten in the UFC. I mean, I think that's the worst. Yeah, I mean, there is the time that fucking boost them out. They had to get two in and two submissions. That's right. That's a pretty big fuck. That's who my reminds me of his striking wasn't as good as Muralos, but the combination of wrestling and his jujitsu. Like once he got a hold of you, he was probably going to put you out. Muralos was so good. He's still coming around. He's got a fighter in the UFC now. Nice. Yeah. Doesn't. That's awesome. Yeah. I saw him when I first started jujitsu at Carlson Gracie's place. Did you? Yeah. The very first year that I started jujitsu, it was like him. Vitor was there. Sergio Cohen. Mario Sparry. Mmm-hmm. It was crazy. Yeah. Yeah. I just got a lot of room back then. Doubt and wound up watching these guys train when like Vitor was about to make his UFC debut. I was just starting out. I was like, this is amazing. See, you know what I'm guys in there? Juice, they were all in there. I mean, you could just come in off the street and see the best jujitsu guys in the world. It was training. That's crazy. It was crazy. Yeah. And it was all they were all fighting in the other guy. What's his name? Carlos. Fuck. But I don't know. That's right. Carlos Bajato. He was there too. Mmm-hmm. It was a bunch of those Carlson Gracie team guys. They were just got lucky. They tried to raise them. Yeah. And they were able to raise them. Yeah. I felt like a he-man figure. Carlson had some savages, man. He really had a great team. Yeah. Yeah. It was a pretty big- Yeah. That's what I got my black belt from. Yeah. That's another guy to be proud of. He was a good guy. Such a nice guy. Yeah. It's kind of amazing when he realized that before 1993, jujitsu had no schools. Right? And now another every corner. Every corner. That's it. That is like ground field. It's like that's really insane. Yeah. Like the Gracie family, like the world owes them. Yeah. No. No world got about it. O's them. The world, the whole world. The whole world. It's exactly like, I think it's a world. The world. The whole world. Yeah. Everybody. Because I think liking MMA has impacted culture and then people training much more people training at jujitsu has impacted culture. Hell yeah. Where the funding we be. Like the UFC's here because of the Gracie's as well. I mean, obviously the fatigue is in Dana, but who's the idea of the whole thing. He won't have a crocodile motor route. It's amazing. I'm going to be hearing about it in 1992 with Horion and Hoist, the seminar I went to. And they were talking about that. They were talking about the different ideas what they were going to do. And I even know I didn't think they were full of shit. I thought it was never going to happen. I'm like, what is this? Blood sport? I go. It sounded ridiculous. But now everybody's so used to it. It sounds ridiculous that it sounds ridiculous. I did a sure. I went first found out about it. I didn't watch it until UFC took. So I will only watch on video tape. Like someone from the gym told me about it. And I went and watched it. I got the video tape like Hollywood video, brought it home. And I was like, oh my god, they did it. That's what I thought. I said, you're like, oh, they did the thing that we always wanted. So when I first started. Yeah, I first started taking karate and I thought karate was good until I stumbled into this really good talk window school. I was like, oh, I'll talk windows and shit. And then I started boxing. I'm like, oh my god, I can't box. And then I started kickboxing. I'm like, oh my god, you kick my legs. I didn't know you can kick my legs. It was terrible. And then I started doing jujitsu. Oh my god, I'm helpless. So it's like all these steps along the way. I was like, it would have been nice if we knew what style was real. And this would Bruce Lee tried and right. Bro, when I was starting out in like 88 doing type one, nobody knew nothing. Nobody knew what worked. But he just like, sorry, that guy beats people in that thing. And that guy beat I wonder what happened. They thought no one knew. Right. And I saw you as he was worthless. And I saw you as he was worthless. Grapling arch, you're worthless. Yeah. But luckily I learned it was not worthless. When I just got my ass kicked. You touched me and cracked it on the fucking wooden dummy to change it. Why did you push my ass? not worthless. I just could want to get my ass kicked. We don't know. He touched me and cracked it on the fucking wooden dummy to change the place. Push my ass. That's all I know. But here's a real scrap. I'd go back to my season of eighth grade wrestling. That's the case. But I also think that Wing Chun would work if you knew all the other. Like Anderson Silva can use Wing Chun. Right. You know what I'm saying? I'm saying I'm on a hand trap. Yeah. There's hand trap in an elbows from him. There's stuff that does work if you know all the other shit. It's an added element. Right. It's like there's mo- there's moves that you could do that you're just- your opponent's not going to- Your opponent is used to this, right? They're used to punches, like regular punches. Every now and then, weird shit can work because they don't see it coming and then it opens up other big shots. And Wing Chun can- those guys when you watch the really good ones like whack at each other's arms and shit, you're like, okay, there's like a little value in this. Yeah. There's a little value in getting good in this. As long as you know how to actually punch. Yeah, I don't dismiss nothing. Like, because anything can work in the right context. It's just not going to work on Aaron's Crawford. Yeah. Not a box in that against Aaron's Crawford. It's not working. You can't remember what it is working against him anyway. No one has figured that out. No one has figured that out. Got much. Listen, you can have fun with it, but as far as value, I'd say very little value. Very little. If you're going to do that, you might as well be doing Muay Thai, West then boxing or Jiu Jitsu. No, for sure. By itself, useless. But what I think is if you already are doing other stuff and you can train with a guy who can show you some of it, I think you would be like, oh, I see value in this. Like, do you remember when Dan Henderson was fighting Hector Lombard and he hit him with like a back L. Right, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Or a back forearm. Yeah. He was elbow or four. Yeah, I think he like throw a punch and can't just find some times. Sometimes people do standing back fist sometimes and they work. There's some shit that we're missing. Yeah. And like, I think Wing Chun is a part of it. Yeah, I agree with that. Like, especially like when you're in close like in clenching through the issues, you're just like, trapping hands. And you know what I think is the number one thing that people need should be doing. The number one thing that people should be doing is point fighting karate. It's something like if you want to add something. I mean, not obviously not number one over wrestling and all that. But number one thing to add and don't add Wing Chun at point fighting karate. But it's such a physical thing that a lot of people probably can't do. Especially if you come from a wrestling background where you're so used to being like heavy, square, to be able to turn sideways in and out, jumping and out like that. But if you can do it, that advantage is so when you watch like MVP when he's in his fucking prime. Money, I mean, here's the chara bullet. Yeah, but the thing about the Apple Mac elbow crazy. What a beautiful elbow from a wrestling position. Yeah, we see that again. How do you land it? So yeah, he had his leg. Look at that. He's holding his leg. And he catch it. Look at the fucking elbow. Oh, right behind it. Fantastic. What a fucking hell. That's one of the greatest elbows of all time. I appreciate it. Yeah, right now. Check out. To get a knockout elbow while you're hopping on one leg. Yeah, that's crazy. Fighting off the take down. Yeah. That was nasty. Nasty. What's going on? What else get into these guys like MVP? That advantage is so huge. The advantage of being Wonder Boy and his prime. Yeah. Bro. That advantage is so nuts. So I watch videos with people knowing online. I'm like, if you could do that in a teammate field, no one will catch you. It's you'll be in and out. You know what a kid is closest to it. Zero gone. That's true. Zero gone is not a point fighting karate guys. A boy tie up, but he's a basketball player. Yeah. We were talking about this the other day. Like what better sport to develop plyometrics and the ability to change direction than basketball? You're constantly changing direction and they're big men. Why can't basketball players fight? They don't try to go to play. Because they don't train. That's true. Just because they don't train. Yeah. But zero gone. You look at the way he moves like he moves like a basketball player can move. He's 250 pounds and he's a heavyweight and he can fucking strike. Yeah. I remember I used to train Walt Harris who was a pretty good basketball player. Nice. Always try to tell him, man, it's the same thing. Your pivots are the same. You got to be able to move change directions. It's the same thing. But as a heavyweight, it also comes with being lazy. Yes. Those guys are just lazy. Well, it's harder to do the fucking thing. It's harder to move all that weight. It's like it's hard to get a 248 pound guy to move like zero gone. There's not a whole lot of them. We were just talking about the other day. I think it's an underappreciated thing because we're used to lighter weight fighters moving like that. But I'm like name one. Name one guy and heavyweight and moves like that. I know who you used to. You know, you used to was the dark horse of the heavyweight division, Travis fucking Brown. When Travis Brown was in his prime, he was a bad mother fucker dude and he moved light. He was a big tall dude and he moved light. in our love ski used to. He just got a lot of money to you. He had some, you know, wars. Yeah. And they take their toll on you. But if you go back to like Travis Brown in his heyday when he was knocking people out with those elbows from the trench and the way he would move, like he would move like super light on his feet, like bouncing around. And I think it was because he played basketball. It's got to be it. 100% it makes sense. Because I know Travis played basketball. Yeah. When you get a big athlete that's light on their feet, that's how giant it is. Yeah, it is. Because you go in needs one entrance that you didn't anticipate when you get popped and just now you're compromised. You're getting that first step and being able to get a clean shot. Dude, those karate point guy, I've only fought a couple of karate point fights when I was a kid. When I was doing tuck window tournaments, we enter into him. And I thought this one guy that was like, his name was Mafia Holloway. He was like a champion. I couldn't even touch him. I couldn't even make it close to him. His first name was Mafia Holloway. No, it was a very famous. I don't know if it was a real name. But that's what his name was. Back in the mouth for you. He was like a well known black belt point fighting champion. I couldn't even touch him. I was like, Jesus, we're playing totally different games. I'm playing a continuous fighting game, which where you're, you know, you're fight in tuck window for a certain amount of minutes. And he's playing this thing where you stop every time they hit you. And so you can't hit him and he keeps hitting you. Yeah. And it's just stop, stop, stop, stop. And so I'm like, oh, so frustrated. But I remember leaving going, ooh, I need to learn that. That's crazy. I didn't know you could move that quick and just jump out of there. The way he's doing it. I'm like, and you think about like these guys that fight him like Kevin Holland that fight MVP. Yeah. After a while though, like what the fuck is this? Yeah, he was in his corner saying that like, I can't. He's quicker than I thought that. What am I doing here? This is nuts. You just can't do anything to him. He's styling on you. Yeah. That's not what I trained to fight. Steve in Thompson, Wonderboy. He did. So I knew the mistake that everybody was making. They were using just regular tall kickboxes. I went to Karate schools and we got just Karate kids did that. Yeah. And just bar with it. And I was like, don't worry about take downs. We don't even need to get there. Just be able to deal with this movement and his length and being able to deal with that because it's different. What is this? Oh shit. Yeah. It's got a crazy kick here. Dude was very good. He didn't give me with that. He got me with a couple of sidekicks to the body though. I told you that. I was very impressed. I was impressed by the speed in which he was able to like move forward and back because that darting in and just tagging each other's speed is a totally different speed. They're like continuous fighting speed. Because continuous fighting speed, you would assume that if the guy's hitting you that you're going to counter and you're going to exchange. And what these guys are used to is you never exchange. They just pop you. They pop you and they get the fuck out of there. That's a great asset. That's an asset in MMA. Giant asset. He's not somebody else. That's an asset. It's a giant asset. Also if you try to play their game, you should just try to play their game just to realize how hard it is. And you're like, oh, this is a crazy, this is a different thing. This is all about the blitz. It's all about the entry. They switch stances at will too. At will. Yeah. That will. But I think all the good guys do now. I think that's going to be a pre-wex. There's too many calf kickers out there. Yeah. You got to be able to switch. You guys watch one. You watch a kickboxing in one. Did you see Jonathan Hagerty and Yuki Yosa? One good for Hagerty wasn't it? No, he won. He figured him out. Hagerty was, he's the guy to beat that dude that was wrecking everybody with that. Yeah. He's a fable guy. Well, he's just a full on Muay Thai guy. But he beat him by continuous movement and switching stances. Right. And I did see that. I'm really, really technical. I sure. Like if you really like striking, it's a really technical fight. He did an amazing job of just constantly giving of different looks and switching stances and moving and then catching them in exchanges. And dude, it was fucking beautiful because he was a crotches. Everybody's legs. It was really sweet. He just kept switching stances. Just kept switching stances. And he did a lot of great boxing from the outside too. Yeah. But he never gave him the same look. Let's see that. Look at that. Look at that. And it needs to the body, a lot of needs to the body. It was beautiful, brilliant fight. I was just chatting with him on Instagram. I'm going to try to get him on. Nice. Bring him to America. Like this is what Zufa should be promoting. You know, I mean, I know they love boxing. That's awesome. I'm glad they're doing that. But you know, this is it. Yeah. If you want another thing that's really exciting, it's striking. Just have only Muay Thai. I'm just surprised they haven't done that. Yeah, it doesn't make any sense. That's what everybody likes to watch. Everybody likes to do. Dana said to me, I don't know if he changes opinion. But he said to me that people don't like kickboxing, because they think of like PKA karate from ESPN from like the 1980s. I'm like, that's old people. Yeah. Yeah. Only been to my diet is. It's a different people. Young people love martial arts. Like young people love knockouts. Young people boo when fights go to the ground. They do. MMA is the best. No doubt about it. It's the greatest sport of all times. The champion of sports. However, if you're going to have some value in another combat sport, it's Muay Thai. It's the most exciting shit. You can do the most options. You can need. They can throw each other. They do all kinds of wild kicking. You think Rekover, who wins boxing success will bring some eyes to kickboxing? I don't know. I'm having him on too. Nice. I hope so. He's really phenomenal. I mean, dude, for 10 rounds, he really, he was into the point where if you're good judges, if the judges are real, he, who sick needs a knockout to win. A thousand percent. Which is, he was afraid. I thought it was up by eight, like eight to one or two at the time. I thought the same. A lot of people thought the same. I mean, he was, he was bullying him around. Yeah. He was moving, he used his weight. Well, did he shit or he drove himself? Cardiose himself and it was phenomenal because he put my style against Usyk. And it was Jim Carey and that fucking, what's the one where he did that? He did that. He did that. And I've been looking like it too. It was fucking phenomenal. But, but may he really did amazing. I personally think if they rematch that now Usyk will like kind of figure them out. So maybe it'll have to get him faster. Look, I hope not because I was rooting for Rekover. If he really rematched, Rekover was going to know that he can do that. Like before that fight, he didn't know he could do that. And Usyk didn't know he could do that. And the difference is, Usyk is not a real heavyweight. He's the greatest heavyweight of all time, which is crazy. But he's not a real heavyweight. He's, he can't say the, like Tyson, in my opinion, is always going to be my favorite in his prime. Yeah. He was just so insane. He was so insane to watch him just to mawless the whole division. But then you look at Cash's clay. And then when he was Muhammad Ali and Larry Holmes doesn't get his due and Lennox Lewis was a fucking beast. So maybe, you know, who knows who would have fought, but that guy stylistically is like the greatest heavyweight ever. Like watching him move the way like skill for skill. You're watching an artist. Yeah. It's like the way he put on the wall. Yeah. Oh my God. He's incredible. But he's still really a 220 pound guy. Yeah. You know, like he puts on some extra weight. He gets a little thicker for that. But you know, Rekosh, huge. Rekosh, he's a giant guy from the Netherlands. Is that where he's got a real heavy way to touch another Dutch kickbox or their old giants? They're all tough as shit. Six, what's like six, five, two, seven, he's two, he's got crazy cardio too for a big giant guy. He was bouncing on. I mean, he was for 10 rounds. He kept that pace as a heavyweight, keeping that pace. And once he slowed, you know, that's when Usyk was able to find him. Did you watch him at? I can't watch. I have a hard time watching anything but fucking mixed martial arts. I fucking chipped him and started watching him. Yeah, well, you know, I swear to me. I swear to me, man, moving by the way. How was it? It was fucking good. Really? The masses of the universe was good. I was worried because I'm thinking, Ellen knew reboots and this and that. I go, is it going to be too woke? Is it going to be this? It was fucking fun. It had a Thor Ragnarok type feel where it's just kind of fun and a little goofy, but not to the point where it's just takes you out of it. I grew up with that, he man. That was my kid. That was my kid. That was my kid. Around our age, right? So it did just this to that. It made it fun. It was fun. It was fun. It was awesome. Yeah, I heard there was some sort of crazy, he wasn't allowed to do interviews. Wasn't allowed to talk to the rest of the cast. I heard that. Why? Because they're worried he's going to do nutty shit. When in the Joker, he was sending people dead rats in the mail and stuff. Oh, really? Because he was in character. That's why I said it was like, you're going to be an evil fucking skeletal guy. No, we can't let you be in character. Can't contact the rest of the crew. I don't know if that's true. That's what I heard, but it was fun. See, that's true. I heard that too. I heard, I heard, was this something about that? I thought somebody said that. I know somebody said he definitely did it with the Joker. I know somebody said that. They were the Joker rat or something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. You would chill out. There's some dudes that played the Joker and you're like, alright, it's over. Hey, I heard. I mean, he's led to play the Joker like everybody stopped. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, come back after that. Until Joaquin Phoenix. Yeah, he plays a great. Yeah, they came out of it. I was like, okay, no, that's the Joker. Yeah. Then you saw the sequel and you said, fuck that, bring that. I didn't see the sequel. Tim Dylan told me he was the worst movie that's ever been. I didn't see that. I didn't see it either. I didn't make it. I didn't. I didn't watch it. If I was guessing, he probably didn't want to do it. I don't know what they were thinking. I bet it was like a dispute between like the movie company and the dude. I don't know what the music did it. Why would you do that? Yeah. Yeah. Unless you're trying to mock it or you're trying to defuse it. Maybe the government was like, hey, after you released that movie, we had the BLM riots and everybody's like, Nell A on fire. Maybe don't have a movie where you're encouraging people to like light cities on fire. Maybe make a musical. Yeah. It's just trying to defuse the Joker movement with a musical. It's funny how the first, I never seen a, I mean, sequels aren't normally as good as the original, but holy fuck. I never seen something so bad. I didn't make it through it. I saw some of it and then I'm like, once I thought it's singing, I'm out of this moment. It's very rare. Where a sequel, you're like, damn, that's just as good. Well, terminated too. And play a strengths back. Those are a couple. Those are a couple. Rocky too. You didn't like Rocky too? Capuchin, I like being fucking one. Obviously. Why do you take it to the zoo in the beginning? Why never get over that? They know they love you, they know. They don't choose to stare at the dream. The whole joke was that mean bodyguard saying, take it to the zoo, the redogs like and then he paid such a fucking zoo to propose the war. Is that not crazy? Yeah, that is. Brother, that's how people were in the 70s. They were animals. But he's basically saying, I don't know. I was probably talking before the internet. Are you going to move your reviews on your channel? Are you trying to plug my channel? No, I'm taking it. You just don't know. I don't know. You just don't know what I'm talking about. You're not alone. No, because I'm trying to do that. Hey, you know what I'm watching on there. I do. I do series reactions. One more reason, reactions. Are you watching the new house of dragon? No. I haven't seen it yet. There's too many things to watch. Let me tell you something. I'm fucked. I'm in the middle of from. I want to talk to you about that too. My wife's mad at from. You don't want to tell me why. That's your month season four episode five, I think. There's only four. There's only four. And then the fifth one is the final season. It doesn't come out until 2027. So tell me sure. Hey, house of dragon. I love Game of Thrones. The night of the seven kingdoms was phenomenal. And house of dragon out of all of them is the one I like the least. Because it's a lot of just gloom and doom. All the characters are pricks. They're all bunch of fucking wacky tugging. Yeah, there's no one to like. Exactly. Don't know. But this one, the third season is fucking. I watch. Yeah, I do the reactions on my channel. Thanks, Dean. What is the channel? The back Sarah channel. Oh, you do. Oh, it's these contemplate. Oh, that's me. I know. I know. It's like these contemplating. How is this dragon? No, no, no. What is this? You ever seen Mr. Easte Theatre? Yeah, but that was my Mr. Easte Theatre. Yeah. Well, they should have acted their head. You're the former UFC welterweight champion of the world. And you're sitting there with the headphones on. That's great. This is what I think about house of dragons. Yeah. You didn't have to do that. That's two hundred milligrams of edible folklore. What is the 55 milligrams? You know what I'm saying? You know what's in that really love when they were trying to find Targaryens? Because of Targaryens. Oh, yeah. Because of the children. Trying to see who's a Targaryen. So they put people out with the dragons. Yeah, that was burning them on the road. The prior seasons had some good scenes like that. Yeah. But this season, I just watched three of them so far. I'll get in there. Each one of them is it's nothing but fighting now. It's nothing about going at it. Let's go. And it's fucking good. Yeah, it's good. I'm in. I watched the whole season of the whole, all the episodes of Game of Thrones recently. Then you went back and started back. Yeah, we watched it for like four or five months. Watching every one of them. When you watched it like every couple nights a week, like two, three nights a week. When you're watching it, it's like you just like you follow, you don't have to wait like years in between seasons. It's incredible. It's a great, it's epic adventure show in the history of the world. I tell people that all the time. I'm like, you got to watch it. Yeah. You got to do it. I forgot how good it was. And even though it's 10 years old, special effects are perfect. Yeah, for sure. I'm going to say something. I never said in my life. There's a new book I'm reading. What? I'm waiting for me to wait. Wait a minute. Hey guys, it's an autobrid. Oh no, you're doing a graphic novel. Sort of a bitch. No, it's not. It is. And I gotta be honest. I'm listening to the audio book. I can't even say they're reading a book when they really listen to the audio book. But Donald Rawans gave me so much shit about that. He's like, how you reading when you just listen to it. I'm just trying to abbreviate it. Yes, I listened to an audio book. Red and sit down and read it. Rising. Red rising. Have you heard of this? No. Well, you're going to document this episode because sooner or later, someone's going to pick it up. And it's going to become either an Amazon series or a movie. One of my black belts, Jedi Joey Beams, told me about this age. Just a great name. Jedi Joey Beams. Oh, Joey Beams. Oh, Joey Beams. Oh, Joey Beams. What's a savage? But I, Jedi Joey Beams is a fucking great name. Oh, he's great. But he likes all the shit I'm into. So he told me about this. I'm going to write it down. What is it called? Red rising. All right. That's it. And I'll tell you. I don't know how many books they're all, but I'm listening to the first one. And I'm like more than halfway through. And it's what's it about. I'm setting future on Mars. Whoa. Red rising is a 2014, the sole podium. The still podium. The still podium. The sights that you know. You better watch a couple of all these first of all. You better watch a fucking. This is why I got that watch a watch. My son is telling us he's reading my short friend. He's out of it. The first book telling us he's a one minute dystopian comes out. Somebody else read it. A bunch of pricks. It's a great book. It's a great book. And I like getting into something new. How long is the book? That's regular coffee. There's a coffee coffee coffee coffee. You know what? You must know what a little baby. I'll try and figure out what you're going to do with that. I'm down for that. I'm down for that. I'm down for that. Yeah. The red rising, man. That was really good. It's like a game of 300 space. I'm in. Oh, you know what I started watching? Because of you guys that battle start. I'm like, I'm all the only first season. There's like 20 episodes. I'm like 10 in right now. Yeah, that was a sci-fi channel. Bro, that show was so underrated. So underrated. Like to this day, if you go back and watch battle start Galakica, the entire series is fucking incredible. Very good. The new one. Yeah. The one that you're ready to be original. You're a man. Yeah. Here's what I'm going to recommend. You can watch it with your wife or by yourself. Would you want to do porn? What's that? That's why you're saying porn. Well, by yourself. Windows Bay. Windows Bay. What is that? Apple TV comes out with some fucking bangs. Bangers. A silo is another great one. But Windows Bay, it's very rare. It's about an island that's kind of cursed. And a man is trying to get it to become like the next fucking Moth is vineyard, whatever that is. And you know, this is it. Oh, that guy was his beast within. This is great. Bro, that guy's in another great fucking series that also might be Apple. It might be. It's very rare. That's something. I don't like my family's a bunch of ghouls, except for my oldest. They like all the horror shit. I'm not into it. But it's very rare. I like spooky shit. So it's like spooky, but it's fucking funny. The car, oh, it's it's got like a quirky type human to it. And I was fucking dying. I was the beast in me is another one. It was what was it on Netflix? Netflix? It's on Netflix. It's still on Netflix. It's a series. And it's about an author in this fucking psychotic guy that is a rich guy who lives in her neighborhood. I don't want to tell you any more than that. It's a movie. It's clear. I saw that. I saw a pair of danes in that guy in Matthew. You watch that show? I didn't watch it. I didn't watch it. I didn't watch it. Dude, it's a good good. It's a good, clear. Danes can act or ass off. This summer, soccer is here, and the watch parties will be going back to back to back. But don't worry. Uber Eats has your game day essentials covered. All the snacks and groceries to keep your crowd happy, delivered straight to your door like chips, dips, wings, guac, and fresh ingredients for the perfect game day spread. Order in so you can stay locked in on the game. All the hosting none of the hassle. Order in so you can lock in for the games. Only on Uber Eats for a limited time. Terms apply. C-app for details. You never know. She was lying to you. You know, no idea. She's just fucking, you're just no way you're going to tell the lip quiver. Wow. She could lie her ass off. She's fantastic on that. It's got 98% on rotten tomatoes. That's how good it is. Great show. The beast in me. Yeah, there's too much shit to watch. There's so much shit. I just started to pit. And I'm laid on that. So what's the pit? About the ER room in Pittsburgh. Yeah, so he plays a doctor in the ER room. It's really good though. OK. There's so long in two for a while that I just fucking fall. I never heard of it. Just too many shows. Yeah. I did that with land, man. After a while, I'm just like, new season of land, man. I don't give a shit about the slutty wife and the door doesn't know any of that. Yeah. She points to stripper wife well. After a while, I was just like, all right. I go, they get to some interesting shit or like the cartels after them. And then they're, oh, let's take the old. The scene is out to the strip joint and saying, I think we go, well, the wife's being outrageous again. That's why I'm being inspired to do this. I don't know. By ADD, I can't take it. That's fun. Now that was my problem with it too. I thought that the women were like, the characters of women. He was two women. Who's cheering their daughter on? Basically for you, I was kind of like, I have a question. If you guys all seen it, why do they live together? Like the other lawyer, why do they all live with Billy Bob Thornton and his family? That's a plot point. Yeah. Yeah. There's no other reason why they're one of them. Yeah. Because there's only one house on the ranch or something. Oh, because I'm just like, they all have to live in the one house. It's his office and his home bank. Yeah. But it makes it fun, but isn't he making a lot of money? I'm not. What are we doing? I don't know. Because lawyer be making Big Bank. You know? Well, now he's got to be making money because I was running the company spoiler alert. Right. So he's making more money. Yeah. She's making sure they're eating their vegetables. Yeah. But he's making a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit. She made about it. Anything. It just got a little bit of a lily Bob. Billy Bob and I show her so good. He makes the show. He makes the show. He is the show. Taylor said that he wouldn't even made the show if it wasn't for Billy. Really? He went to Billy with the idea is I'm not going to make this if you're not going to be a man. Yeah. He made the show. Oh, and he does. He's great. He's great and everything. You ever see things to do in Denver when you're dead? How you know? You get long ago loves that one. I mean, dude, that's your guy. He's great. I'm like, hey, that movie. You're right. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I got my name. I had a lot of stuff. I haven't seen it in decades. But when I saw it, I loved it. Yeah. But the problem is sometimes you go back and you try to watch one of them with a whole life. I was like, what was I thinking you? You're with me. You suck so fat one. There's a bunch of movies like that. You try to watch them. They're terrible. Yeah. Sometimes it's just better off remembering how good they used to be. Yeah. Well, the impact. You were just a more naive person for the internet. Yeah, true. I watched one of the worst movies that was so fucking good, that it was fun. It was a rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Rowdy, rowdy, rowdy. Yes. He was in the middle of the ground. We saw him last night, Joe. Joey, Joey, Detroit. How comes the frogs down? No, it's a combination of, say, like, Mad Max, like a post-apocalyptic thing and that makes skate from New York where in the future, rowdy, rowdy is the only guy who's not fucking sterile. Everybody else is sterile. So, damn, serve as Chase and them for it. So they have to, like, it starts off when he's in, like, a fucking general. He's in, like, a room because he got caught with the general's daughter and fucking, they put a, they put a, um, a jack strap on him, which explodes. And he has to, oh, no. He has to do a frog. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So, he has, this mission is to go to this frog's town. And there's a heroin there and he's got impregnating it, everybody. Or else they're going to fucking blow him up. Sounds like a horrible job. It is crazy. It's moving. What is that we know? No, no, no. Oh, my God. You can't unso it. So he cut out frogtow, this is amazing. He cut out halfway through things of doing Denver when you're dead. Oh, I'm a buddy. He's in for a frogtow. Yeah, but I agree. This is, you know, what you're getting into. It's not a bunch of people pretending to be cool. You know, it's like this is just silly. How did you even find this and then sit down and watch the whole thing? This is the thing where you know, it's well documented about my S problems. Sometimes I spend a lot of time on the throne and I got my iPad. So I go to prime video and it's almost like when I was little, like I used to go through the channels and I'm like up all night, I'd find something wacky. So I look for weird or different movies and that's one of them and I just, it just put me right in. I watched that whole, I'm in two shits. I watched that all fucking movie. What is it? One, two, three. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy to ship it to hours. You say? I love it. It's crazy to ship it to hours. A little. Well, not the two hours. Yeah, the budget for this movie was double what that movie obsession was that just came out. That's my wife said that movie was great. So the budget was $1.5 million back then. Yeah. movie was double what that movie obsession was that just came out that's me my wife said that movie was great so budget was 1.5 million back then in 1988 wow so is this a small release yeah I have the well who made this movie what was the company that made new world that's a big company maybe they sold it to new world I don't know how it should work was this before after they live well they live was good they live what you're saying maybe they got a daily world rolled it but I bet if you tried to watch get it turned to frog towers released on 93 he was to be a yes before even DVD like no put it on the state listen everybody watching this and cursing me I mean we got to know what you're getting into exactly what it looks to be guys only gave it two out of five stars I'll dare that DVD talks at three but he's he's a hysterical and he's walking I bet if we watch they live right now we wouldn't like it I bet we'd be like oh it's not pretty funny if it was a good was last time you saw it I mean it's one of the movies when you're flipping around if it's all in because him and who's what's the his guys name member they had a base a wrestling match in the fucking alley they were right the black guy for a minute work yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah this this movies from like the 80s there the 90s there it is this movies from the 80s and the 90s that become comedies yeah this is used to be a comedy right this is kind of a comedy this is like a little tongue in cheek but then the stuff like roadhouse right right right right here right for sure you are a house this yes such a bad move yeah yeah it's so bad yeah it's so insanely the bad guys bad right things bad yeah things bad except for Patrick this way he's here it was appropriate at the time but that's he he's everything we were done people were dumb back then you know that's what I think I think we were done advice you know no internet people are stupid it's true yeah we were only exposed to what we were exposed to exactly in your area yeah we thought that's solid yeah you should have seen roadhouse you know what that's good guy you're gonna root for him yeah he's complicated but he's tough required the legs poetry he's just pain don't hurt hey they say they don't hurt the karate scenes are so bad like everything is so it's so fake it's so dumb looking but it's still awesome they've watched Sam Elliott in his backup had an 80 year old backup but dude clearly could barely walk okay oh and guys left and right crap that's it meho he's awesome and everything yeah Sam Elliott's all everything every time you see Sam Elliott in a movie like yes hey the bad guys didn't he tell Patrick what's his name that he's gonna fuck that he used to fuck guys like him in prison yes yes it's a family that's what we played on landman's father right yes yeah yeah he's awesome he's always good always always in everything he's real life Marburg yeah exactly yeah he's right everything yeah that movie was so bad this thing is back then it wasn't yeah everything in the 80s was bad bro TV shows were insane you watch me like what were they doing yeah trying to brainwash America Roger Ebert's review is it this is right on the edge of a good bad movie and merely the bad it's not a good movie well he's right it's not a good movie but viewed in the right frame of mind it's not a boring one either that's the thing Jean Cisco was less complimentary he's calling it outrageous in terms of its cartoon like plotting and dialogue and lamenting swazies mindless posturing a young star has sold himself to become a pin-up boy someone sounds oh jelly come on some sounds a little jelly yeah that sounds a little jelly to make acting it's called the talk it made a me yeah I made a movie and thought it was gonna be better than it was right okay let's move on yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah right let's see it's a cult classic there's day people are still talking about it bro basically every actor it's ever lived it's been in a couple lemons of course that's part of the process that maybe Daniel Dillouis he's probably a little bit more maybe that link one a lot of people didn't watch that Lincoln one that might be the only one I don't know anybody who was like raves about the Lincoln what about the vampire hunter Abraham Lincoln that was crazy who was that I never saw that that was Daniel was something that I know that's a good name of the 80s no they should have been it should have been made in a yeah it's like a comic book did any time like a Marvel comic yeah I didn't see it I would watch it was pretty fine it's really was a good the vampire it was a it was like a comedy thing I might have seen it and forgotten about it yeah I don't even remember I thought I mean you get high enough when you watch the movies they're cool but you don't really remember details all the time so yeah you know what I'm looking forward to that new werewolf movie oh there's got the same guy that didn't know us for auto yeah doing aware what they just released a trailer today what's it called werewolf were yeah werewolf I thought it spelled weird yeah basically werewolf where's it take place I don't know some foreign country you can hear them speaking some strange language you know it's like oh yeah give me some I want to see yeah it looks pretty well Robert Eggers is shit oh Christmas how was the van I thought we were Christmas yeah how was the vampire one fuck yeah it was awesome you think I like it yeah it just I don't know it's good dude it is I think it's the best vampire movie of all time that in the interview would have been yeah yeah yeah not for auto yeah I think not for out of the best vampire movie of all time it's my opinion I think it's the best it's like I've seen a bunch of them Gary olden one was amazing that was a great that's driving you I'm not really sure yeah we don't know right that was a great but man there's something about Eggers nois for auto it's like it's more terrifying than all of them you like it's just something it's more hypnotic like he's got powers over people like it's weird the way he influences people it's like creepy yeah like the way that looks shot like I can see what you're saying like you know how to show me a scene where they're when he's making him sign the contract there's a scene where the dude has to go to his house and he doesn't know spoiler alert like what contract he's signing because he's signing it in an the language that he doesn't know to sell a house to this prince that lives in Romania he goes to business case the creepy is fucking scene ever this is the first scene where you like see him and you you slowly gets revealed like what he is yeah the best vampire movie of all time there's a man I you'll love it I'm gonna watch it so well done watch it you know I sold his detour okay listen to me my life the language is of my four father or something I'm a maiden token I see you're gonna bride I'm just so yes he wants a look at the bride well he wants this guy's wife this is this whole contract this is what this whole thing is about of him going to this guy's town and buying a house there from him like this it really just wants this guy's wife he's like eternally connected to her oh it's creepy is fuck dude oh shit I gotta watch this oh yeah I gotta watch this best vampire movie is it I gotta watch this ever yeah some people disagree that's fine my opinion you ever see lost boys that was good that was fun I don't remember that better if you watch it today you'd be like what yeah you'd be like yeah this is corny shit John Raulo was long hair how stupid leave I was that you know wrong fucking way those boys are on ratio for it now lost boys the Broadway show oh my god dude that's a little stressful boo Broadway I see a spider man I still have a spider man I saw a rocky two things I love it's like go to see a spider man movie with the worst special effects ever also there's a guy swinging and it be like oh I go dude really break show me the moment basically ball burn it not basically barcy barber who was the Mason barbers a fighter what's the right girl that used to see Macy Gray Macy Gray yeah yeah I wasn't seeing I was this right rocky play it was fucking horrendous to this did they box they pull a ring out and they're yeah it's fucking awful wow it's like those like it's like the movie is but just what you're picturing oh no I've never seen anything I liked on that moment this this is it oh oh theater people you're so silly dude I can't stand you guys socks you can't box the beloved Oscar winning story I just I mean I assumed Stallone did this I don't know I mean he's got a own it cover story I'm not into place I saw dog day afternoon with John Bernthaw on Broadway oh really yeah how was that I wasn't bad though like he was he was really good in he's really good in yeah I like that shit did you did you ever get into the Punisher yeah I see the yeah one last kill yeah watch that was good it's a one-off yes it's it's like an hour long it's not a movie it's not a it's like it's like a special you take that was good yeah like that was really good he's in him in the dead that was good yeah he was good he was first season was okay second season wasn't good but that special was good if you have to watch one thing it's like 45 minutes doing an hour yeah I did a watch along on the Matt Sarah channel I did John Bernthaw yeah walking daddy was amazing yeah he was played such a good creepy friend yeah what do you like when I get back to life yeah yeah yeah I just said that was crazy I met him a few times in real life he's you know he can scrap a little bit yeah he's very nice guy yeah he was on the podcast George talking to him first smart yeah interesting dude went to school in Russia yeah yeah that's I mean that's a weird place to I know I learned acting yeah and just so you know on the world on the topic the Punishes can it be in spite man brand new day that's coming out yeah the new Spider-Man movie though those they just keep swapping out Spider-Man yeah this this Tom Holland he's back in it again he's yet to do a bad spider-man thing he's good there's no job security and being Spider-Man no they got another dude waiting in the wings or there is job security they just were told me to go out back if the 20 is yeah they just not a big gig the multi-versing but the thing is about Spider-Man is supposed to be like college kid yeah yeah unfortunately this guy looks like a little kid Tom Holland yeah it's the origin story as he starts out as a liquor I might be a high school yeah yeah and then his uncle Ben gets killed and he doesn't say he doesn't stop the guy you know what else was fun was the Spider-Man no walk yeah yeah that was awesome yeah that was pretty good Alex dope I thought it was good and you can watch it in color or black and white to give you the option yeah Nicholas Cage is a fascinating dude but he's been around forever he's the good Nicholas Cage in this yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah for sure well I think if there after that Pascal movie he did what's his name was in the title it's like I don't know being Nicholas Cage right that movie brought him back it was like called fiction for Travolta like take them back off again what is that movie it was a great where that Pat Pager Pascal's like a drug teller who's a big fan of Nicholas Cage and he winds up like hiring him to come to his house to do something and then he gets cages him up in the cartel business the unbearable weight of massive talent that's what it's called is that is that the name of yeah yeah there it is see being Nick fucking cake so that's a great be plus that's not bad it was good it was good yeah I watched part of it I never got through the whole thing that's just busy but it looks hilarious yeah it's pretty much hilarious you know you're like an actor and you get these gigs like because people do things like that they'll like show up of people's houses and parties like someone wants to pay you a million dollars to go to Dubai you know like okay something they fly to Dubai then they have dinner with people and hang out with them and people just cut them a check damn yeah we're gonna get that you know weird yeah it's uh there's there's you know so like Nicholas Cage like that probably would happen where the cartel guy was like that guy he's my favorite like remember when I mean Sean Penn met El Chapo right hanging with El Chapo and did an article for Rolling Stone magazine where he talked about meeting El Chapo in Mexico no shit yeah yeah just remember no do you remember when Connor was wearing the El Chapo shirt yeah pictures yeah yeah those were the pictures that he did with Sean Penn no shit yes that's the shirt that's what Connor what Connor's doing that it's a these days mock that's hilarious mind speaking of Connor how well does he do next week boy we're gonna find out we're really gonna find out what's going on if he gets into the second and third rounds that's one really gonna find out we'll know me at that point but I mean whether or not he can really fight for five rounds like I don't know if he can man with a great gas tank yeah after five years of tearing your body up yeah it's not you don't know right because it's all in a vacuum like there's some training footage of him beating guys up that you've seen but who knows what he actually has been doing we know he's been partying but has he also been like really training because if he's been really training and it shocks everybody because he still got it skills yeah I mean my god if he if he somehow or another sparks out Max and look the first round do you do know how big he does oh he's right back right back I mean right back he'll adjust and gauge he's a big swiping instrument in the universe yeah they go for the BMF title at one seven right like I don't want to cut anyway my only concern is his size like Max struggled with bigger dudes like Dustin the first time then Max came back bigger which we know because when he went back down and struggled with her law ski you know I mean went five rounds with Justin so like I'm just waiting to see does his Connor able to put that fucking weight on him and have a problem is he a big a dude though they both fought at the same weight class did it just start a 45 you know point time when Max was fighting at 145 when he was a champion he was walking around like 176 he's a bigger guy I mean I love Max so like I it's he looks a man Connor follow I follow Max on YouTube he's got a great channel so recording all of his training and all stuff he's doing and you know you see him he looks good he looks big Dustin Poryy thinks Max might be bigger really yeah I mean he's kind of thin but he's got a bigger frame he thinks he's gonna be bigger like I mean he came to my gym a couple times and he's like my height I think he made a big mistake going back to 45 after he did yeah I agree I think it's too hard I just I think it's just too hard on the body and especially when he got he beat who's a thick 55 when he fought Justin he looked good yeah he looks solid at that weight I think him fighting at that weight he could actually fight I think going down to 45 I think he's I think he's fighting it looked to me like he was in like he was compromised like I think the weight cut was just yeah it was too much did you think the Justin fight and Max is different if he doesn't get caught with that kick early in the face one you know I'm saying I would like to see that fight without Justin compromise right but I mean that's what people think about it's like that yeah that was the intention right could have been a case right it shattered the bones of his nose yeah so that for sure I mean but then you know you think you see the way Max looked at 145 when he fought Ilia but then you got also factoring also he's fighting Ilia and Ilia so fucking good like you look bad like there's a lot of guys who don't look he glaze combinations on people and a lot of guys look bad doesn't mean they're bad I'd like to see Max and Justin again if Max pulls it off but then again like what are you gonna do for Ilia like if Ilia wants a rematch like I don't believe so I think you give him Patty if Patty wins that's what I think that's what his next fight should be I think make it be back up I think Patty wins who's he's he's he's you think Patty beats Ilia no I think he beats Saint Denis to get to Ilia I think his he gets hit way too much to beat Ilia where Ilia sharp he's so sharp I rewatch that fight yeah I like Patty in this one Saint Denis is a beast I just think his Patty strike is a little better in his Jiu Jitsu's better I think the only place Saint Denis has the advantages into the wrestling just my opinion I don't know man Sunday knee switch camps and then made that big adjustment after he lost to who'd lost to my conno yeah I think my conno fight he's looked a lot of that how do you put someone is back at all like I don't does Saint Denis train off his back because it didn't look like it in that boy Connor match Patty and Ilia would be you tell you because they have that's right they got a fight yeah that'll be a man that's like you make that shit in London I think that's that's the right comeback fight Ilia and also do that you're winning you go like I'm going oh my god not I want to get caught in a riot you know for anything they were sure for me lock you up for your social media when you get over there they would too they were shit on a Patty when he lost to Justin and you know he got compromised also that first round I believe he got poked in the eye or what else what in case he went five would him he went five with him and you know and got battered and stood up to great shots and he's gonna come out of that fight better he'll know okay there's more work to be done there's holes I have my game this place is where I got caught and he has improved over his like when he first got there I didn't really think much of him but each time out he's I think he gets a little better so yeah do for sure it's just Justin's in yeah just the savage dude he's my favorite fighter at you know been for a minute yeah no doubt because he just always in white house and saying and especially after you see that second round when I rewatched it again when Ilia was putting on him in that second round I know all those liver punch on like how does he come back from this if he was the one too so beautiful though too like the way he delivers those shots just calling you know else doesn't like that Aaron Pico yeah great body work yeah got the show his name to the greatest great yeah Pico yeah yeah that was one of those guys I was fighting Pitbull who's like you know a real legend but he the way he mixed it together the strike and the wrestling was really good he just got crazy in his debut and he just got a little just too hyped up a little too aggressive against a guy who's way too skilled yeah you know he's a hunter yeah you know he's a guy love that he's so aggressive but that was a great comeback fight you know yeah it was because it shows that that he's still in there you know you get worried when they when you see people get their lights put out like that you know I think it'd be the same and then when you seem come back in a fight like that being so intelligent yeah that's a good sign but he has to make sure his defense is always good because his chin is still suspect regardless of how good his skill is he still don't had a chin he's been knocked out a bunch of times you know I mean after a certain amount of times it's easier to get knocked out and you've got to know he's been knocked out and training always believe part of your chin is believe and you can't be knocked out and then when it happens to you that first time instead of when you get your bell wrong you bite that on your mouthpiece now you're like oh shit not again like I think mentally it's a it's different you know there's something to that probably but then there's also like oh well if you get a little bit on the fun you know like certain shit that violates it doesn't matter nobody twice you read bro fact I said our proposal we'll kick you yeah I remember that one that was in Brazil and as it was a Terry Adam yeah he had a good one too that's one of those where you go I don't think that guy's ever gonna be the same I don't think he was the same after that no I thought it right then and there I think that was too hard yeah I was too hard that's a different shot you've seen it where guys they get one and then they're still in there then you see them get a couple and then next to you know their chin is gone it's just it's not it and listen Chuck Liddell's mentally strong you know I don't think he's doing like I wonder if this is gonna you know that's just his body is body's trying to protect them yeah it's body's saying enough of this and it's also the apparently it's the lining inside your brain all that fascia tears over time and repeated head traumas and just there's a lot of swashing around so when you get dinged your your brain is literally going without shock absorbers bouncing off the inside of your skull that might not be the technical way that I'm in. Hey man listen all those high chokes I was like a little armadillo I was covering that little motherfucker and I saw him run into a back fist that was okay right but it's so funny how everything just evolves when I got stopped with the first I was the first guy everybody gets stopped with a back fist and when I did the people like yo this guy must suck nobody get stopped with that shit now you see it on every car you get stopped with back this to we used to have these conversations like Eddie Bravo and I at the beginning of the UFC about stuff that works that's not in there yet like what about this what about that and you know the big one that I missed on what's that front kick to the face before Anderson Silva front kick V toward the face I'm like that shit doesn't work nobody does nobody does that yeah no we've got it yeah it's too hard to land yeah then it's I don't have no why I thought that you really thought that for a little bit because I was like it's not worth it yeah I was like that move it's so powerful to the body I was like that's really where you should use it because you could land it's a big target you could really fuck a guy up you get your most power the front kick going straight and also to the face it's like too hard to hit I'm like I thought that's what you do yeah yeah I'm a cheat and Randy I think it was like V tour first yeah or are Anderson V tour first I think that was the first one we saw a real spectacular front kick knock out to the face but then it was Machida and Randy and then a bunch of people start doing it and then front kicks the face became but yeah thank you thanks and say cigar for that Michael Shingle she told me yeah that might be worse yeah yeah or Cheetah Rivera Frankie Edgar oh yeah oh no thought that for Frank front kicks the face or brutal I just didn't see that coming I really because in barch large tournaments most people were thrown into the body and not thrown them to the face even in kickboxing not a whole lot of guys are thrown them to the face you know the with Michael Chandler I remember talking to me said he didn't even practice that he just says he just saw the opening and just threw to kick that's well yeah that's so crazy I think too once a successful technique gets out there and people see it honey that all of a sudden hey I can fucking do that yeah 100 percent he had a rough outing the last one Mike yeah that's a time man it was a bad match up that's that's day and say it Mike it's time for you to retire Mike is 40 who fee is in his prime and he might be the scariest striker once I'm using the set by the way giant for 50 I know like ranging yeah good movement he's fucking good but we hit him with like three wheel kicks yeah yeah he was just I'm it was target practice it's crazy how good he is and you talk about that Taekwondo movement he has that exactly well what boxing hands yeah so it's crazy yeah you know I mean got a tighten up the wrestling that you just do and that's why I lost a Ben wasa and Danny yeah that was a good learning experience yeah when you see guys that good fucking everybody up you know the way put out King who she is well that was real bad he does it like a video game and and and I thought that was going to be the same as he yeah I was going to be at the same by the way the physique knock out apparently he was like sick as a dog before the fight was they were talking about pulling out of the fight no sure any just took the fight anyway had one of the best performances of his career but that guy's he's elite and training with Volcanowski I know only going to make him better perfect for sure what better guy like wrestling strong like animal featherweight there was like the king for so many years won the crown again yeah yeah stick around with that guy he'll show you how to get up he'll show you how to not get taken down and Volcanowski you know he don't have much left in them right so he's got a coach yeah he's gonna want to like pass it on yeah you got the perfect guy to pass it he's got a great fight IQ yeah very well rounded to Volcanowski yeah I think he's one of my favorite yeah he's really grew on me I didn't like him because of Max you know I was always rooting for Max but uh you know he's earned my respect that guy's just he's he's good he's good everywhere too he really is the dude I got my eyes on the most his Carlos Prottas I got my eye on my mind I got my eye on my mind that Jack Dell amount of Leno and K.O. was crazy Jack Jack is so fucking good and he's so tough he's so tough and you watch Carlos just T.O. fun him he really did a part like target practice for him against such a high level who's having fun I know that's the worst part do Morales is a savage too still no but that fight but save that fight Morales versus Prottas save that fight wait till it's ready not yet it's like don't pull the brisket out of the smoker just yet no I was telling Matt I saw some grappling uh like footage of Morales and I mean he's looked pretty fuck like he has a wrestling background and if there's a way he's gonna get it protest it's gonna probably be a combination of those things because Prottas just wants to stand yeah of course yeah and he's he's he's built like a bit like if you had an engineer like a long- back you might get out pointed but he's he's calm in bad positions and he's always fucking dangerous that was the last you think in movies a chain smoker or something that he's he smokes the good yeah the fifth round man he had he had Ian in trouble yeah he's good dude and he's really hit so fucking hard when he caled Leon I was like no Leon's good he's a good striker to kill Leon like that clean was crazy they got a crazy rumor what was the fight nerds they yeah and who if he was there yeah he trains with them and he trains with other people as well like Prottas moves around um but he you know he had a giant and my uh boy tie record rather and shit yeah like how many boy tie fights that Carlos Prottas have like world class like you have watched a bunch of his just pure moy tie fights and the comfort level that he has in their exchanging and moving and knowing where he's supposed to be enough to be that like sensitivity that he has to like striking exchanges because world class moy tie is such an advantage yeah I would favor him if he fought Ian Gary again perhaps yeah I would really yeah he knows he has to like try to get it on him yeah can't point fight him do you think that Islam's gonna just have his way or do you think Ian Gary has a shot there he definitely has a shot I mean he in he said he had 29 kit moy tie wins uh five losses so 34 moy tie fights and like high level man you watch him fight you know like okay this guy he can fucking he he knows where to be where not to be and he knows how to like peace people up man it's like when you have that high level we've seen it so many times with these guys like world champ like Alex see these world champion kickboxers they're entered to MMA like nobody has a chance standing with them it's like it's too scary yeah and that's what you've seen with Carlos it's like fuck man like what he did to JDM I was like holy shit I mean he he was having fun he was just planning on the time I was like what beating the shit out of the former world champion having a good time just smashing them had him screaming from calf kids yeah yeah whereas he went to his corner Shit out of the former world champion having a good time just smashing. How do I scream in from calfkin? Yeah, yeah Where's he got went to his corner and they're like no ah fucking scream Not screaming. Yeah, so you can just get kicked You know, let me straight dude is his nose is on the left side of his face and you talk the same that guy Toping up That's a fact that was one of those I was had him when he was getting him up against the cage I was fucking flinch it. I'm like here it it's coming because you just you know It's coming do you just don't know where it's coming from and those knees to the body are so nasty Protas is so nasty. He's so good man He's getting better too, and he's now we start to do this shit. Yeah He's feeling it. He feels like he's the best guy. Yeah, I feel like he's the scariest guy in that division I think so. He's the scariest, but it doesn't mean he's gonna be the best right the bottom line about Islam is no one's able to get away from him He gets a hold you he's very good standing up now And he gets a hold you you're a foxville he has a different kind of wrestling different kind of grab Well, if he and can't keep him off on monolceey beats him on a ground his submissions are fucking insane too He's he's just got a vice grip man. I know everybody that he rolls with or everybody that he fights rather They also I've never been grabbed like that never been never felt anybody that strong who's that Islam Islam Yeah, I don't know if it's the same at 70, but he's so big. I can't imagine it's not It's not like he's a little seven. Yeah, it's like cuz he's he's talk Good frame on him. I think he's gonna be better at 70 It's not gonna be depleted because when I would stand next to him in the octagon when he was the 55 pound champion I'd be like how yeah Way 55 that doesn't even make any sense you're 190 pounds right now. Yeah, guaranteed if I put you on a scale You weigh 190 I think it's so big. I think Ian's gonna make it come competitive early You know like cuz he's got good footwork. He moves side to side really good He's long but if he gets taken down twice and then it becomes a habit of him getting taken down He won't get back up He won't but the thing is if Ian Gary can get off sharp combinations early he could stun him. Yeah, yeah Because Ian can move his fastest Fast as fuck fast as fuck and he's super accurate and the way he throws his strikes is like real clean Yeah, no fatness move. Yeah, everything's like that. Yeah, he doesn't have a response of yeah He's not like a physically overpowering guy. It's technique. Can you technique it sharp? Yeah Did you see his interaction that time with comes out? Yeah, what are your thoughts on that? There was a little too much of a pat on the back. That's what the fuck I'm talking about That wasn't wrong and I like Ian. I don't know about them But there's like a pat on the back with it kind of have to be honest. Yeah He went up to him You try to check him what you know you got you're like coming up. Oh, you feel strong and there's a weird thing You hit me a little too hard on the back. Yeah, you know there's what there's a hug and then there's a slap slap Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, there's a slap slap that took a little Right, rest on your male dominance. Yeah, you know You don't like me are you hitting me you feel like it feels like you're hitting me a little bit Yeah, it's like if you were if you hit a woman in the face like that you go to jail You hit me in the back. Yeah, if you like hey, where's my focus spaghetti and you double the slap Right now I don't even like from so many right hands if you see this little Oh, geez this thing right here. That's bumping out. Yeah, I don't like yeah I fucked it up on show and he said but I don't like when guys try to when they first meet somebody And they try to squeeze do out because I want to smack him right there because it's on my cuz I feel pain with that shit Now he's talking about the harm that's now that's chav kat that's half car. How dare you Know it was Jamie wasn't at a fight it was like I honestly felt bad for homzot trying to make 185 From all that I heard before the Strickland fight like he almost died to make 185 Yeah, when he made 185 when he fought Strickland really yeah He was apparently thinking that he was gonna go up to light heavyweight Oh, and they were even talking about him fighting eerie Okay, so he was preparing like he was going up to light heavyweight and if you watch out He's another guy who's got a great YouTube channel. He details all his training He was hanging out with that Calavita guy doing a lot of the right of the card. He owns strength. It's here. It is like he gave him Yeah, and I forward that though I think it was like good job tonight good job and I think he slapped him on the back before that There was or maybe it was after I don't know what it was, but it was enough so like he's fine now like they seem cool Oh, no, no, I was talking a little shit right here. He gets pissed and pushes him He's a champion don't worry so yeah Well, you know, I'm just a little squeeze on the shoulder Yeah, that was modest as a Chechnya is not America Right, okay, it does it come from Chechnya That is a war-torn country and those motherfuckers don't play The guy who runs it the guy who runs it is it's homes out told me yep, which is like okay So much show he let some tap him out. Yeah It goes but that's how it goes You know you gotta do what you gotta do but I like the fight I think Ian has a real chance. I do too I think early he does, but if he gets if he is taking down repeatedly So he gets taken down he might just get smushed. He might. She's get choked and smushed and choked I don't know. Let me struggle with shove cuddle in the ground He did but again, that's a couple of years ago. It's not like he's not getting better. I mean that dude. Yeah He's smart like he knows that he knows how to get himself prepared I think he's got his edges on the you know on the feet obviously, so I think that's where he if he's gonna win That's where he's I don't know why so don't like him. I love him. He also is awesome He also almost finished Shavka with a really good show Doesn't really did he did have to go back. Yeah, yeah, it's back. Oh, I forgot about that I forgot about that. I mean he that was the closest anybody came to finishing he also fucked up Shavka's knee Yeah, he hit him with that oblique kick to the knee and that's the reason why Shavka had to get surgery really and he's had two surgery Sense yeah, like Ian even made a post about it. Yeah So rude So rude this is why you had to get surgery. He's like I think he had made a post I saw a post that maybe somebody attributed to Ian But it was he it was his work I mean look it's a legal technique and he's really good at it. No way he throws it that oblique way sideways to the knee That's fucking devastating and he's long enough to do you just kind of yeah, yeah for sure John Jones style But he's like with his the way he can move in with combinations It's very hard to deal with but even he had a fucking grab MVP's like I know right here How that's what I'm talking about where you can't hear them. Yeah, you're like what am I doing here? Well, so yeah, but that's why like Ian like in terms like think about that like he's able to solve them problems Mm-hmm like he says IQ is so high He's beating guys like MVP Like you guys and other people and Carlos practice. Uh-huh guys that other people can't beat very true very true Look at that. There it is right there. That's it right there, man He back it up against we hit it. Oh my god, dude. Damn. That's a fuck look how bad that is Right there That's a wing chunk Don't wait Real it's real wing chunk works proof Oh Gary's no joke, man. He's fucking dangerous and that style of being that tall is so hard to deal with Matt my short brother. You know what I'm talking about Let me tell you especially little trolls like us. You know, we try to latch onto my head It's just so hard to even spar with tall guys because they can hit you from six inches further away Then you can hit them. That's a lot of space. Yeah, you got to come in behind that double triple jab I love the fact that you you can do anything and you should be able to kick to the knees I hate the fact that it blew his knee out. We really haven't seen him the same sense We mean it's been Two surgeries I think you had one fight after that right One more fight. He's had a he's had a what didn't you have a big car accident or something like that? Yeah Shovecott Yeah, I thought so. I don't know. Maybe I hope not or maybe it was just his family Maybe I don't know. I hope he's okay. I just missed the guy in the octagon. He's fucking good, man Chovecott was good. It's just like one technique can change your whole thought. He was coming back like trying to rehab from whatever From the accident like it. Oh, so yeah, I thought that I mean lucky Obviously first it hurt is like for sure for sure for a shot ACL surgery before that So he might have made you that's maybe that's what happened. Maybe he redid it. Fuck do that sucks He's so good But then again, it's like this fucking sport waits for no one these dudes are coming up Coming up you know what I'm bomb the guy canceled this weekend is Ethan Ewing oh It was a short notice fight for a maker at Madison Square Garden Yeah, and well make a and well like he's having a heart Well, make us having a hard time lately He lost his last one too, and he's a better fight in the net So he's a young kid so we'll see the best from him yet But well, he can't also spectacular. Well, make it dead. He looks so good in his debut And he looks like he's you know, and on the contender series. It looks like he's he's really good But fucking Ethan. Yes, he's really good. He's really good And he's another guy like we're talking about like these this new breed of guys like the sandhankings Yes, constantly switching stances constantly giving you different angles and directions It's like very hard to pattern that he's he on the countercard too, right? He was on oh, Sanne. He's and hey, he's fighting about tista. Yeah But he was Ethan was on the card, and I think they pulled him off Yeah, he was the dude. He's fighting was undefeated. What's there? It is bosh rod. Yeah, fuck and bosh rods good A really good high tall range he like that would have been interested Yeah, plus the the card. He's injured. He'll be back I like the fact that he's not fighting injured too because this is a pretty significant injury and so when these guys They say fuck it. I'll just do it and then you have one loss and then that loss leads you know your career can go down a weird Road pretty good. It's a very good card. It's a good. Ben wine, Sanne and Patty Pimblitt, right? That's right And then go to Max on this one too, right? Yeah It was going around the new weather for Josh Hoke it. I was like, please don't make that be true Yeah But he's a minus 2,500 Robert Whitaker and Nikita Krylov is good to man Robert is going from one 70 to 85 to now light heavyweight in that crazy He's not that big No, he's he's like six or not even no no How does Robert six feet tall yeah six so he's I mean he's a thick fella. Yeah Definitely got to be walking around at like two 30 or something like that But these guys are so tall and so rangey and that fucking Nikita Krylov guy can kick He's legit two or five Cody still is light up here in that fight before he got caught remember Yeah, he was light area. I'm sure. Yeah Cody, I don't I think it's time to Cody. You're right Adrian. Yeah, man He went through a bad streak too, but that dudes very skillful very good boxer Yeah, he looked good in his last one. Yeah, what's good? He doing too. What is this thing on his eye? See angry daddy's good-looking Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, got to doctor it up the kids these days. They like face tattoos He's at young as 450 Favorite saying like minus 450 Cody's chin, man. He's just yeah too many times Too many times what's a age thing to I mean Cody's not actually that old I think he's only like 33 How old is Cody Garbrad 33 now he's got to be ordered in that don't think he's old No, I don't think he's old. I think he started his career 34. Oh my god. Yeah, see I think he started his career really young dude Fucking a guy now. Oh July 7 next week max start he was what 19 sky still bright Yeah, well, you know when I interviewed them for the UFC at the White House, which is the most ridiculous thing in the world I'm sitting there in this ball. It's like beautiful Adorned room like gold on the ceiling and shit like that and on a chair with a camera in front of me And then there's a monitor here that's Connor as a monitor there. That's max and they're arguing with each other You won't lay a glove on me You It was it was crazy to see the two of them going back and forth. It's fun seeing Connor come back man. I know he's She cracked me up man. He was cracking me up. I can't wait to wait this gonna be amazing. Yeah Look, I hope he looks great. I hope it's a good fight But you know it's a tall order to take on max hallway after he was just the BMF champion he beat Dustin poor yay Yeah, he lost to Ilia, but like you look at the wins that that guy's had in his career and how he's looked since their first fight is a Totally different human being. Yeah. This is a world champion like one of the all-time featherweight greats I Think if Connor don't knock him out early, he's in for a long night. Yeah, Max can fight with no weight cut No, I could have man like this never get tired people are saying oh yeah, but what about moving up? We're like this great friend. He don't have to cut no weight for him. It's great for both of them Listen, this is the future. I would hope I would hope guys would abandon weight cutting I really do and I think the UFC should accommodate it by Letting go of these ridiculous weight limits. Let's just find out what guys weigh Yeah, let's find out what guys weigh and let like have them fight But have one fight right one. There's one still do that. I mean that was the way to go Like wait where did you get any of the year and then like this is where you're gonna fight if I would run things like one because they also allow steroids Allegedly, I might just man. I don't want to get slander. I don't want to get sued I don't think well, do they have they I think they have drug tests at one. I think it's like no I want them to take peptides. I want them to take everything they have I want to give them a hyperbaric chamber like let's go Yeah, and then just release them. Yeah release the hounds. I want the best fighting that's humanly available You're fucking pride days. Yeah, that's exactly this. I want the enhanced games MMA bounce With Connor and Max one guy even in his prime con is always showed signs shown signs that You know his endurance was never the best. Yep. We just printer and Max is Man, he's the guy in the last round 30's winning a fight Max 30 seconds point that he is fresh Is as good as this first Max's discipline is beyond compare like that motherfucker trains hard I mean you might train just as hard, but very hard Think they're in harder the craziest one was when he put it on Calvin Cater and he was They're so crazy he's watching that cage side and I him looking away talking and Hit them was just something bro. How about Brian or Tega when he was fighting them showing him how to keep his Grab some grab this hand and puts it by his head into no do like this You can block it and then pop some of the jab again Bro, Max always a bad motherfucker dude. Oh, Hunter. And you know I think it's gonna be interesting to see look Connor in his prime was elite Connor Eddie Alvarez of his that corner right now fighting Max. I'd be like holy shit. Yeah, that's a dude That's different but can he regain that form right we don't know. I mean he's a special dude He'll get it's just pop talk it shit to him Your met Dana was Dana was losing his mind over there There's also coven so you could kind of hear him right yeah 100% cuz it's not oh look at that look at that right here He wanted to look at that with slipping shit. I'm the best boxer in the UFC Look at this bro. He's such a bad motherfucker man And if he starts talking to Connor like that in the middle of fight and teeing off on him if Connor gets tired It could get rough look at his last fight with Dustin. Yeah, the difference is Connor. I don't give a fuck if he's 39 I don't care old he is that dude's got the touch He's got the touch of death and he's very accurate And he's accurate and he's fast as fuck and when he's sprinting when he's sprinting He moves quicker than anybody. Yeah, it's like you can't do that for five rounds But if he does it and cracks you you're in you're on Foxville. Look what he did to Aldo Who fucks ever done that all though? That's the touch Do you think there's any chance to Connor wrestles him? I think Connor might try to wrestle him to it Nate said Oh, he doesn't want to turn it over there. Maybe maybe looking at that and then maybe See in the desk. I don't see that. Well thing Max has got it put it on him a little bit Then he'll shoot cuz he's not in it for work. That's gonna get him even more tired He did in his first fight he wrestles he's not in it for war, but he can surprise us man Yeah, like you know the humiliation of losing that second fight to dust him with a broken leg and sitting there and having to go out for all Though who knows how he responded to that obviously he did a lot of parting We don't know what kind of training, you know and if he really is still the Connor McGregor That had something to prove when he entered into the UFC and he can get himself into that mindset and get through a camp with that mindset Who knows man? I mean he definitely look focus as fuck when I was talking to him in the interview It doesn't really mean anything until you actually see him move around Yeah, but if he really prepared himself correctly who wants to make a stand lane show that he could still do it It's my kid wild, but if that's the strategy Fuck man if he's worried about his endurance already if that's a question if that's the strategy He's not really seeing that it's not like he's gonna take him down and just smoke him Max's got he has a ground Max's look what he's got in so much with Charles Olivera Yeah, it looks like he's like you did. Yeah, right. I would like to talk to Kavanaugh and see what was the plan like How did you guys do how long was the camp like how did it start? Well, as he's doing before the camp. Yes So I had talked to Laura Sanco who interviewed Kavanaugh Okay, and she said that he wouldn't say it But he kind of alluded to that wrestling might be a part of the game plan. Well, that might be a ruse Yeah, that might be the lure because the way that Charles handled Max in the last fight was crazy But also that's Charles Like that no Charles is a fucking monster Charles. He's so good on the ground man. Oh Max had this advice some shit that other people would have tapped and it lives he cares was crazy Islam smushed him Right there's a no reason levels to this board Crilly Islam smushed him. I know he got him made him a bad made of a mush He was tapping like immediately. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I get out of this. Yeah. I'm going night night That's how good he is. I mean his his squeat when he got drew Dober in half-guard. Oh I know I'm trying to go from half-guard. I just didn't know Yes, it's just much. Yeah, pressure just pressures fucking phenomenal incredible squeeze like he just cuts off the blood like you There's nothing you could do about it that forearm grip dars that he uses do you fuck with that? I don't mess with that, but I know how powerful it is. Do you fuck with him at? No, that was never my thing Yeah, the con is and the darses because we're short-armed little Probably with these things They're great for some things but not for Because like all you have to do is grip here Yeah, I never tried it though But I did used to like the Japanese necktie for the same reason because the Japanese necktie when you're funneling under For when you go for that under hook on the left arm and you get it behind the head you cinch down like this and then Instead of trying to go all the way through and cinch it up as a dars You you take it from this position with this lever on the back of the neck and you tuck the neck into your chest Okay, and then you grab a leg and you grab a leg and you do this Yeah, lean on this shoulder so you once you cinch it up as soon as you get this forearm behind the neck the first thing to do is you put your left shoulder The mat so your left shoulder you drop down the mat and usually they they think they're gonna spin out of it But you're trapping the head in a jess shoulder to the floor right This is a video of me see we get there's a video of me showing it to TJ Dilla Shaw We're at the on it headquarters and I'm showing it. I'm doing it. It's great for short-armed You're on his back. You're saying no you're on the dars position, right? So he's got the under hook you funnel under you get it behind the head once you get it behind the head you use this lever You pin that down on the neck and the first thing I want to do is put my left shoulder over on the top So here it is so here it is so once you get to this position and you clamp I want to put my shoulder down and then his head is trapped Is that in that crate? 100% it's horrible you hippin in yes and you usually grab a hold of a leg You can just step by words right there Jamie back it up to where I'm showing it to him and then I talk through it back it up a little bit Yeah, there it is give me some volume So you're hooking it like even before you fall down to immediately It's not fall down for exactly so as soon as I cinch my hands together I'm hooking the leg. Yeah, I want to tie them up. Yeah, I want to tie them up I want to get in a position where he's gonna roll out of it like you will with the dars Right can't roll out now you're exactly exactly is I also because I'm trapping your head in my chest So you're you're just worried about me getting this but I'm not even trying to get that. Yeah, I'm just getting this Vymer here That's a Get it see people like when they put their legs in there. That's what he was just saying. That's why it's like it's really good That cranks at neck bed Danny can steal. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah You very rarely see this in the UFC and it's available too because also the gloves They get in the way of certain chokes like definitely rear naked chokes It's so hard to get the hand in the proper position with the back of the hand on the head does it matter which leg you step over Like you want it over the first you step over the far leg when you feel like it's better You get better control but it doesn't matter as long as you could tie them up and trap his head inside your chest So once the heads in the chest you're in a terrible position to defend because it puts your head of this nasty angle Like the moment your head gets to that angle so TJ show it like one of the ways that he does it About his grip is different from you Trying to different I like my grip better what's on my grip. It's any problems grip But I like the grip better because you got the lever So the thing is about having it go through this lever when you get this forearm in the back of the neck That's a lot of power. Yeah, there's a lot of power that way So if you see how I'm doing I'm doing it like a little bit And when yours too you're all on his one his head neck TJ is Craterly so he did it that way now like in that that time now he's doing it the right way That's that's nasty and then once it gets in the chest yep trap the leg You can trap either leg It's the whole thing is just trapping the head you just want to make sure you have contact with his body So his left legs or his legs rather can't spin out you don't want him spinning out because then his head's gonna get free It's nasty, but it's just I don't see it in MMA And I don't know why because it's available when guys are trying to get the dars and they can't get it Like there's a lot of times the legs are tangled up and it's it's horrible because you have this lever You know when could be tap corner and everybody's like oh you didn't even there wasn't even in Was doing that same ship, but he was doing it across the neck on the back Horrible, it's great your neck man, and that's what that feels like but that's even worse because it's sideways And you got your body one yeah, but the the worst that I've never seen that UFC is the executioner I don't think I've ever seen anybody get that rear that that you know You're in the back mount and you reach over you go get yes Yes Well, that was the the Scottish Scottish swister Scottish Yeah, it's got a swisters a little different. It's still nasty as fuck. That's the leaning back Yes, it's horrible and you're not gonna text the spine But my man could be fast enough yeah the executioners the worst yeah because you've got rear naked hooks You got the head back this way. You're going like that. Oh nuts. That's nuts. Yeah Now that's a catch wrestling thing right? Oh That I don't know man that sort of started popping up at 10th planet at least like in the 2000s like 2003 or four so Epstein likes to call it the executioner But he wasn't the only guy doing it like other guys had figured it out So you're in north south which a lot of guys, you know That was back in the North. Yeah, this is it right here Bro, this is holy hell when you're in rear naked choke position, but you have the the arm wrapped like that the amount of pressure on the spine is just It's you can paradise my 100% should I to 100% Sure, but he's trying to wave around that look at look how nasty this is like it's such a bad position to try to defend You have no strength to defend it. Yeah. That's a wrap hell. That's a wrap and I don't see it in the UFC I don't understand why I think it's available. I think some guys could get this I mean Not always but there's a lot of times you're trying to fight the rear naked choke or You're trying to get the rear naked turkey the guys defending if you switch to something like this if you could find a way to get into a position Like this you're not gonna defend that Well, the truth is a lot of guys in the UFC or MMA in general don't really practice Jujitsu from that standpoint right they do anti jujitsu because they think that there are chances of winning a fight on their feet are better Right, so their idea is just like defend it take down go back to my feet Yeah, or just use basic jujitsu so like stuff like this. It's available to them They don't know it or they don't practice it enough for it to be instinctive for them to do it The fact that they're just trying to get up to their feet to the first problem, right? Yeah, that's it Because look at Gilbert Burns for a stamie in Maya Not used to jujitsu a little bit and he finds the opening if he doesn't not jujitsu He'll use that but then he has to move a certain way gives no space to get to his feet Gotta get a remember this guy's name the guy who's the Bellator champion is from Ukraine He's fighting the UFC once Amazon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're a slob. I knew that was the name and I didn't want to fuck it up and I was panicking Yeah Yeah, but you know what I really panic weigh in days Like he's gonna forget the name Do you don't bring the paper You pay do I have to not only don't have to listen to these fucking names Of course over and over again fucking so much. Let's come and you know And and it gonna be mad at you if you mess it up He's so good at it. I don't know. He should be doing it. I should be the microphone name. Yeah, I'll introduce the guy I'll just interview people. Yeah, he's the best at naming the names. I do that. I'm on filter I go hey Jimmy who do we have next? It's a fucking crazy name him. I just get the first name down Doris lob is good. He's good. He's good. His ground game is so sweet What is he in fight? Which show you see pull up his last fight Yeah Yeah, it's but you want back it up a little bit so you can see the takedown watch. How he does this look at how beautiful this is bro I mean it comes right into arm triangle look at this And then he goes need to sell to write up just crushing him. Did you see the his setup for a Neil Magni yeah, oh man He's smooth he's smooth. He's smooth. He put it on Neil. Yeah, and then he break down Gotta have something actually look at man. It's pretty good. Yeah that guy can move and That guy's really good. He's dangerous Hold Sean Alvarez. He would be doing the windmill. He has one KO loss. What those Jason Jackson Jackson Jackson Yeah, Jason Jackson not them out. You just put it on him Jason Jackson. Just just murdered him just like random ran across and beat him up. Yeah, I was talking to big John and Josh Thompson on the podcast they brought him up like that He's like the on most unheralded the most under appreciated of the guys that are out there. It's Jason Jackson Yeah That's a problem when you're not new you have seen that is and if the you pick them up I mean, it's gonna be kind of late to dig through the rubble of this house to get it. Holy shit Geez that's nuts man. That's crazy. That's nuts Put your perspective real fast. Holy shit, dude How bad that he want that belt Right I mean, he's doing went back to a war zone to get his belt a better post god Bellator Press imagine with you a seat belt Fucking dudes good man Got a bell to her and press imagine with you a seat belt That's so crazy Fucking dude's good man. There's so many good guys now. It's crazy. It's just a wild time for the sport man Yeah, you know, I like big John You know one thing I don't like that he does. Oh, it always irks me like big John McCarthy I like he won't I want to title he was my guy, but I hate this Man as you fucking savages know when you're in there you're in a certain mindset, right? You got a guy looking to do bodily harm to you. You're looking to fucking take him out anyway possible If there's a foul or something Now you're in this mindset So now you got this big fucking guy Oh, what do you see you see ugly? Making Joe. Oh Yeah, oh, yeah I'm gonna go back to this guy trying to kill me. Bitch. Good one big John You know You take the name out and maybe you could use that on kill Tony Oh Does it oh, god, there's something in me that makes me just be like dude. Is it about you? Good one big John Sometimes you see the guys Oh, yeah, I do fuck that It's the same is the guy looking to give you a high five out there fuck that too So I mean I don't know it always irked me and it just stuck out when you his name came up And I why any he's not a big guy. He's a great guy. I love him, but how about this? Now that you're back roughing making know that Yeah, I could imagine that would fuck with your head, right? It'd be like man make me listen that joke I just got poked in here Well, I think they're getting a little bit better about warning people for fouls, but not better about taking points They did for a little while I knew it was hot there was like yeah, yeah One point and everybody's like yeah, it's crowd cheered. That's how it's got to be folks That's the new rule the new rule should be I poke one point don't poke eyes You do this shit and you jab some of the eyes one point one point. Yeah, no one point right away You know not to do it Sometimes it happens unfortunately if it happens you get a point taken away don't let it happen And you go back to your corner go make sure you don't do that again nut shot one point unintentional non-shot It's a warning like you because you could kick while I'm kicking We're trying to hit me in the nuts, but we just collided legs that happens all the time The rough one is the court the call is the the back of the head when you're trying to put a guy away Because he's moving his way That's hard that's hard that's hard that's hard that's hard and that spot is a lot smaller than what most people think because we Think because we we think about it. They just ate it back in the head So you're assuming that it's like anything that's just the mohawk a little small Everybody's though. Yeah, kind of should be able to hit the back of that if everybody had the old aisaborn head cut You remember when Henso fought was his name? Rikers Spiker It showed if you're allowed to elbow the back of the head the rear mount When Henso was dropping bombs on him and then steps on that's the Put him the sleep What is that? He gave him before he choked him to sleep Ruma the guy was He did what what he thought. Yeah, he was calling his fucking room trying to wake him up like had his people harass and ends He was a dick and that's why I had to read him and he said oh You have not you have eyes like my my girlfriend But they're prettier or some fucking so right away, Henso's one of those guys that he can go from a smile to fucking Baha and seconds and Zero to 100 really quick well, and you know only if you're a dick The nice Come on that shit that position just shows you if you're allowed to do that Yeah, this is before but show before that what we does before it's once it here it is once he gets them back mount watch I mean dude, that's a wrap you can only take Imagine that was in MMA Now here's the thing is that dummy has a gear is that inherently dangerous is it that much more dangerous? I mean what we're doing is already dangerous Right, and it also is very effective So are we removing a very effective technique that would end fights and if so are we doing it to protect the fighter? Because if we are why we are allowing a lot of other stuff why are we allowing flying knees? Why are we allowing sidekicks to the name? Why are we allowing wheelkicks to the head heels to the head? It's not coming to face again. Yeah, hey nice fight That I mean that gives a certain amount of things that we already allowed that are so bad for you It's like why don't you allow a shot to the back of the head? I need it explained to me like I'm a child like why is it okay to slam your elbow full blast into someone's temple? Yeah, but not this one you could drive your elbow down into their eye socket That's okay, but the back of the head is bad But also the back of the head's fine if you knock someone out from the back of the head and you didn't mean to like a head kick Like how many head kicks wrap around Here in the back of the head right wonder boy and it's like a UFC debut He goes over the shoulder wow back of the head out cold Yeah, that shit always works the back of the head brown kicks. That's a lot of times where they land This guy maybe we're getting hit in the back of it. It is a little different Yeah, how many times are like like Ernesto who's knocked dudes out with back of the head head kicks in kickboxing All the time for sure. I think that's how he knocked out Maurice Smith I think he's snuckin around over the shoulder and hit him in the back of the head Hmm, I mean I mean anatomy's gonna dictate that You're supposed to know right so that's me around no one says that's an illegal blow My overhands that's where they hit a lot Facing you know what do you want me to do? This is what is part of the sport right? No, if that's legal and you get okay Oh, when if you head kick someone you land them in the back of the head that that's always happened. Yeah, let's have it a hundred times I don't know. I mean it's weird right it is I mean it's weird because I Mean then we now we're playing with all these different rules and people don't like them I mean it's just like but I mean you got a draw line somewhere I suppose but see if you can find Ernesto who's Chaos Maurice Smith Less rules shows who's the better fighter right? But those there's some rules that I'm like okay, but now you're getting a unrealistic Understanding of a position like when someone's in a turtle and you can't need it. Yeah, to me that one should be eliminated right away You should be able to knee a guy to hit me. Watch this. Look at that Meredith right at the back of there. Yep. Watch that again. Can you is it in slow motion? Is that what it is? Watch watch how slick this is our nest. Oh, it's like Oh, man Chris he was too crazy like Billy Jack look at that bro Yep, and you know if that happened in the UFC everybody would cheer. Yeah, you couldn't say hey, that's an illegal blow Right even though technically that's despite where they can constitute illegal blow. Yeah, that's Illegal. Yeah, that's illegal and wheel kicks happen like that all the time all the time because it's coming from that angle From behind around the guy tries to duck under hit some right in the back of the head and no one complains Yeah, it's weird. No one to referee never said stop knows tracking the back of the head never happens Yeah, ever it's only when they're like totally around and they're throwing arm punches Yeah, which is the least we're talking which is less powerful than a full kick to the head But the reality is if you were in that position and the guy could throw elbows to the back of the head That would be a wrap in that same position where you're on a guy's back and you're doing this kind of shit Instead if you're just back of the head boom Like hands-o just right. Hey, man. What about headbutts? Right? Headbutts not even standing up right like what I'm in a clean. I'm buried in it's good for sure guys Yeah, I fucking love no no dad I get in your head. I'm getting that clean man. My home in would get in your guard and headbutt the fuck And the only guy to solve that puzzle was more resmith You well Maurice Smith was the first guy to solve that part ragtime out cardio cardio cardio and defense off his back Good buck of my guard Mark Kermert five-yuggers. Yo, what had butts to head butts when you were on top is brutal Yeah, I was a first fight I ever went to really UFC fight I ever went to is a nice Birmingham Alabama really I was area Wow brother. That was a huge upset. Yeah, I know I was in the crowd rooting for Maurice Smith for obvious reasons And everybody but I was the only one there I was friends with Maurice the Maurice came on my house worked out with him. I was cool with Maurice So it was like I was sad. I was like oh my god Maurice is gonna fight mark You're gonna get killed also. He's 260 pounds. There's a wrestler he takes everybody down and then when Maurice was a leg kick and I mean he said come on mark ground me and pound me Wow Mm-hmm ground me and pound me Wow It was talking to him while I was doing it and then when Mark would move towards me Move away. Yeah, yeah, I'm right back in those leg kicks were brutal to Maurice was the first guy to bring like world-class leg kicks To the UFC yeah world class did the lines then guy Petra his oh yeah, yeah Paul Varlans he had sick leg kicks the lines a Pete He's up I mean up the beat up William be way Not about the head first. Yeah, I think Maurice beat him for us But Maurice beat him by decision right wasn't it a five round decision? I think it was a five round He just beat him up. Well, you know what a kick Yeah, he was head kicked with shoes on Go Yeah, we're crazy sport man. I remember one of the first fights that I saw was this Japanese dude and Valeeji and the jat they were grabbing each other's like underwear Like you could hold up they was given him a wedgie I think the duty was fighting like was literally grabbing his shorts and like given him a massive wedgie During the fight. Oh, yeah, totally legal it was totally legal in the UFC It was bare knuckle back then to the first fight of work was bare knuckle. That was 97 Vtor was the only guy that had gloves or was the first guy or tank the first guy to wear it tank was one of the first guys for sure My tank might have been the first guy I believe he was the first guy and then Vtor warm to Vtor was you know Bro 19 years old and Vtor first fought in the UFC Tornado It's great to look like it. Yeah, I mean definitely for you solder on that motherfucker Under his trade. He looked like the fuck at home right well not yet he didn't when he first fought in the UFC only with 200 pounds He's so fast When he fought trade tell me one 200 wait 200 pounds. Yeah, then he gained tons of weight and fought Randy and when he fought Randy He was like 240 and that messed him up to he was too big Whatever Randy got cut in that one member no, that was a different one that was in the UFC later on For a light heavy. Yeah, yeah, cut it. So this is like so that was just a telegraphen And trade telegraphen if you're watching this is lost his check in a his pack rather in a car accident when he was a baby Yeah crazy he lost This is Brad Kohler, right? Yeah, this is a different fight. What is going on here? 1997 oh, yeah, this is not that's not Japan 97 it's UFC 12 actually Japan 97 was when Frank Shamrock fought Kevin Jackson remember any arm arm? Yeah, yeah This was pretty crazy. This is a different card. It's ultimate Japan 97 UFC 12 is the fight You remember the number yeah, Randy looks older there than he does that That's not it's not it wasn't Japan though I was just heard you say something about Japan 97 that's all I typed in No, no, there's a Japanese fighter is what I said he fought Luigi Valed ishmal It was either UFC 12 or UFC 13 Waleed ishmal UFC if you find that you'll find it and dude was given him a super wedgie Yeah Totally allowed yeah, perhaps shorts you could punch guys in the nuts. Yeah, can he punch in Joe saun and his balls? Yeah Remember that dude what about Gary Goodridge and the crucifix? So yeah, here it is Paul Herrera. So here it is look what the dudes do it done to the Luigi's pants The ladies pants The crackers out because the dude had a hold of his shorts. I do remember earlier in the fight rather that be McKenzie Durney's Given the way but yeah, we just did Okay, so look the Japanese guy has the gloves on as well So V to our had a mom, but Luigi is fair enough. Look you're allowed to grab it back then look at the Japanese guy has gloves Luigi's bare knuckle And that crazy really grabbing his makeup or grab it is nuts. I think you could grab nuts. It's gonna be so uncomfortable He looked at his grabbing offense. He's like yeah Yeah, yeah, I'm grabbing the big John's tried to prize hands away. He just grabs them again He just don't even let go at least back then. I guess you couldn't grab the fence. So there was a rule He's grabbing it to get Look at the grab that's the most blatant footprints grabbing of all time. I see ugly right there Big John what he get on it John John slap his hands away John you sub John Johnny's grabbing the fence They really it was like a suggestion back I think he knocked his hands away saying don't read the pants, but only like a little He's kind of not that enthusiasm It was like as he was letting go already he was like Brad that yeah, that was the first UFC at work The they the rules back then were so weird shoes wrestling shoes. It's weird. Are you you know like right wrestling shoes would change everything? You get so much more grip on the cage so much more ability to move. Yeah But the wrestlers would love it, but also locks that's Oh heel hooks real problem when I first thought of training I remember with cook up back in a day He used to wear restless sneakers and stuff and I'm gonna be like you know I wanted as much for the street as possible. I remember that was my mentality So I'd wear the wrestling sneakers or my y'all fuck this Guys I grab a yo foot. Yeah, I'm like y'all fuck that Fuck sorry. Also like lose your own seat and up arm bars and stuff like when you try to grab the foot and throw it over it Now you've got a grip on something. It's like text yeah textile like you could hold on that motherfucker a foot is Foot's hard hold on to they get sweaty and shit. They're all slippery No, I know good. Yeah, I hear look Jen's pulver. I was like he gonna wear shoes. Oh Jamie could you find Dean Thomas's rolling knee bar on Jen's pulver? Oh But they don't have a jayney good. Oh, it has to be on line out everything's a d-d-d-d-d Those fights those old fights mean those are history. I'm a shoot-o-fight. You know I remember seeing that interview You remember seeing it I studied it because I was gonna fight you. Oh And I'm like People on me motherfucker but Jen's pulver had some laser beam punches back. I know I remember when he knocked down Lewis oh, I got a fight. This guy. Oh, that was right Jen's Paul you got a good crime too. Yeah, but I he could crack did not want that guy punching me Yeah, you can't be wearing shoes. It's just too much too much of an advantage Was an old school one too. You did it almost like you gotta give you back to him. Yeah, I think you should let it Look at this here. It is look at this Inside the inside the hook with shoes on that's a wrap the worst Tap tap tap the long time ago. Oh my god. That must have heard what did it feel like? Did you feel it? I heard all the pop How bad was the injury? Oh, I don't know. I never recall them afterwards, but oh It had to be real bad dude. It had to be real bad With the shoes and everything like my god. Look at that. How you go into that. That's so pretty Look at you look at you right into the inside. Oh my god. He knows he's Fox bill. Oh God, I heard it pop you mean Dean Thomas. Oh, yeah, I heard that pop a few times How good does that feel it feels good I watch myself getting knocked out by BJ Panover and over over the About time I get one those heel look ones are the ones that you why you're watching him you're grabbing you know You're already on like you're like I hate them. I hate them with a passion Yes, because they ruin your whole career. Hey, give us you a comora dislocate Why stuff that's just ugly man. It's like you almost like I want to push it back in you Frank and here Oh Great you tore them in out snap the dudes humorous just My coach is yelling like protect your photo God it's horrible and you don't recover fully from that. He had a good surgery sound like a Pulstick snapping I'll just I'll never forget the sound of widemen when why oh Oh my god. Oh my god. That's like a chalk will never forget that sound. I remember that So that one was so In the cool so loud. It was sort of chances Anderson does it to you know, he does it to Anderson and then it fucking happens to him Winter for guys in the UFC Connery no Cori Hill's the first one. Yeah, I remember the cori Hill one because the referee didn't see it I put my headphones on I'm screaming stop the fights top the fight Was it related to that no idea some kind of disease Bro a break of a bone is a traumatic injury like you have to understand this is such a difference between breaking your hand Which I think we've all done or I broke my arm and I was a little kid breaking your shin Like that it's such a traumatic step in you down on it Frank me or broke his fever in a car accident a guy t-bone to my motorcycle snapped his thigh bone Well Frank wasn't the same for years It's a few years for him to come back to full-form again. That's rough So this is the other question about Connor how much can he use that left leg? his left leg snapped in half Okay, and I see him kicking the bag and I see him doing all these things and that's great And I hope it's 100% but I mean I see Chris why me kicking heck the lumbard Body punches and leg kicks you see what I'm doing? Yeah, yeah, that's your thing But it is yeah, they're a lot of leg kick and body punch. It was the oddest is the weirdest guy I just saw Chris just kick it him and bah and Hector was like punching him in the neck Like what the fuck out of rules is this it's crazy. I don't know what I was watching those Well those ones with the dudes like stand next to each other and just leg kick each other into submission That shit's pronounced. Those are so that's so crazy. Who does that? I don't know man But there's a lot of those videos. It's almost as dumb as slap. I'm shit Mean kind of almost because like you could really ruin your life You don't understand like Pedro Hizzo like one of those kind of guys could you imagine like doing our will Pedro Look at the damage his or did the Ramelmans leg or she had a different vein pad Randy got done with him Torre was like six months man to recover two two two fights Damn, and a heavyweight fight oh Jesus Oh Sick it's horrible Those are a man and I know how hard Chris kicks Mongo's like backstage he was killing the pads was all the hold of it's such a great impression Plug in then he went out there and Jesus Wokered's making me feel bad for being 68. Oh, yeah. He's telling me He's so funny, and then he was asking about a peptide. I have to text them later He's the best You two together. I swear to me a show Show Yeah, just follow you guys around follow you to the pizza place Really would if you get one of them keep it up a Kardashians people who know how to do a reality show Film the two of you guys together hanging out drinking coffee talking shit training fighters Yeah epic I mean oh way too long he's getting older Honestly, think about how many guys you've worked with like super high-level guys like aljo and marab and you know Just admin being with them and wide-men being with them at the UFC's Yeah, great fucking show me time. Who's best to have bikes on in the corner? No, I was to come on It's so funny. I like that Comedians are making comedies again. I'm looking at Harley this is hauling wings Yeah, we'll all Williams. He put a Gordon is fucking I love that guy. Oh my god That guy's a fake leg. He's so funny. He's movie He's a movie wingman is funny. It's funny. It's cool. He's funny and everything you know It's if I miss those feminasty Nate You know, there's these comedians are now funding it themselves like the Oven Yeah, he's paid the bus boys. Yeah, and Tom to yours doing a bunch of you They were they were they were spade did one together. Yeah, he has real-life Joe dirt. So that's a They're just doing it where they don't have to get okay I ain't by anybody. Yeah, and the other one I keep I always find everybody's telling them what to do How to how to how to fucking be in a cult how to spot a caught a cult with us The Greek guy the heavy sec Greek. Oh Is that a stop? Yeah Funny one do that that one's that one made me fucking very funny from Baltimore and he does a Baltimore Ravens fan after every winter loss during the season like you have to Fucking see because it's fucking hilarious very funny dude. Yeah, man I like it's a good time for comedy because this is like pushback Yeah, you know when this pushback then people get excited when someone doesn't give in to it Mmm, they make up make their own shit But if you want to try to make a comedy movie with a studio you have to deal with so many people telling you what you can You can't say your way better off just doing it on your own like they don't really know what funny is they're trying to protect their job They have more say they were cranking them out for a while. They're like tell a gig and night Yeah, but that can tropic thunder. You know what happened the fucking internet happened people started complaining in real life Like you know, it started these morons online started affecting the way people view comedy So ridiculous it's the meanwhile didn't affect the way we view violence, which is crazy Like you could have a super hyper violent movie Nobody has a problem right now It's the dumbest shit of all time, but if you have some crazy like if you try to make a movie like Like super bad Fucking hilarious just try to make that today good make it you couldn't make it tell or tropic thunder Try to make it Make it fucking Robert downy junior straight and black face Full retard I asked him I said do you think Robert down junior? I said do you think you can make that movie videos? Oh? You could make Most of the right ladies combo is about guys trying to get laid The premise alone is not gonna make it right you know what I mean? It's funny, man It's like we're allowed the most hyper violent movies and celebrate them all this is awesome Like I just watch collateral again the other day Oh, what I'm fucking love that's awesome We watched the scene and one of the one of the episodes we did we watched that scene where shoot those guys in the alley And I got so into it. I go to watch that movie again Yeah sick movie but hyper violent a movie that everybody says wonderful movie Comedy brilliant. Yeah, let's make you laugh Yeah, but doesn't it like isn't it like spoilers like I don't want to spoil it, but like doesn't deal it doesn't Jamie Fox kill Was that my the one? Well, is it an energy dies? I mean I somehow but you know like I don't believe that he kills the mayor's their assassin the attacks I think I could want to die. I think when you kill a bunch of people over a long period of time Oh, it's one of those is even in that way to your turn You know it's supposed to be Russell Crowe and Adam Sandler in that movie Originally serious. Yeah, it's crazy One of them should be doing it. Yeah, right. Yeah. That's interesting. I'll tell you what Tom Cruise was good Phenomenal he's pretty much good in there. You'd they say they use that clip of him in that alley for training like CIA motherfuckers It was that clean and you know the scene. No. Oh, it's a very seen I mean Jamie pull it up on my favorite one of my favorite scenes in any movie it is Got a love a good tactical draw because I love a guy practices. What's the underrated? It's a fucking it's a live-dye repeat Tom Cruise one Edge of tomorrow what is it edge of tomorrow? Yes Sorry Coming back coming back. Oh, this is seen. So Jamie Fox is strapped to the car He's he's zip tied him to the steering wheel and took the keys That's fine, but you can't have a bunch of guys trying to get laid Message Spring break I never thought of it that way actually is ridiculous The comedians like rebuttal to it You know to not be unable to make the movies they want to make well It's only empowered the clubs like clubs are packed. Yeah Everybody wants because you go like you go to the mothership. You're gonna hear some wild shit People want to laugh they don't know what it doesn't mean you mean what you're saying Right, right, right. It's just fucking it's calm. You're it's a joke Bob Marley didn't really shoot the sheriff What are you doing is fucking around? Yeah, we all know we've always been talking shit talking shit has been a natural part of humans We talk shit. We joke around and the idea that that's supposed to be up to someone's standards or someone else's Parameters of what you can and can't talk fuck you Don't go just don't go watch it Tom Brady Roost kind of brought it brought it back in a big way Yeah, in a big way. Yeah, the Tom Brady Roost I think cracked egg because I think I like 55 million views on Netflix alone Like within the first week Water, yeah, people still getting canceled though. I think it's kind of I think it doesn't work You can't because everybody just people get put your own stuff on yeah, you can just do your own stuff What's also when people get canceled people just flock to those people now? They like make some more popular. Yeah, you know every look at Kanye Kanye selling out the biggest fucking places in the world doing pop-up shows Yeah, he's doing a reen-up pop-up shows Yeah, just one of Miami couple weeks ago my son went to it Doing one this weekend in San Antonio really just pop-up show Tony Hinchliff just went to the one in Tampa He said it was insane. Yeah, so it's a great show. He's ever seen his life He's on top of a world. He's handing on top of a globe Yeah, and like it's spinning while he's up there doing two and a half hours of Bangers yeah, like you really like Tony goes you realize how many hits this guy has who is he gonna see Kanye mother-pops Yeah, otherwise known as yeah, yeah, that's right easy Yeah, no one wants to do a versus battle against Kanye. He's gonna eat you up. He's so prolific Yeah, it's and like it's Tony said like every aspect of the show he produced so every sound has a like a purpose every lighting effect It's all coordinated. He said it's amazing legit crazy is fucking a shithouse rat. It's like that's how you have I mean, but most creative people 100% you know, don't come from a different you don't get that good by being normal Right like he's too good, but I mean normal is overrated the guy comes back from wearing a diamond-in-crested swastika To selling out the biggest arenas in the world. He has a song called the Hile Hitler a year later he's selling out the biggest arenas in the world like instantaneously Do you know they wild out? He's the goat like no one's even close He's like one of the greatest performers of all time. Yeah, but no one's even close like with the stuff that he does like he can compare it to his Contemporary's like he's yeah, he's so far ahead of everybody Yeah, but no one's even close like with the stuff that he does like he can compare it to his contemporaries like he's Yeah, he's so far ahead of everybody Prince was like a two it's all the hits he had and all the hits he's written for people Yeah, I'm not Freddie Gray should happen in Baltimore He called the city and wanted to do like a benefit concert or whatever and I was able to go to it and At one point on the stage he's doing all these songs and he goes god damn. I forgot all the good shit Gelling but the best story was on sound check like he tunes everything's got to be the way he wants it and a Jay-Z Beyonce and Somebody else. I don't know who the third person was, but they were gonna come and be part of it So they asked him if he could come he's like yeah, sure So when they came they started to go on stage for sound check and a friend of mine at the building said Prince like whoa What are you doing up on the fucking stage and they're like? Oh, you know we want to get our shit straight and he is nervous as my shit You want to come and be a part of it fine if not get the fuck off the stage Whoa, and they fuck you know they walked in and left they got out of there But you got to be careful with other stars because they do like the metal. Yeah I went like this Lighting and that dude, you know shit was getting done how he wanted it done a hundred percent. It has to be he was too good Yeah, he's a fucking genius. I remember the tar solo. He did it the rock and roll. Oh my god. He could do anything Yeah, you could play any musical instrument. He used to play all the musical instruments And he could play basketball. Yeah Did you watch that Michael Jackson? I didn't I saw it Did you watch it? I did yeah, I thought it was good Ray like you didn't see it. I didn't see it It's good. No. It's a long go set. No. No. It's gonna be told. No. He told me But I mean, it's a good thing. I guess after he's seen it. He goes in touch any kids Oh, tell you right now, he didn't fucking touch any So like long ago That's all I want to go with your thoughts on it. That's hilarious. No if it comes like my son Fuck up. Yes, father's a fuck. Well now. It's a good movie and a guy who played it his nephew nailed it Nailed my family loved it my wife I Love it. I didn't see it though. It's a cautionary tell the Michael Jackson tour is like when kids get that famous No one can handle it. That's what that is. Yeah. Yeah There's also the weirdness of the doctor saying that he was chemically castrated His doctor he seemed like killed him the same guy that killed him with the prophin all that put him to sleep with Yeah, anesthesia. Uh-huh. That guy said that when he was young his father chemically castrated him to preserve his voice Then I get into that part which totally makes sense when you look at him in comparison to all the other guys in his family He's really thin like he has no test house. You know no one really thought about all the brothers are all big Yeah, they're men like you look at your main for sure they're big men He's really thin and he kept that high pitched voice like when you listen to some of his like human nature Listen to human nature like that voice isn't saying yeah, we can't play on the show But Jamie play human nature by Michael Jackson real quick Why did what did virus get plump on game of thrones when I cut off his ball? Well, I don't think that was real You can still get fat, but you can't you you know you don't get muscle like you don't have any testosterone It's gone you're gonna work in feed that guy either to keep him thin so he could dance Well also he's probably performing every day every time he's burning off shit tons of cow They put a fit bit on that dude. You know I'm steps that he's taking dude. It's pretty crazy like a front man for a band the fucking run in their day We're gonna play this song human nature. Oh the official music video Oh man that voice you I don't think you get that voice from a man. No, but how do you regular man? With that has happened with the same way that they do it with puberty blockers that they use on kids No, like when you're when they do puberty blockers That's what puberty blockers do. Yeah, what they do is they just blocking all of your testosterone production Hmm and so they used to do it to criminals so if they had a sex offender that was I'm all for that. Yeah chop did dicks off just a limited Just eliminate them they should be eliminated, but the Chemically castration thing these do with opera singers. They call them castratos That but not chemically castraity these use a knife We used to chop their balls off and they were young so that they could sing like like a woman It was a very haunting sound like there's only one recording of a castrato. That's from like Jimmy What was it from like the 1800s? Oh really? There's one recording of a guy singing that that had no balls And then they do it to him when they're really young they do it to when they're kids No kidding. Yeah, like your family sells you off to some opera and they slice your balls off and keep you that way forever Crazy damn. Yeah, and the sound see find that castrato recording What we sound is haunting man. You hear the guy singing creeps you out He'll like oh my god. This guy was a little boy and they cut his balls off so he could sing like this Oh, yeah, and I think that's what they did to Michael Jackson Well, he says what the doctor says it makes sense to me. I mean it makes him like even watching a movie How hard his father was on him and how much he demanded of him? You could creep us out now listen to this guy's voice. Okay That's depressing, but we know that actual process those are actual practice. They really did chop boys balls off so they could sing better run from happy human nature to Fighting was fucking dying. I know it's really not to think about the horrible things that people were willing to do It's not disproving anything. This is the guy thing he went to search where they were doing it I think he said he was having very trouble a lot of trouble finding a lot of information about Pastrato's yeah, and where they did it or how they did it but they hide that Yeah, I was chopping nothing. Oh, yeah, let me take you to the lab We show you will do with the balls Are you doing those peptides many units were castrated after puberty and thus castration and they'll affect on their voices Oh, that's a unique though. That's just really pube after puberty. Yeah, right? So they hate you gotta catch a man Here, right? You gotta catch them before they Grow their nuts. That's so horrible It says it goes back to 480 but boy constant to noble boy Who's who came up with that idea? I have an idea Come in Infection from getting their nuts chopped off, you know probably a lie. I know back then they didn't even know what fucking Cuties were they had no idea. Yeah, they didn't clean an eye No, no, yeah, no Start off with as a punishment. It wasn't a choice and then they realized this guy sing really nice That's kind of cool Gentlemen, this is a lot fun We always have such a good time. Oh, yeah, man. How you feeling? We talk why me? Why everybody You're right handle like a boss like a boss your eyes are a little Chinese My time guys you handled it I had a great time. It's always fun. Let's go eat Yeah, is it Italian? We'll go whatever. What would you want? Did you want to do Italian? Let's cut this off Matt's Arab as soon as you did to Train at Matt's gym yeah, you come there too, but subscribe to that thing subscribe to that Ground control Ground control USA.com has all the locations. We just opened in Stuart Florida and Showgun fights calm next show is November 14th D Thomas fight expert slash movie producers Deep waters every Monday myself Jorge Miles, but I'll Chris Wyman in Dustin, poor yay Monday at noon deep waters on Paramount plus and Your film Emma film flowers is coming out soon. Good one. I loved it. Yeah, I loved it I love it. I loved it. I love it. It's and the ethanol on landing. Yeah, we did it another one