Go 3 2 1 Lex handsome is ever. Thank you. Well dressed always feel like a slobbing around you Do dress like that in real life or only when you do podcasts? Yeah, so I've two outfits this and Black shirt and jeans slick outfit. There's nothing nothing more classic than a dark suit with a white shirt and a black tie Is that a black tie or is it a dark blue? Black tie black tie black suit black tie. It's armor. Yes. It makes me feel Like focuses the mind. Like professional. Yeah, I can take in this seriously. Yes. Yes Like you're you're fucking for real man, but I know it's in shit. Yeah, I got notes in shit, but But given this suit like I like to get like dirty like I like to work in a car or whatever like I don't want to I like to get in the fight in this. It's this isn't like me trying to protect myself from the From the messiness of the real world. Oh, I understand. This is a just just looks good Just makes you feel like the professional is it flexible like you know they make a clothes that are flex Yeah, you can move in it. I can move in it. Oh, that's nice. I can I mean You showed me how you can choke me last time with the tie. Did you get a breakaway tie? No, I didn't but you know I kind of I kind of let you have that one because I think I can defend it pretty well Well, you're probably very good at defending jokes. Yeah. No, no front would like with the tie I don't have a system yet. I'll have to talk to John down to her to develop a tie All you have to do man is just take the back of the tie cut it put a little piece of velcro in each end You got the same tie. That's not no, but I think you Going under the tie to try to start the choke Actually, I mean you're making yourself on there, but like maybe you tend to arbor or something like that I think there's a silly Don't be silly. Well, listen if someone grabs a hold of your collar. That's the same thing Yeah, Ezekiel chokes are deadly But it's not over. Yeah, if you sink it in, but it's so Collars are real problem Right in jujitsu. Yeah, they're a real problem If someone gets deep on your collar like you're not with a suit, right? I'm gonna start doing this man. You're fucked Not good not good. College are not good if you go deep if you get in deep. Yeah Yeah, yeah well The problem with that is it's a handle it's worse than a collar because I'll get underneath that knot and I'll grab a hold of that pitch and Then it's all just twisting. Yeah, but you have to you're right I would have to get it. I'd have to get it You know, so they don't have to hold on to this part because it can loosen naturally unless you're really good at like Because it loosens doesn't yeah, it loosens naturally. This is a system to this. I think You don't think I have Trying to choke people with ties on as friends. Yeah, I'm gonna grab a hold of that tie real quick What happened if I do this yeah, no, no, not you just a people and also it's probably a joke Yeah, yeah, I was fighting for my life. I think it'd be different. Well, you sure you're a tough guy You are actually trained martial artists. I mean, I'm not saying it would be easy to grab your tie and choke you to death What I'm saying is it's one more area of vulnerability that doesn't need to exist But see I'm disagreeing with you and saying like if I was gonna fight to the death I Would wear the suit. Okay, cuz I don't look good Let me tell you something about CIA agents and secret service guys. They wear breakaway ties That's because they're not good martial artists. Oh, that's not true. There's a lot of those guys are savages Are they a fuck yeah, man? No black belts man if you're a fucking if you're a secret service guy You're supposed to be protecting the president. I guarantee you a bunch of those guys are savages I think they're smart enough to use guns that too Yeah, but they don't you know if they have to wear a tie a lot of people like to wear breakaway ties Is that a fact? Mm-hmm. I might be making this up right now. That's the bro. No, I know but it's it's a little bro fact But only 10% I think look. Let's Google breakaway ties for self defense because Dude, look, I'm definitely a dummy right okay, I think about the stuff too much, but when I was driving limos I always felt super vulnerable when I had to wear that tie It looks good though my one of my actually my first album my first real album that I ever did for Warner Bros Was in 1999 and I wore exactly that outfit. I wore a black suit with a white shirt and a white tie and a black tie and look dope Yeah, it's called I'm gonna be dead someday. Look at that breakaway tie stand up like a mm-hmm Look at that breakaway tie son low pro breakaway tie. Whoo? That's what I'm wearing. Let me explain some come get some most people when they're vulnerable like say I'm afraid I'm getting to be picked on by bullies and learn a martial art how to define myself. Yes You when you felt vulnerable wearing a tie Decided not to wear a tie as opposed to learn how to defend yourself all wearing a tie There must be a system I guarantee you to sure you could you could say that you could defend yourself You had a dog collar on your neck too, but I wouldn't recommend it I took my dog out once I had a pit bull and he bit my cat he grabbed a hole in my cat. It's terrible story I had a crazy dog one of my dogs was a Dog that I had gotten was I was young and irresponsible in my 20s and I got in this dog that was bread from a pig hunting dog in Hawaii and Those dogs are hyper Animal aggressive they're great with people he was great with people he loved people But everything that moved he was like locked in on he would spend his days in my yard chasing lizards His thing was to jump up on the wall of house and try to snatch lizards It was like a video game for him and my friend Eddie was terrified of this dog Eddie problem. Yeah, and so Eddie would come over the house and Frank would just decide that he runs shit When Eddie's around because Eddie was so scared of him. He'd be like hmm. I think I'm gonna kill this cat So he just just tried to kill my cat and I got a hold of him in time And I got my hand into his collar and I choked on conscious head like that Yeah, I just dug behind yeah from behind I just dug my hand under his collar and I twisted and I put him to sleep You went right out. It's crazy. Yeah, it works. Works on dogs Yeah, maybe from the bowels and things from the back. I was thinking from the front But from anywhere you can grab a dog collar if you get your hand in there if you're strong enough and you have good technique You know how to go neon belly and then you twist it you can put a dog sleep Well, you have changing my mind See yeah, but I don't know. I mean look Obviously you're gonna be aware of that and you're gonna defend and you get but it's a it's an area of vulnerability Pull up 1990 and pull up I'm gonna be dead someday the cover of that because I'm literally dressed exactly like you on the cover or when actually doing the show No, I never wore it doing show. I think I just wore it for the cover almost ironically No, I kind of like the way it looked. I just you know there it is Bam I'm tired to tell there because it's that one's orange and the other one's hot pink, but I think The the the share of colors a little more open like like you don't give a damn Well, that was a long day and there was a long photo shoot. We were drinking. Yeah There's a lot of looks chaos involved Shit there's legit there's legit there was a lot of a lot of stuff going on there, but it was Just I just I liked that look it's good. Look by the way Congratulations in the 10 years. Oh, thank you very much. I don't think you've celebrated All I see is on James Instagram Like a naked picture of Bert That's a 10 year picture. Yeah, we probably should do something it was December was officially 10 years So it's two months ago I'd have some sort of a party or something. I know you don't like to talk about it think about it But even spied millions Very nice. It's very it's a very nice Side effect, but it's a it's a weird gig, man You know, and it's a it's a gig that became what it is Slowly without me understanding what was happening while it was happening which makes it weirder and weirder and With it has come increasingly Stronger levels of responsibility To where you know now I have to actually that guests and think about what they're saying Where's before I would have someone on their crazy? I was like, look at that crazy motherfucker on this here What he has to say and people would say a lot of crazy shit and then they would say oh You know you didn't push back or you had this person on and they they said something irresponsible And I had no idea what they were gonna say Yeah, there's a lot of people that have said some pretty outrageous things that I had no idea that we're gonna say yeah so the Like I started one of the things you inspired me to do is to start a podcast on artificial intelligence and I have a Jack Dorsey as a guest coming up. Uh-huh and that's a good example of somebody you got like an insane amount of pushback Yes, because they were mad that I didn't talk to him about censorship my my take on it was it was Certainly irresponsible my part the first podcast because my take on it was I just want to see what it's like to be a guy That starts this thing and it becomes probably one of the most important conversation tools the world's ever known and also along the way becomes You know it becomes something weird like right now. It's weird like Twitter now. It's just It's just 50% hot dumpster fire, you know, it's Amazing inspiring stuff like you can always find the dumpster fire and all kinds of conversations. Yes And the confusing thing to me about your conversation with Jack which I didn't look at the internet Before I listened to it and I had been enjoyed it. I was interesting I learned a lot from your first conversation with Jack and like and then I looked at the internet That told me I'm supposed to hate that conversation and what I'm confused about is Why why there's such Like why is there such hatred thrown towards? I also talked to the head of the YouTube how did the YouTube algorithm search and discovery a lot of hate towards you to Yeah, how to hate towards Twitter a lot towards Facebook and There's everybody sold there's some challenges and so on But they're doing like an incredible service and the algorithm they're trying to develop and control is really hard to develop a control Yes, so for sure so the pushback that people get it's almost like they're ignore it. They're They're taking specific anecdotal pieces of evidence or look this person said this it's It's not that problematic in our eyes But they somehow got censored from the platform removed from the platform and They don't look at the bigger picture of how challenging the entirety of it is and how incredible First of all the incredible incredible platform is to have a conversation like a global conversation like this and how hard it is to do to achieve the goal of Having it sounds like cheesy but having like a healthy conversation a health the discourse because you want an algorithm and a platform that removes the assholes from the scene because it's a really difficult Challenge because you want to say that one person was really loud is screaming in their room like comes to the party You have a cool party a bunch of cool people some communists some right wingers whatever it doesn't matter They can all disagree, but they're not assholes They're to have a like interesting debate conversation so on and then there's somebody that comes with like a And just starts screaming like one like slogan or something like that or it's trying is trolling is completely sort of non genuine in their way of communication they're destroying the nature of the conversation and then of course that person if they get You know the bodyguards come in and say can you please leave the party sir? Then they get extremely that's the exact kind of personality to extremely upset and Sometimes they almost look for that so what you're supposed to do as a jack doors is a As a leader of that kind of platform. It's a very good question And I really think that there's no real answer. That's one of the reasons why it's so frustrating You know if you just let people say whatever they want whenever they want to There's gonna be a lot of people that get turned off to that kind of a platform because you're gonna have a lot of people yelling out racial slurs ethnic slurs gender slurs homophobic slurs There's gonna be a bunch of people that are trolling there's gonna be a bunch of people that just say things to rile people up And that's all they do is gonna be a bunch of people that just want to shitster and they want to dox people So you got it then you have to set parameters like what are the parameters don't you can't dox people you can't Don't say racial slurs don't say ethnic slurs It's you're managing at scale and you're managing an insane amount of people But then there's legitimate criticism that they lean towards progressive people and liberal people and they They have woke politics like for instance you can get banned from Twitter For life if you dead name someone so Lex if you became Female and you change your name to Ali and I just said fuck you man your Lex band for life That's what a dead naming that's dead naming like if you wanted to call Caitlyn Jenner if you want to call Caitlyn Jenner Bruce on Twitter you would get dead named There were you would be dead naming her and you would get banned for life a woman named Megan Murphy who is a turf Do you know the turf is? What do you think I don't know what a turf is I'm sure you don't you two two balls deep in science. Yeah turf is trans exclusionary Radical feminists so trans exclusionary Why not have such a hard time with that word exclusionary right exclusionary? Why does it sound wrong? exclusionary sounds wrong What does it mean to be exclusionary to trans? They she did okay turf's do not want trans people to be to have a say in women's issues I see they think that they are a different thing that there's women in women's issues and these feminists That have been female their whole life dealing with women's issues Yes, do not want trans people coming in and in many cases What you find is that trans people come in and then the conversation changes and it becomes about trans issues And they want these conversations to be about women's issues in in feminist movements It's complicated right? She got banned from Twitter for life for saying a man is never a woman They made her take the tweet down so she took a screenshot of it took it down and then put the screenshot back up and Then they banned her for life should she get banned? No No, she shouldn't because biologically she's correct if there's an argument there if there's an argument a scientific argument A man is never a woman, but can a man identify as a woman and should you respect them? Her then and treat them as a woman. Yes. So yes. So the question is whether I mean I I I'm not too deep into thinking about these specific issues But the question is whether you should get banned for being an asshole you should get banned for being For lying because I think lying is okay. It's true. Whatever. There's a lot of people lying on Twitter Yeah, lie and sort of or insult you can insult people on Twitter as long as you know specific about their gender See that the insult thing that's where it gets it's the party thing You have the Asshole to speak whatever term you want to use they show up to the party and then if a person shows up to the party and a lot of people Leave because they're annoying or whatever. Yes. That should be like we should do something to discourage that behavior That's a good point. However, let's let's paint a different picture of a party Let's have a party where everyone says my pronouns are they them and Zeezer and Javu and they and then you come in you come on bro You're a guy and like no, no, I'm a they you fucking cis gendered heteronormative piece of shit and then they want to kick you out of the party Yeah, no all you're saying is you're a guy band both of them no way band the Band the person who's not open-minded or respectful for the you know Don't ban people here's the here's no no no not the yeah So of course it's been well documented by By people now the reason we probably have the current president is Yeah The people on the left are very also rude and disrespectful. It's a small percentage of the people in the library small This is part of the real issue on Twitter. They are all on Twitter, but it's also the small percentage When you say it's so hard to have a group and call that group the left because The variables are so extreme. There's so many different people that follow Politics or that that espouse to certain belief systems that recognize themselves as left if I need of you're probably on the left Yeah, so very much on the left. Yeah, but I don't get considered to be on the left because I'm a cage fighting commentator You know American flag behind yeah, I'm very broish. I hunt. I bow hunt which is even more broish Right, and I I am Unabashedly masculine I'm a man and a comedian yeah, so I'm a dirty comedian and I say and I make fun of everything including Sacred cows like gender Homosexuality heterosexuality my own kids my wife my mom Everybody I make fun of everybody and if you take that stuff out of context In just publish a bunch of it. It makes you look like a moron or it makes you look like an asshole That's you know what what is the left right? What is the left in my mind? The left when I was a child I always thought of the left because I grew up my parents were hippies All right my my stepdad was an architect and before that he was a computer programmer He had long hair until I was I think I was 20 years old when he goes here I mean long like down to his ass like a native American nice and You know they always he smoked pot when I was little. I mean he I was always around hippies I lived in San Francisco from the time I was seven till I was 11 and I was always and and my family was very Left-wing they were always Pro gay marriage. They were pro gay rights pro racially quality pro Just name it man pro welfare pro You know just the idea was open-mindedness Education all these things are good and this is and warm is bad and you know there's a lot of You know there's a lot of things that maybe They had that the had they had like very strong beliefs on that maybe they weren't Entirely nuanced on as well when you you find that about people on the left as much as you find that about people on the right but it's The radicals on both sides being there's nothing wrong with being conservative, right? There's nothing wrong with valuing hard work There's nothing wrong with someone who values fiscal frugality or someone who is you know you have Conservative view on economics or on social policies You know and you you want less government. There's nothing wrong with those things either. That's when you get extreme like yeah The guest was amazing. Yes. Yeah, I recently that converted a bunch of folks from the KKK Davis yeah, wow this is him right here. This is a CD. He's amazing. He's an incredible human man But that kind of thinking I wish you saw more than yeah, sort of like not even if you're on the left to be to talk to people And they're right instead of just shut them out. That's the problem with this idea of kicking people out of the party You kick people out of the party guys like darryl davis never get to convert them There's been people from Twitter that have been converted. You know Megan Phelps is a famous one She was a part of the westboro Baptist church her grandfather was Fred Phelps that fucking famous Crazy asshole who was like super rude like who you know would make them Take those signs and say god hates fags and literally go to soldiers funerals and say that soldiers died because God is angry that people are homosexual so Megan was completely Intrenched in this toxic ideology. What are a lot of to escape that? Yeah, she met her husband on Twitter from arguing a thing back and forth And now she's out and now and now and you if you talked to her you would never believe it and man and not that long Go either not that long ago. She was in that church like six years ago. It's kind of incredible that you can so amazing Grow that mindset so no matter I mean that's inspiring that you can hold a mindset of hatred and I'll go Escape it while she was indoctrinated into it from the time she was a child and you know for her It was the only life she knew right her families in that and for her she just I mean by whatever for whatever grace of the grand universe plan She had enough open-mindedness to take into consideration some of these other things that people are saying We have a problem today with cancel culture. It's a real problem Is that you just want to write people off? Well, those people still exist. It's basically a cultural form of euthanasia You just want to go out and whack everyone who doesn't agree with you, but if you if you do that You whether it's eugenics or whatever whatever you want to call it you just eliminate everyone who's not the way that you like Culturally eliminate them take them out of the conversation. They still exist. Yeah, they still exist So what happens and well then they're angry they're angry they left out of the conversation and and they don't grow and then you've written them off as a human being You said that they're they're a hundred percent bad now if you had a spectrum of people in this world 100% bad and 100% good. I mean there are some beautiful people that really are a hundred percent good My friend Justin ran who runs fight for the forgotten charity He's about as close to a hundred percent good as you can get I mean this beautiful person goes to the Congo and makes Wells for the pygmies and gets malaria. Yeah, he has an incredibly he's got some crazy parasite now that they don't even know what it is They can't recognize that he's been suffering for eight months now. I think That's about as good as you can get right and then there's people, you know, you could It's a gray area when you start to drift away from the good I have the same thing in my like that's the focus I have in the academic setting of science There's and that's that's the inspiration of your podcast that you you gave me is to talk outside The people that are sort of conventionally accepted by the scientific community like a little bit on the fringes Yeah, and the quote-unquote fringes so you have the same thing in machine learning and artificial intelligence There's people that are working on specific It's called deep learning these learning methodologies that are accepted You know, there's conferences and we all kind of accept the problems we're working on and there's people a little bit on the fringes There's people in neuroscience actually anybody thinking about working on What's called artificial general intelligence is already on the fringes Yeah, if you even raise the question. Okay, so how do we build human level intelligence? That's a little bit of a taboo subject the Consciousness it was called the C word for a while consciousness really yeah. Well. It's scientists. So I know I understand yeah Explain it to me like what what's the aversion? What does everyone worried about? Does what no it's What are they worried about? It's this culture of Rolling your eyes the same the same way you might roll your eyes if somebody tells you that earth is flat they sort of Put all other things in that category as well. It's like well. That's okay. Whatever. That's we so in the case of consciousness We really don't understand very much at all what consciousness is what the What the you know the subjective experience the fact that it feels like something to take in the world that it's not just raw sensory information being processed actually feels like To touch something to taste something to see something. It's like incredible David John was calls it the hard problem of consciousness. Why do we feel it? Okay, but we don't have scientific physics engineering methods of studying consciousness So it immediately gets put into this bin that it's not an okay thing like you're a little bit of crazy Off the reservation. I think somebody was there. Oh, sir. That's a slur. I never even thought of that I didn't think of what that meant. Yeah, so they they already put in this bin of you're not a legitimate researcher in the same kind of You know, and I think we're now in a in a culture Which is great, you know, Eric Weinstein's good at this I'm hoping to be good at this You're good at this at allowing those people on the fringes in and saying what are your ideas exploring those? Yeah Of course you have a greater and greater platform to where there is a line you don't want too far in the fringes Yeah, that's Something I'm aware of now That I wasn't aware of say like three or four years ago and I used to have a lot of those I've had some people on that I would never have on again You know and and then I've had some people on that I've been criticized for having them on I'm like Okay, I see why you are upset, but I think there's a value in having conversations with people that are on the fringes There's people that are bad faith actors, right? They act in bad faith Those are the ones you have to be careful of and sometimes you don't know who they are until you get to know them Yeah, like then you've already kind of opened the door like for some people for like the democratic the legitimate Seven-year-old plus democratic party Tulsi Gabbard is on the French. Yeah, right, but I think You having her on is great is exploring You know, the She's one of the young minds exploring sort of the the role of the United States in the foreign policy in the world militarily in terms of trade and so on so she's an excellent mind Why don't they go on the French and same? I don't think she's on the French or any Sanders for many people still is on the fringe Yeah, and I think he gets misrepresented though. Yeah for sure one of the things that was Tremendously beneficial for me is to sit down with him for hours and have a conversation And you go oh, you're a real person. You know this wacky guy yelling about billionaires When you know when you get these 90 seconds sound bites and these debates You don't get a chance to know who someone is. Yeah, so I used to listen to this I listen to a lot of radio on the left and the right to try to get like take in What what people are thinking about? He's to listen to this program. I think it's called the Tom Hartman program He's like a Major lefty, but he had this segment called brunch with Bernie Anyway, invite Bernie Sanders like every Friday something like that and Just sort of the intellectual honesty and curiosity that Bernie exhibited was just fascinating sort of like as opposed to being a political Thing they just repeats the same message over and over which actually what it kind of sounds like when you listen to him now publicly It's actually a thinking individual and somebody's open and changing his mind But within that is just completely been consistent What people are terrified of is that he's going to raise taxes on successful people in ruined business Yeah, that's what people worried about that in doing that it will crash the economy. Yes. I don't know if they're right I don't even know if they're so first of all That people are using the word socialist Yeah, he's a socialist. Do you really want socialism? America is a great country because we're capital. It's kind of thing From my perspective, I think we already have a huge number of social Well, he's a democratic socialist democratic social it's a different perspective He just values workers the idea is he wants people to earn a living wage He wants people to not be indebted with the tremendous amount of student loan debt When you're just 21 years old and getting out of college He thinks it's insane and I agree with them. He doesn't want people to be burdened in this insane way If you ever get sick and I agree with them. I think we'll improve the health care system I think as a community if we're we're looking at the United States as a community one of things that you know Look, it's great to support business. It's great to have a strong economy. It's great to give business the confidence to take chances and a lot of people think Donald Trump does that It's also great to take care of our own and I don't think we do that enough I don't think we take care of our own enough in terms of we have the same problems in the same inner cities That we've had for a decade after decade after decade and there's no Significant attempt to change that but meanwhile we do these nation building projects in other countries And we have the interventionalist foreign policy where we're going to invade these countries and try to prop up new New governments and try to support them and we spend insane amounts of money doing that and Along the while we don't do anything to our inner cities that are the exact same fucked up places that they were in the 70s and in the 60s Do you know do you know Michael with Junior is no? He was on the podcast a couple times and he used to be a police officer in Baltimore. Yes I know him. Okay, so listen to that podcast. I'm just horrible with names. Okay his his Experience was first of all just he found a piece of I know him. Okay. So listen to that podcast. I'm just horrible with names. Okay. His, his experience was first of all, just he found a piece of paper that showed like a crime target from the 1970s, all the stuff like drugs, crime, robbery. It was all the same issues in the same neighborhoods that he was patrolling in today. And he was like, holy shit. And And he realized like, oh, this is a quagmire. And then he found out about the laws that were in place from way back in the day where you literally, if you were an African American, you couldn't buy a home in certain areas. They had, what is that term? Is it redlined? Is that what the term is? Where they, they designate certain areas where they literally won't sell homes to black people. And he was becoming aware of this shit as he was a cop. And you know, in the beginning, he was all gung ho. He was like, I'm a cop. You know, I'm here to bust bad guys and do the right thing. And then along the way, he kind of recognized you're dealing with systemic racism. Red line. Yeah. So yeah. So that hasn't been addressed. That's all about. I mean, there's a million other things at home education. Yeah. All those things. I think Bernie Sanders, when he talks about those things, he seems like a guy who really cares about education, health care, and people that live in poverty. Yeah. I don't know if he's going to be able to do anything. I don't know. That's, that's the main thing is like people say democratic social system so on is going to, he's going to make, make a slight move into the whatever direction he's trying to advocate, in this case, his more investment into the infrastructure and so on into our at home. But like, you know, he's just one human being. There's, there has to be a Congress that represents the people. And if there's anything, I think Congress is probably the most hated entity in all of the universe. Like you look at all the polls of what people like and hate, like like rats are above in terms of favorability ratings. So Congress is really the broken system. Bernie won't be able to do much except take a little sort of the role of the president as I see it is to one, the terrifying one is to start wars. And so this, it's a very serious responsibility you have to take. And the second is to inspire the population in terms of executive power of enacting laws. There's not much power. All you can, all you can do is what our current president is doing sort of inspiring the, on that, in that case, the Republicans in Congress to sort of work together to work on certain legislation. So you can inspire the Congress and you can inspire the people, but you don't have actual direct power. So Bernie is not going to turn America into a socialist, you know, haven. He's going to take a small step into maybe he'd probably fixing, focusing on one aspect, like healthcare or something like that. Like President Obama did and tried to make a little change. And so, so in that sense, people that are genuine and have ideas, like Andrew Yang is another one. He has like, it would take his number of ideas. I don't know if you've seen like, he thinks all cops should be purple belts and you just, yeah, I like it. Like go Andrew. Because you're a, yeah. He has a million other ideas. He does. Well, he's a genius. I mean, he's a brilliant guy. And he's an entrepreneur. So he comes at this stuff from a different angle. Yeah. And he's open-minded. Like I guess. I, well, I disagree with him on his evaluation of the state of artificial intelligence and automation in terms of his capabilities and having an impact on the economy. You don't think it's going to be as much of a deal as he thinks it is? On the time scale that he thinks it is. But I also want to be careful sort of commenting on that because I think for him, it's a tool to describe the concerns, the suffering that people go through in terms of, in terms of losing their job. Like the pain that people are feeling throughout the country. It's like a mechanism he uses to talk to people about the future and that, you know, there are people that are well off, like the different tech companies that should also contribute to investing in our community. I mean, the specifics, I want to kind of sit back and relax a little bit. It's like when you watch a sci-fi movie and the details are all really bad. I want to just, suspension of disbelief, whatever, and just enjoy the movie. In the same way, the stuff he says about AI, he's not very knowledgeable about AI and automation. So it's a little, it touches me a little bit the wrong way. We're not as far along that the transformative effects of artificial intelligence in terms of replacing humans in trucking autonomous vehicles, something I know a couple of things about is not going to be as, you know, I can speak relatively confidently. The revolution in autonomous vehicles would be more gradual than Andrew is describing. But that's okay. There's a million other ideas. And you'd be, I nevertheless, the University of Basecinkum, or some kind of support structure of that kind, nevertheless could be a very good idea for people that lose their job, for people to be mobile in terms of going for one type of job to another type of job. So continually learning through a life is just that artificial intelligence in this case, I don't think will be the enemy. There could be other things that are a little bit sort of neighbors of artificial intelligence, which is sort of the software world, eating up some of the mechanization of factors and so on. You know, maybe the fact that, you know, the kind of way that Tesla and Elon Musk are approaching the design and engineering of vehicles, they're a little bit more software centric. We'll sort of move some of the job from Detroit, Michigan in terms of cars to the Silicon Valley, not necessarily location wise, but sort of a different type of person would need to be higher to work on cars, a little bit more software, engineering software centric, versus the sort of hardcore mechanical engineers, more sort of, you know, tradition called car guys or car gals. Yeah. So that there would be some job replacement so on, but it's not this artificial intelligence, trucks will completely replace your job. And in the case of trucks, you know, it's not, there's a lot of complicated aspects about the impact of automation sort of the trucking jobs. There's actually a lot of mean for jobs. Like there's not the truck that that job, there's already people leaving that job sector. It's a really difficult job, but doesn't pay as well as it should. It's really difficult to train people and so on. So the impact that he talks about in terms of AI is a little bit exaggerated. Well, like I said, a million really good ideas. He's open minded. So in terms of, I think the nice role of a president is to have ideas, like the purple belt one, inspire people and inspire Congress to simply implement some of those ideas and be open minded and not take yourself seriously enough to think, you know, all the right answers. And Dr Yang, Bernie is like that, although Bernie is like 78 years old. So yeah, he's getting up there. Yeah, look at President Tulsi when he kicks the bucket. You know what? I didn't really think well, yeah, that's so I think Hillary Clinton endorsed Bernie and Tulsi Gabbard for president reverse endorsement. Accidentally, yeah, by, yeah, by say, it's just such a petty thing to say that no one likes Bernie. Like come on, lady. This is, you're in the twilight of your life. I think she's really aware of the fact that if she says something like that, people are going to like Bernie more. I think it's an endorsement. I don't think she has any idea that. I think she's super insulated. I don't think I think she thinks that she can actually hamstring them by saying something like that. And she doesn't understand that it just makes people realize that the things that they say about her correct. Yeah, I don't think they get that. Really? You gave her credit for killing Epstein. I was joking. I don't think she did. I think I'm joking too. Somebody did it. I don't know who it was. Maybe it's some scientist character. Maybe he's still alive. Could be. That's what Eddie Bravo thinks. Yeah. Eddie Bravo thinks he's in like Dominican Republic somewhere. He'd been at us and drinking my ties. It's a conspiracy on the conspiracy. Yeah. Well, Eddie's always like that. He's many levels deep. He plays for D chest. When it comes to conspiracy. Do you think that Andrew Yang is off? But ultimately will be correct in terms of the automation timeline. Do you think that maybe he doesn't know clearly as much as you know about automation and artificial intelligence? But do you think that it's possible that, you know, I think he's looking at a timeline. I think he was thinking within the next 10 years, millions and millions of jobs are going to be replaced. Do you think that it's more like 20 years or 30 years? But still something exactly. So the timeline, of course, nobody knows. But I think the timeline as much, the time skills is more stretched out. So 20, 30 years and it'll continue. There'll be, there'll be certain key revolutions and those revolutions. It's a, it's an incorrect work to use, but there'll be stretched out over time. I think the autonomous vehicle revolution is something to achieve a scale of millions of vehicles that are fully autonomously navigating our streets. I think it's 20, 30 years away. And it won't be like all of a sudden, it'll be gradual. It'll be people like the former Google self driving car, Waymo company who's doing a lot of testing now. Incredible engineer, I visit them for a day. It'll be expanding their efforts slowly. They're doing also way more trucks. The time was trucking. They're already deploying them in Texas, I think. And then of course, Tesla, who's this year going to approach a million vehicles. And they're trying to achieve full strength self driving capability. But that's going to be gradual. I just got a new update for the Tesla, some new self driving update. It costs four grand. And I was like, what is it? You know, and then, but I think it was high. And I was looking at my phone. I was like, hmm, okay, let's do it. And so I got this update. But I'm like, what did I just pay for? And I'm not even any, I don't even know if I'm going to use it. But I think it can change, I think it does everything. I think it changes lanes. And yeah, well, okay. So I'm not exactly sure what the update is. But it's probably, see if you can find out Jamie. So it's probably the quote on quote full self driving. Yeah. Very important. I'm the safety person, I guess. I'm this podcast. Tesla cannot drive itself fully autonomous. You have to keep your eyes in the road. Oh, my God. Sleeping on the internet. And he was fine. Yeah. Well, in a car, how cold? I'll look into it. Was that on CNN? It was someone filmed the guy. He was in his car, passed out. Not just one. It's been a few examples of that. People commuting on their way to work out cold. So some are for fun and fake. But it's certainly a real thing that you pass on sleep. We do that with manual driven cars too. I enjoy driving home in my Tesla from the commie store, like one o'clock in the morning hitting that autopilot. And I keep my hand on the wheel. But it's just, it's a level of relaxation. Keep your eyes in the road. Yes. I'm not looking at my phone or anything stupid. But it's just like, oh, dude, dude, you press that double button. I just, huh, it changes lanes. Oh, it doesn't change lanes. It stays in the lane. It does. It can change lanes. But I think you have to prompt it. Like if you want to, like, it, there's an option for navigate on autopilot. Like it'll like take you everywhere you need to go. But I think you need to step in at certain points. Yeah. And you actually, so now you can, it can change lanes without you pressing, uh, that's what it is now. Yeah. So you can do it automatically. And they're doing hundreds of thousands, I think they're tracking the number of automated lane, first of all, incredible that this is possible. There's hundreds of thousands of automated lane changes without human initiation happening right now. I mean, to me, as a sort of a robotics person, it's just incredibly here it is from whole snack on Twitter. Um, it says Tesla's new update, let's the car recognize traffic cones, stop signs and stop lines, trash cans and stop lights at their colors. If you try to run a stop sign under autopilot, the car emergency breaks and forces you to take over after. Right. Wow. You can't run stop signs. So this isn't the update you paid $4,000 for. That's already, that's part of that. But I'm actually surprised. So the 4000. But it says Tesla's new update. What's the time on this channel? What date is the December 24? Oh, okay. More recent. So this, this isn't the exact update. The, the, you paid $4,000 for, I think this is a general part of the full self driving, which is $4,000. And just to be clear again, safety person, it's not like it detects traffic lights, but it doesn't stop at the traffic lights for you. And maybe in this case, it doesn't emergency braking on the South side, but it's not, not good enough. It's not, it's not, it's not, it's not there. Trust it. It's not there. It's in fact this, you know, there's a lot of people including myself think it's worked quite a few years away. But it's also sort of also on the podcast, just like you got just to talk to you, I must meet him, talk to him in person and realize that there's, you know, there's people in this world that can make the impossible happen. You interviewed him as well. Yeah, twice. Yeah. Tell me what, what's that experience like for you? So, you know, it was, it's quite incredible in the sense that he is a legit engineer and designer, which is like a pleasure for me. I've talked to a few CEOs, talked to Eric Schmidt, just, just CEOs and they're a little bit more business oriented. Elon is really, really focused on the fundamental, like the first principles to like the physics level of the problems of being solved, whether that's SpaceX with the fundamentals of rock and reusable rockets and, and, you know, going into deep space and cars and Mars, whether that's in your link, sort of the getting to the core, the fundamentals of what it's like to have a computer communicate with the human brain and with Tesla on the battery side, sort of saying he, he threw away a lot of the conventional thinking about what's required to build first of all an appealing car, electric car, but also one that's has a long range. That's something I don't know as much about, but then on the AI side, just, I mean, he boldly said from scratch, we can build the system ourselves in a matter of months, now a couple of years, that's able to drive autonomously. And most people would laugh at that idea. The most roboticists that know from the DARPA challenge is, most of them know how hard this problem is. He said, no, no, no, we're going to, we're not only going to throw away LIDAR, which is the laser based sensor, we're going to say cameras only and we're going to use deep learning, machine learning, which is learning based system. So it's a system that learns from scratch and we're going to teach it to drive from eight cameras and so on. So just talking to somebody like that was the fact that he thinks like that, I think it's just fun to talk to people like that. I don't meet them often. Let's say, I don't know, stop this bullshit of thinking that this task is impossible. Let's say, why is it impossible? Is it really impossible? Well, you find out when you start to think about most problems from first principles, is that it's not actually impossible. And then you have to think, okay, so how do we make it happen? How do we create an infrastructure that allows you to learn from huge amounts of data? So one of the most revolutionary things that Tesla is doing, and hopefully other car companies will be doing, is the over the air software updates, just like the update that you got. The fact that just like on your phone, you can get updates over time means you can have a learning system, a machine learning based system that can learn and then deploy the thing and learn over time and do that weekly. That sounds like maybe trivial, but nobody else is doing it and it's completely revolutionary. So cars, once you buy them, they don't learn most cars. Tesla learns. That's a huge thing. I forget about Tesla Autopilot, all this stuff, just the fact that you could update the software. I think there's a revolutionary idea. And then they're also doing everything else from scratch. This is the first principles type of thinking, the hardware. So the hardware in your car, I don't know when you got the Tesla, but it should be hardware version two. But that hardware performs what's called inference. So it's already trained, it's already learned its thing, and it's just taking in the raw sensory input and making decisions. Okay. They built that hardware themselves from scratch. Again, balls you move. Now they're building, what they're calling, again, he's such a troll, but they're calling dojo, is the name of the the specialized hardware for training the neural networks or training the models. What training is is the learning side of it. So they're building their own like supercomputer. Google has a TPU to improve the training. TPU was this 10 for? Tensor processing unit. It's the same thing as the more general and video has graphics processing unit GPUs that all the nerves, all the people like me, have been using on for machine learning to train neural networks. It's what most also gamers use in play video games, right? But they have this nice quality that you can train huge neural networks on them. Okay. TPU is a specialized hardware for training neural networks. GPUs allow you to play video games and train neural networks. TPUs clean some stuff up to make it more efficient, energy efficient, more efficient for the kinds of computational neural networks need. Google has them, a bunch of other companies have them. Most car companies would be like, okay, let me partner with somebody else to you from Google to use their TPUs or use Nvidia GPUs. Tensor is building it from scratch. So that kind of from scratch thinking is incredible. And the other two things I really listen, the like about Musk is the hard work. We live in a culture, like so many people, like I often don't sleep. I do crazy shit in terms of just focus, stay up nights and times. And I often people recommend to me that you know balance is really important. And taking a break is important. You know that you rejuvenate yourself, you return to with fresh ideas. All those things are true. Sleep is important. You have people on the podcast. Tell you how important sleep is. But what most people don't, don't advise me is hard work is more important. Passion is more important. All of those things like that should come first and then sleep empowers it, rest empowers it, rejuvenation powers, especially in the genuine disciplines. Hard work is everything. And he's sort of unapologetically about that. It's not like a come to us, come work with us. It'll be a friendly environment with free snacks. It's like you're going to work the hardest you've ever worked on whether you agree with him or not on the most important problems of your life. Okay. I like that kind of thinking because it emphasizes the hard work. The other part, it was in terms of meeting him in person. I don't know if you got to interact with off because when he was on Mike with you, he was very, he was very kind of... It was hard to bring it out of him. Yeah. In person before that, he was very jovial and friendly and huggy. He's great. Yeah. And then once he got on the microphone, I was like, oh, this is heavy lifting. I'll bring this out of him. So then we started drinking. And then oh yeah. It helps a lot. And then once the drinking, you know, then I got to see who he is. Yeah, I shouldn't have done that. But I like drinking. Yeah. No, the thing that's really interesting is he's gone... If you look at his biography, like the kind of stress he's been under. In terms of his been at the brink of losing his company's several times. Yes. And he lost a child. And he's just... That's the other thing that inspired me as that he can be a good dad while running so many companies. Because like I always often wonder about, you know, the kind of hours I pull on what I'm doing, can I have a family? Can I really give him... Because I'd love to be a father. And can I have a family? Can I be a good person? Like can I? It's very, very, very difficult if you're working 18 hours a day to give your kids the time that they need. But it's possible. Not 18 hours. There's always, I believe in there's in life a month, maybe years that you have to do 18 hours a day. But not always. There's time for every day. Right. Do the sprint sprints. Yeah. And then establish everything and then sit back. But the problem with a lot of guys like him is, first of all, it's very difficult to find a replacement for the way he thinks. Right. So if he's a CEO of these companies and he's the one who's the mastermind behind all these things. And then he wants to step back finding a commensurate replacement is insanely difficult. Because most people who would be a potential replacement are already off doing their own shit. And there's not many people like him. That's an interesting thing. That's actually the disappointing thing to me is that he's kind of thinking as a rarity. I'm not sure why that is exactly... Well, he's... I joke around about it. But I think there's a spectrum of evolution. And his mind is clearly way more advanced in my mind. There's something going on in his mind in terms of his attraction to engineering issues, solutions to global problems, solutions to traffic problems, pollution problems, all the things that he's the internet. And he's trying to put... He's trying to give the world internet. I mean, he's got all these things going simultaneously. And one of the things that I got out of when I was talking to him was that he almost has a hard time containing these ideas that are just pouring out of his head like a raging river. Like he's trying to capture handfuls of water. And there's raging river of ideas that's going through his head. You know, when he described his childhood that he thought that everybody was like that. And then as he got older, he thought he was insane. Yeah. I can relate to that. I've... I'm trying to learn how to talk, but I've trouble talking because there's like a million ideas running in my head. Like anything you say, I'll immediately start these like weird times that they go off. And I want to start thinking about them. Does that true with a lot of people when you're aligned at work? I think so. I think that's kind of puzzle solving. Like that's what the comfort is. I'm just surprised that a CEO is able to continue being that kind of puzzle solver. Do you see that tweet that he made about his plans? Like you put a tweet up and I think it was 2006. And then it's essentially done all those things. He's done all those things. Now the thing is most people... So there are a lot of people love you know, I must. But there's a quite a large community of people that don't love him so much. Well, that's always the case. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know if that's always the case. When is it not the case? Who just who accomplishes as many things that a guy does where everybody loves him? It's a difficult, I mean, I'm not a historian. I could say Steve Jobs' terrible example. So many people hated that guy. So many people hated that guy. I have personal friends that are involved in technology that wouldn't use Apple products because he's such a twat. Sure. They didn't want to have anything to do with him. They knew people that were engineers under him. They said it was horrible and mean and it just required so much with screaming people and insult them and you know, he had these ideas in his head that he needed to get done. And if you couldn't work the hours that you needed to do what he wanted to accomplish, you know, who treat you like shit? Yeah. You're right. I just wish the world was better. I think because like with all people like that, like we Steve Jobs and with Elon Musk when he dies, people will always, you'll remember the greatness, right? Yeah. So that's how it seems to work. It's just sad that you can't celebrate that currently. But I do think there's one particular aspect of his personality that I also share that pisses people off really bad, which is like he said, he had a plan, but he's late on that plan. He's promising things and he keeps being like a a year or two or three late. Right. And that really, I don't know if it actually angers people or if people that already don't like you use that as a thing to say why they don't like you. But it's certainly a thing that people say a lot. Yeah. And but I think that's an essential element of doing extremely difficult things is over promising and trying to over deliver. That's the whole point. Right. Is to say to make all the engineers around you believe that it's doable in a year. That's essential to do it in two years. So like that that kind of entruly believing it is it seems to be essential. Well, didn't he have people pay full price for that roadster? Like you got on a list. Yes. So you paid a quarter of a million dollars for a car that's essentially vaporware. Yeah. But the thing, so I don't know, there's a bunch of financial people that get like mad at that. Oh, yeah. They get serious. Like there's investors, you know, it's like, it's, I think it's the most short, it's stock in history. Yeah. So, but it keeps kicking ass. I don't Confuses the fuck out of people. To me, it's the stock market is the most boring thing ever in people. It's it's like it's a gambling. Yes. And so you trying to say you're an expert in investing in the stock market. I blocked. I removed those people from my life because they don't say anything any interesting ideas. I said it. But, you know, when you're doing legitimate investment, yes, that's that's a really important services society. But if you're commenting on the fundamentals of engineering problems that real engineers are trying to solve, that's not interesting to me. The so it that kind of stuff upsets I think financial folks. But the beautiful thing is when you have people buy vaporware and you bring that vaporware to reality, that's the amazing thing that you will definitely bring that roadster to reality. If he doesn't die, that roadster will happen. Yeah. If he dies, bail out now same with it same with that insane cyber truck. Yeah. Cyber truck is fucking awesome. I mean, so ridiculous. If you live long enough, you better believe there's humans being put on Mars. Whether it's him or he gets everybody else. See, that one I'm skeptical of just a type of people that are going to want to go. See, you're not talking about the engineering problem. No, I think it's possible. It ultimately, you know, I mean, it's look, can we put people in space for sure? We've definitely done it. Can we put things or some people think space is fake? That's do you ever Google hashtag space is fake? It's wonderful. It's a testament to the education system in this country. Well, and that's tiny little tangent. I've gotten, I joked about flat earth and space is fake a little bit, almost like saying that's an interesting way to being open minded. And then I realized that's not something to joke about. But there's a community of people that take it extremely seriously. And then some of them thanked me for acknowledging that the possibility of and then I had said, okay, plus a little heart. Okay, this is not a little brain. I appreciated their open mindedness, but they should take introduction to physics. MIT OpenCourseWare provides courses on physics. They should, can a regular person just sign out for that? Yeah, yeah, it's open free. So how does that work? You would have to do in order to take those courses. It's all made available online. Just go to m8mit.org or is it.edu? MIT OpenCourseWare is the website. I mean, most people, it's all on YouTube now. Oh, that's beautiful. It's all lectures. They're like millions of views, introductory lectures to physics, mathematics, statistics. I have courses on the shadows. But in order to understand that the work has been done to recognize the fact that the earth is around, what would you recommend right away? Classical mechanics with exponential focus, experimental focus. See, none of those things are going to be... If you're a dang bat, you're not going to be able to absorb all that. Well, look up the Wikipedia page for gravity, I think. That's not going to help either. They say gravity's never been proven. No one understands gravity. There's no one who actually understands what gravity is. We just know the effects of it. It's actually magnetism. Yes, for sure. So you have to undertake the effort of proving the Wikipedia article for gravity. Just know the effects of it. It's actually magnetism. Yes, for sure. So you have to undertake the effort of proving the Wikipedia article for gravity wrong. So Wikipedia, bro. Want a terrible example. Wikipedia sketchy. It says I'm Brian Cowan's brother. It says I got celiac disease. He says a bunch of shit. It's not real. How do you know you're not related? I know. Okay. I'm pretty sure. I mean, why is well be my brother? I don't know if it says it anymore. Someone put it in there again. Fuck it. Wikipedia is actually another distributed system. It's incredible. Lea surprising to me that it works. Yeah, it is, right? Because even though there is a lot of misinformation in it and there's a lot of, you know, falsehoods. There's a lot of really good information as well. You know, like particularly about historical figures and interesting stuff. You know, if you want to find facts on things and on science and technical topics or not, not like nutrition science or things, but there's a lot of debates on like physics and math and so on. It's really good. It's really, really good. So it's community supported by other physicists. But moving back from a fighter, it can go back to why you think we're not going to be colonizing Mars. Oh, I'm not saying ever. I'm just saying the problem to me is the type of people that would want to do it. Because they can't return. You know, that's the real issue with going to Mars that you can't return. There's, you don't think there's a huge number of non crazy explorers in this world that want to die on Mars. I had a whole bit about it. I really believe that it's the the fringe of the fringe that would be willing to die on Mars. No, I'd be willing to die on Mars. Really? Stay here. Come on. I like you. Don't go. No, it's my take what I like about me. It's all temporary. What's all temporary life? Yeah, it's temporary. Right. You're going to die someday. Sure. But if you decide to die on fucking Mars, like bro, you'll be sending me emails from Mars. Dude, I fucked up. I won't be sending you this. This is the thing. You're into the Native Americans even read something following your work there. I'm sad. Obsessed man. Yeah. I've been obsessed about World War Two or one, but you're like, you're converting me to think of like to the to the both the warrior cultures and the suffering in that world. The suffering is insane. It's insane. I'm this book on black elk. Man, it details his life from he was a young boy when during Custer's last stand. He was there when Custer was killed. Black elk. Yeah, but the man. The guy. Yeah, what do you call that? He's a oglala's Lakota medicine man. Yeah, and he just lived through the transition. He lived through the transition of them battling with the US soldiers to them being on the reservation and fucking insane poverty insane. Just in this the stories of people, the illnesses and the deaths, how many people's children died, malnourishment, starvation, abuse, and then how just how much they hated where they were living and how they were living. On the reservation. Yeah, it's horrific man. It's horrific. It's like it's hard to imagine. It's hard to imagine when you're reading that this just happened. You know, he's talking about the really horrible parts at the end were in the early 1920s, 1930s. It's hard to imagine. This tribe from 100 years prior in the 1820s were living wild and free and were living the same way they had lived for hundreds of years and had this incredible relationship with the land and these incredible religion that they practiced where they worshiped the earth and the animals and the sky and they had all these conical concepts for the way you should live your life and how to guarantee prosperity and how to guarantee success. Man, they had a fascinating culture. I mean, and it's gone. It was wiped off the face of the map. There was nothing like it anywhere else on earth. There was no culture anywhere on earth that was like the Native American culture in the 1600s and 1700s and 1800s. But in that period of time, they had this spectacular way of life and there was often very cruel and very ruthless and they wore it on each other. It's this idea that Native Americans were living in peace and harmony with each other's nonsense. Yes, I started. I was listening while doing hills. Yes, you kick my ass. I was listening to the empire of the summer moon. A great man's book. I commented on your Instagram saying something, basically admiring the purity of that way of life. So much shit by people saying, oh, you think rape and murder is pure and admirable. So there's certainly an aspect of their way of life, which is sort of the warrior ethos. The Comanches in particular were the most ruthless. The most war like, that's all they did. Basically like the Genghis Khan, the same kind of the same horses, the innovators actually, more innovators. And all they ate was meat as well. I mean, all they ate was buffalo. They essentially rode with the buffalo, killed buffalo, hunted buffalo, and then raided other tribes. And then until the white man came and then they started raiding the white man, killing the white man. But they were at war with white people for hundreds of years. They were the reason why the West was hard to settle. I mean, the sneaky shit, I don't know if you've gotten to the point where they were giving people these big swaths of land in Oklahoma. And they essentially set them up to be killed by the Comanche. They will say, hey, go out here. We'll give you 1,600 acres. It's all yours. And they're like, oh, terrific. Let's get our family in. Get in a wagon and no one let them know that the wildest motherfuckers that have ever lived on this continent were running that place. And they would go there and just get slaughtered. And one after another families were wiped out that way. And people were kidnapped and that lady that I have on the wall outside of Cynthia Ann Parker, who was adopted by the Comanche. She's, her family was murdered in front of her when she was nine years old. And she became the wife of a great Comanche chief. And her son became the last Comanche chief, Kwan a Parker. It's crazy, man. It's the craziest story. Yeah, so there's all these tribes that some of them are probably more like some of them are pieces. Yeah. That had a way of life here. I don't want to run matrices too much. I mean, most people don't believe me, but I'd really like that way of life, that closeness to nature. You said texting and for Mars or whatever. I like, you know, I wouldn't choose it, but I would be happier if I was forced into it. It seems like a con, a con or intuitive notion, but because I'm so weak. I'm so soft. They're even running hills yesterday realize how soft I am. Well, you worked too much. Yeah. No, behind a computer, we have little fingers typing, right? But you're also a black belt in Jiu Jitsu. You also a martial artist, you know, me against the Comanche warrior. Good luck. I think you fuck a Comanche up. They don't know how to fight for real. If they had a weapon they kill you. I think you're just, I know. I listen. First of all, they were pretty small. They weren't very big people. Maybe. Second of all, they didn't know Jiu Jitsu. The average person that doesn't know Jiu Jitsu, you're going to choke the fuck out of them. That'd be fun actually to sort of go into different warring cultures. I go in Genghis Khan times without weapons to see what kind of combat style is that. Just send Francis and Gano. He'd clean out the entire fucking car. I mean, just send Hoi's Gracie as well. Yeah, for sure. Francis and Gano in all generations will be screwed. It's not a... But I think... It's interesting. Yeah, right. It's just overwhelming. But I think that if you had real Jiu Jitsu skills, you know what you know now today, particularly because Jiu Jitsu is involved so much. I mean, even the Jiu Jitsu of 2020 is so radically different from the Jiu Jitsu of 1990. It's radically different. Like almost unrecognizable in a lot of ways. But clearly though, the basics are still the most important. And there are some of the greats of all time who just operate with the basics. Whether it's hard to gracie or Hicks and Gracie or... You know, there's a lot of great, great Jiu Jitsu players that just have those solid, solid-barrow, you know, solid basics that are just honed to razor-sharp edge. You know, you know, Crohn, Crohn Gracie. And I... And when I say basic, it is a compliment. I mean, he, you know, armbars, triangles, guillotines, renegade jokes, those types of things. That are perfected to a level that is they don't participate in a lot of the more modern. There's a lot of like crafty, weird stuff that a lot of guys try today. And some of the greats, even the greats that participate in Jiu Jitsu matches today and are effective at it. Don't really have that kind of style. Yeah, I mean, but Crohn has actually had some more creativity if you look at how you're gracie. That's like how basic. There's, I don't even know if he does foot locks. I think that my favorite thing to do is on YouTube just watch Hajir Gracie matches. Like he looks like he's half asleep and he demolishes the greatest black bolts in the world. Slowly, but just like in a, you know, half asleep way, taking them down, passing their guards, going into mount and doing a choke. Yeah. And it's like the... Against, I don't know, but Chadcher, I get against just the best. Well, my instructor, John Jugman-Chato, same thing, man. Just his style. It's just solid basics of Jiu Jitsu. And he has a saying that you more, you know, the less you use, which is really interesting. Well, you mentioned Comanche Warriors and the meat. Yeah. I'm glad some of the diet, the carnivore diet. Yeah, man. Here's something crazy. I got off that diet for this weekend because it was, I did the month and then once Saturday came around, I said, I ate Italian food, I had Girl Scout cookies, pasta and then yesterday I went to Disneyland. So yesterday I went way, way off the diet. And I had ice cream and I ate all kinds of shitty food. And I was getting back pains and knee pains and all these kind of weird pains that went away when I was on the diet. Now this is not a testament against plant-based diets because I was eating shit. And shitty food. Right. And pasta, you know, which is a lot of, you know, bread, pasta. Yeah, yeah, yeah, spaghetti. That stuff causes inflammation. It just does. Yeah. You know, it just does. Sugar causes inflammation. But it's interesting to have this great month where basically two weeks in after the diarrhea died off, I had two solid weeks of no weeks in pains and feeling great. I was like, this is wild. This is really wild. I feel amazing. And then two days of eating shit. And like, my back hurts right now. I'm sitting here, my back is hurting. My knee was hurting yesterday. Like, all these weird aches come right back. Well, it's a nice thing about the Joe Rogan effect is that you try and this diet and you're talking about keto a lot. That's like become more socially acceptable to do. Because I've been eating keto or low carb for many years and doing fasting like 24, 48 hour fast. And I was kind of keeping more in the low down. But even this time, like traveling, like what I like to do when traveling is kind of trying to be, give my current situation not spending much money. And so I go one of the best ways to go either carnivore or keto is to go to mood models and just order beef patties. They'll sell you to beef patties. Dollar 50. Really. For a quarter pound. Yeah. So you can, you know, it's like usually what I use about two pounds of meat a day. And that's what is it. I don't know. That's like 15 bucks. So you've been doing this carnivore thing too? How long have you been doing it for? Often also I have to for the carnivore. I've done since the first time either your podcast or Jordan Peterson or that kind of thing, I died into. But before that I've been doing keto, like my favorite meal is just like meat and I know some people hate cauliflower, but cauliflower and or green beans. Why do you worry if people hate cauliflower? Why do you have to make that distinction? I don't know. Some people hate cauliflower. I'm not out there, hate and cauliflower. Who the fuck are those people? That's a weird thing to hate. I just said a bunch of people say cauliflower sucks recently. Yeah, you're right. You're cooking right. It doesn't suck. You know what's good? Buffalo cauliflower, like buffalo wings, buffalo sauce, cauliflower, fucking delicious. What's that? But that's his sauce. Yeah. No. Sauses is like you're giving into your weakness. And spices. And you're giving away. No, see like a blender taste, it to me is better because you get to appreciate the fundamentals of the food. So I got it. Oh, okay. So I don't know. I just enjoy it. Do you salt meat? Salt. Oh, how do you do that when you salt? But you just appreciate the fundamentals of the meat. Yeah. Good point, yeah. You don't like hot sauce? You're playing chess. Do you like hot sauce? Hot sauce on everything. Yeah, I do. But I stay away from it. Like I try to listen food to me right now in my life is a source of energy, not a source of pleasure. But it can be both. Unfortunately, I'm not addicted to drugs. I'm not addicted to many things, but with food, my mind, I don't know how to moderate. Really? So like anything pleasurable is a problem for me to do. Like cookies? You put two cookies in front of me? Two. Like I don't know how to eat just one of them. Like it just doesn't, my brain is terrible at it. This is Girl Scout Cookie Season, son. Yeah. They changed the name of Samoa's. Those are my favorite. And now they have a new name. I think they call it like Tagalongs or something like that. What's that for a while, I think? Really? Whether they change it. Those are separate things though, I think. Is that am I talking about the wrong thing? The ones that are like they're chocolat on the bottom. Dude, they're so close. Some of those have that coconut in them. Yeah. Yeah. That doesn't sound like the words of a man who's going to stick to the card if we're that. Oh, I'm going to stick. All right. Yeah. I'll have cheat days or cheat meals. I should say. Tagalongs, the peanut butter. Oh, that's right. Those are good. Those are fucking good. What are the some moas now? What do they call them now? And that's the mama. But they just changed. They just changed to something new. I have no good name for the name. I have no good name for the name. I have no good name for the name. I'm rushing too. Basically, robot. Basically, I eat six of those. And I was feeling like shit. Oh. Wow. What? Maybe this is just a very quick caramel delight. Is that what it's called now? I think so. I think someone might have owned another company or whoever they were paying to me. I was wondering if it was a racial issue. That's what the question was with someone saying because it was racist. Odd question answers no. The name of the cookies are owned by the two different companies who make them. They don't source it. And they just put their names on them. They change the name on the racial issue. Wow. Because Samoa, like someone might be like sensitive to having a cookie named after an island. People like a fuck face. That's our island. Not your cookie. You know? See, those cookies don't even sound good to me anymore. What about American cheese? Is that OK? Yeah, cheese. American cheese? Not OK. Well, American. Oh, yeah. I stay with a Russian tautic. It's a cottage cheese. Well, there's Swiss cheese. There's American cheese. And that's it. Right? Is there any other countries that are named specifically after the cheese named after the country? Yeah. I bet you it's not even just like French fries. I bet you American cheese is not even American. Do you remember when there was freedom fries were while people were trying to call fries freedom fries? Like post 9-11 because they were mad that France didn't want us going over to Iraq. Yeah, and then people who hate freedom banned it. Yeah, freedom fries. Oh, that's so dumb. The thing I really like actually, I think that the thing that people don't often talk about is the focus. Like my life, I think a lot of people do this as being able to focus for long periods of time. And that's why I stuck with keto and with those or fasting especially. Yes, the focus is pretty tremendously. Well, that's what I really got with the carnivore diet. The amount of my flatness of energy, the lack of dips and valleys, peaks and valleys, it's amazing. Yeah, it's great. And the fasting helps me too. Of course, it doesn't only what's called Omad, one meal a day. You could just say one meal a day. This Omad stuff. Jesus Christ, everybody. I'm a hip-redded lingo guy. I think I read it. It's Omad. Oh, okay. No, I don't know. One meal a day. But 24 hour fast, that's a careful weapon you have to play with, at least for me. It's weird. It helps your mind really focus. I can sit sometimes for five, six hours a day like programming, really thinking and like lose track of time and really focus. But when you interact with other human beings, you're kind of a little bit of an asshole. I am sorry. I mean, when I am. In a way where it's funny, but if there's something about a person that's full of crap, you are more likely to point that out. When you're on keto or carnivore? No, it's irrespective of diet. Keto carnivore, whatever. It's the fasting. The fasting. Oh, the fasting. It's fasting. Really? It's more irritable. Is it what it is? I think it's irritable, but you also see things more clearly. So I don't know. I'll talk to my parents or something like that. When I'm more well fed, I'll be like just enjoying having fun with them. Like fasted, I'll be like, why are you always judging me kind of thing, right? You realize the thing, the aspects of the interaction, which are problematic and you want to sort of highlight them. I'm just sort of noticing it, which is problematic when you're in a working environment, especially sort of deliberating, discussing with other engineers how to solve a problem. I'm more likely, especially with a lead to team to say that somebody is a little bit full of shit. When I'm fasting, as opposed to that makes sense. Being a little bit more kind and eloquent about expressing why they're full of shit. I found myself feeling more aggressive and more inclined to use recreational insults. When fasting or carnivore. What's the recreation on itself? Come on, fuckface. Fuckface. You know, like saying something like that to someone or filling the blank, whatever. The rate of other words you would like to do. That sounds like an academic paper. The rate of fuckface goes up. Well, just in casual conversation, I'd find myself using fun insults. But more often. But with the intent of kindness behind like, fuckface. No, I mean, haven't even talked about people weren't there. Just having fun. Yeah. But that's also a function of being a comedian. We do that to each other really bad. Yeah. Like, I had a birthday. My friends made me a cake. Said happy birthday, fagget. It's like that kind of shit is just so a part of the culture of comedians. Like everybody calls everybody bitch. Everybody, you know, it's just, yeah, it's fun. Which is awesome because this comedian culture is now at full on war with the cancel culture. And it's like two armies of people who don't give a damn with people who give way too much of a damn. Well, I have mixed feelings about all that stuff. But I ultimately feel like the directions moving in. The reason why it's happening is for good. I think there's a lot of people that are complaining about things and they're trying to cancel people and all that stuff. And it's, you know, ultimately some of it's misguided. But I think the idea is behind it. Like the primary push, like the gravity behind it is people want less racism, less discrimination, less, less of a lot of things. But then along the way you have hypocritical human behavior that gets involved in this. And you have people that are, you know, deeply flawed themselves, but pointing out minor flaws in other people. And then they get exposed and they feel horrible. And for every person who participates in this cancel culture, it's like the way it was coming back at you. I mean, it comes in and it comes out. And if you go too far out on that fucking pier, it's going to get you. And this is part of it that we're learning. And I think what people are today, like if you look at the, just if you look at humanity from like the 1930s, those hard men, people lived in a hard way. It was ruthless. If you watch films from the 1900s or early 1900s, the first of all, the domestic violence was so normal. Like heroes in movies in the 50s and 60s just smacked women in the face. Heroes smacked their wives, you know, hit their kids. It was a different world. And people would look probably at our time today and say, people openly ate meat, meaning not, or like I could see if the engineered meat. Not engineered meat, right? Yeah. Sort of ate meat from factory farms as opposed to sort of, as opposed to recreationally hunting it themselves and eating what they've hunted or engineered meat, lad meat. Or you can get ethically raised food. I mean, there are a lot of ranchers. It's one of the things that butcher boxes are very well, is they make sure that they have relationships with ranchers who have a commitment to ethically raised animals and ethically, ethically killed animals. And what that means is, you know, they don't participate in anything that has anything to do with factory farming, no antibiotics, no added hormones ever. And that is possible. I mean, people have been eating animals from the beginning of time, literally. 97% of the world eats animals. And this idea that the only way to do it is through factory farming, I don't think that's correct. And the only way, you know, I mean, this, the idea is, if you eat meat, you participate in factory farming, and that's horrific. I don't think that's true. But I do think it is true when it comes to fast food for the most part. And that's unfortunate. And I think if they could, I mean, we need more transparency for sure when it comes to that stuff. And that's one of the reasons why those ag-gag laws, agricultural gag laws, where people, there's laws that prevent people from working in these factory farming situations to expose. There's laws that prohibit them from exposing the horrors of these environments. That's a real problem. That's a real issue that's clearly designed to protect that industry and allow them to commit these crimes. Yeah, it's one of the things. I'm conscious of my own hypocrisy in this. So I think deeply, unfortunately, love meat, sort of like, and I'm aware of the, how unethical factory farming is. Yeah. And so those two things I have to sit with and be conscious of. I don't know what. That's a question like, when did that happen? When did the factory farming thing happen? You go back to the 1930s. There was no factory farming. It was just farming. I think it was probably incremental. Are you sure? It was in the 1930s. There was an already some mass. So what is factory farming is scale, but also sort of the suffering. There's a certain line you start to cross, where it just feels those. I mean, it's unclear which point it really becomes torture versus agriculture. Agriculture. That's an interesting line. Yeah, it's probably a good answer for that. The real problem is probably the fast food. The real problem is probably where it's probably where it's loaded. Where's McDonald's? McDonald's probably started 100 years ago. I don't know. I don't know. I'm not sure when it started. At scale, you know, the feeding of massive amounts of people that aren't growing anything. That's the real issue. The real issue is when you, whether you're in New York City or Shanghai or Los Angeles, large gigantic metropolitan areas that aren't growing anything, they got to get a lot of food to those people. If you have 20 million people, I can Los Angeles, 20 million people eat meat. That's a lot of meat. Yeah, you got to feed them. Yeah, you got to feed them. Oh, there's a sign steps up. I think Labage and Year Meat is kind of interesting. Yeah, it is interesting. How much have you paid attention to it? Not much. I'm waiting. I, this is the horrible thing. I'm very cognizant of it that I kind of don't allow my brain to think much about this whole space because I love meat. And I'm trying to save money. I get it. Right. So you eat those McDonald's or the pounder beans. Yeah. So, and the life of a scientist, right? The scientist and especially now I've taken a leap. That's a difficult leap. So I'm still affiliated with MIT, but I decided to leave my full-time position. Why? Do a startup. So I want to try to build, try and, trying to build the kind of thing I dreamed about about the movie, her. I've been working. That's been 80, 90% of my day. And in fact, me doing the podcast is trying to, is not trying, is already successful at giving me enough money for food and shelter. Tell people the name of the podcast so they can artificial intelligence podcasts. Lex Friedman. Lex Friedman. Lex Friedman. Listen to, what is it? Elon Musk. Eric Weinstein's on there. I talk with Gary Kasparov, Chaunkowski, Sean Carroll. Sean Carroll's brilliant. He is brilliant. What is it like talking to Chaunkowski? He talks with his, I love it. Well, I talk. Most people say my voice is very boring, and I talk slowly. To those people I say, go fuck yourself. I love you. I love you. I love you. You're right. I'm trying to actually, it's very difficult to be, to express thoughts, like Sam Harris struggles to, to express thoughts with the kind of humor and eloquence that they are in your brain, like to convert them. Like as a comedian, you're essentially a storyteller. So you're ready. You don't often, you probably don't even acknowledge, you don't even know how you did it. You're like, how you're crazy. You've probably developed this art of storytelling, of being able to laugh and make other people laugh of like bouncing back and forth. To me, most of my life has been spent behind a book or computer thinking interesting thoughts. But not connecting with other people and doing that dance of conversation. So learning that dance while also thinking is really tough. So with Chomsky it was like a pleasure because we could both be robots. But, but I think he's like 92 years old. Is he really? Yeah. And the thing I love the bottom. So, you know, there's all that political stuff that I don't pay attention. I mean, he's a major sort of activist, but he's also a linguist that thinks that language is the core of every thing. of cognition. So like, it's at the bottom. Everything starts with language cognition. There's reasoning perception. All of that is things built on top of language. There's a brilliant sort of seminal research. But 92 years old, he still looked in my eyes and really listened and really thought and really sharp ideas came out. Like, you do the same thing. That was the people asking me like, we meet Joe Rogan. Like, you don't take yourself too seriously. Even with your celebrity with the popularity of the podcast, that's a huge thing. And with Chomsky it was really surprising to me. As well, he's pretty stubborn on his ideas and so on. People criticize him. He's so stubborn in his ways. He didn't take himself too seriously. Like, I sat there. I'm just some kid talking to him. He like, really listened. Like, the stupid questions, the interesting questions. He really listened. 92 years old to have that kind of curiosity. That was, I was like, I'm so happy when I see that kind of thing. Yeah, that's a wonderful example of a career academic who's still just concentrating on ideas. I do. Still thinking always. Because academics can be like, really any other endeavor, any other discipline. You can get lazy. Because academics can be like really any other endeavor, any other discipline, you can get lazy. You see that in almost every walk of life, there are certain people that rest on their laurels. And especially when you become popular, you get really good at explaining. So you get like, you do these talks, you do these lectures, you start saying the same thing over and over, and you forget to listen. Because of this podcast, the artificial intelligence talks, but also Joe Rogan, very two different groups of fans who might both love. People come up to me and start a conversation and I love it. Like they're just like listening to them and they're, you know, hope I never lose that. I'm like younger than Chomsky, I hope you stay that way. It's nice if you have the time. It's a problem if you're in the rush and someone wants to talk to you about something like very deep. I've had those moments where someone says, hey man, I got to ask you. And then they, I'm like, dude, this is a long conversation. I can't, I can't do that. That's the version. That's your burden actually. I'm in a beautiful place, which I don't think will last too long, which is I'm not sufficiently famous to, to work. Like, though those things don't happen often to what can I can have that conversation. Right. You have the luxury. Although let me say I got to hang out Brian Callan who was a huge fan of on nine years Eve. I got to watch the old man dance, make some dance moves on that. And this funny thing happened is he's a celebrity. Yeah. So we're hanging out and two times somebody came up to me and Brian and they said, wow, it's Lex Friedman is so good to me. And then they completely ignored Brian. That's like the killing of the most of it. He made me so proud. It's because it's a fake cost. Then I think it's like nerds and whatever. Sure. Yeah. It was, it was funny though. He's, he's one of my, I mean, it was incredibly, like I didn't know you guys are friends until they all came together in the podcast and so on. I was a huge fan of his from like Matt TV days. He's one of my oldest friends. Yeah. How'd you guys? What's what's what's what's we met on Matt TV? I was a host one week, and he was the, he was, you know, one of the stars of the show. He's an awesome guy, man. Like a really underappreciated person and he's a guy that because he acts so much and because he gets into that, you know, he's just always into that world. He didn't put the same amount of time into doing his podcast, his personal podcast as I think he should have because he's great at it. You know, he was one of the first people that I knew that interviewed Jordan Peterson. And he's, you know, that. Yeah. He said a bunch of brilliant people on his podcast. He's had a bunch of like really interesting intellectuals and scientists and I think it's a mixed mental art or something like that. Yeah. And he's doing it with Hunter, his friend, but he stopped doing it with him. He's an unusual guy, Brian Kalan. It's because he's silly, but he's also brilliant. Yeah. You can see that sort of, Eric Weinstein is the same quality obviously from different worlds. The silliness, you can see through the silliness that there's an intelligent, first of all, good human being that, but also intelligent human being. But at the same time, he's like the butt of every joke. I appreciate that so much. I love silly people. Yeah. Silly people are so much more fun. The people that are like easily offended and easily upset. Like, oh, you're so exhausting. Silly people are the best. I actually, uh, so I played your theme song on guitar. And Brian Kalan's researching it. Like, how do you play it? And it was a Jerry theme song. And there's a Brian Kalan singing video of like Joe Rogan shoulders for days. Yeah. Some lyrics. Some silly song he made on. I'm going to, I'm working on an ideal, I'm going to try to figure out because I can play guitar and play the theme song I put up on like, you guys going to work together and make an album? No, we're going to make an album like a Joe Rogan theme. He's going to come up with some words on there. What's the notes? You got, you got pages and pages of notes in front of you. These are stuff that you really wanted to discuss. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we definitely talked about AI at all. But let me at least, uh, Boston Dynamics, I'd be interested to talk about it. There was a fake video that I sent Jamie today. These mother fuckers. They keep getting me. There's a new fake video. I think that was the same one. I think there's someone just taking the clip from it. Oh, is it? Those guys have been making VFX videos on YouTube for 10 plus years. They're really good at it. So they're so good for people to know that there's a YouTube channel where people, I think it's a single YouTube channel that does like, yeah, visual effects, like fake humanoid or robot robots that kind of resemble something like Boston Dynamics, they do crazy stuff with guns. Yeah. This one, they gave the robot a gun and have see if you pull it up, Jamie. What is the general, the corridor digital on YouTube is the guys that keep that make a quarter through as the YouTube channel. I think fucking incredible that it's not real. It looks so real. And so the, uh, the robot they kick it, they hit it with a hockey helmet or a hockey stick rather. Is there like a long video they made a while ago? They might have made a new one, which was one out in desert, but I think I've seen it before. I see the, they trick you with the Boston Dynamics is boss town. Boston Dynamics. It looks so realistic. But here's the thing, we're not that far off from this thing. No, okay. Okay. Okay. Let's, let's, let's walk back. Let's walk it back. It, it's not realistic. Uh, in what way? So let's, it looks human realistic. So you can tell it's a human, like a robotics person could tell it's a human because it's really difficult to do that kind of motion that kind of movement. Oh, like when it's getting shot, well, not the getting shot. So there's a lot of movement. It does for the purpose of comedy. Right. Like it actually is on purpose trying to look like a human for the comedic internet effect, like getting a human that's getting pissed off and so on. Yeah. Those qualities are like another order. Like this here where it's like, yeah, come on, come on, come on. So for a term. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The Brucey type of movements, some of those are just comedic. You know, you don't need terminator type robot that right. But they do have legitimate robots that can do backflips now and do. So it's really it's a backflip. This is real. This is all real. This is manipulation. So all of these robots, depending on what we're talking about here, but those are remote controlled. And these are single demonstrations that they've perfected. So they're, it's really important to distinguish between the body of the robot and the brain of the robot. So these bodies, unlike anything else, unlike a room, but unlike a drone who can also be very threatening, these bodies somehow, we anthropomorphize them and they terrify us. I don't know what it is. I met spot many in person. That was one of the most transformative moments in my life. Really? Because I know how dumb it is. But the experience of it, like, it's not even ahead. It's supposed to be a hand, but it looks like ahead. And it like looking up at me with that hand, I felt like I was like, I think it was magic. It was like a, um, it was like Frankenstein coming to life is this moment of creation. And what I realized is my own brain sort of anthropomorphized. And the same way you're like looking at these robots and you're thinking these things are terrifying. Like what's like, you know, in 10, 20 years, where we're going to be, yeah, that's our brain playing tricks on us. Because the key thing that's a threat to humanity or an exciting possibility for humanity is the intelligence of the robots, the brains, the mind. And these robots have very, very little intelligence. So one of, so in terms of being able to perceive and understand the world, very importantly, very importantly, to be learned, to learn about the world from scratch. So the terrifying thing is you talked off and like with this philosophical kind of notion that Sam Harris talks about sort of exponential improvement, be able to become human level intelligence, superhuman level intelligence, and a matter of days become more intelligent than that. That's all learning process. That's being able to learn. That's the key aspect. We're in a very early days of that. There's, um, there's an idea of, you know, big bang is a funny word for one of the most fundamental ideas in the nature of our universe. Same way, self play is a term for, I think, one of the most important powerful ideas and artificial intelligence that people are currently working on. So self play, I don't know if you're familiar with a company called DeepMind and Open AI, some Google DeepMind. And again, I know you're first person shooter guy, but Starcraft and Dota 2. So last year, these are what he called them. Real time strategy, I guess, in people with millions of dollars in esports competitions. And so Open AI separately had Open AI 5, which took on Dota 2. Dota 2 is the computer game based on Warcraft 3. That's the most popular esports game. And then DeepMind took on Starcraft with their alpha star system. And the key amazing thing is there, similar to AlphaGo and AlphaZero, then learn to play Go, is the mechanism of self play. That's the exciting mechanism that I think, if we can figure out how to have an impact on more serious problems than games would be transformative. Okay. What is it? It's learning from scratch in a competitive environment. So thinking of, you have two white belts, sorry, go into the gym. So you have two white belts training against each other and trying to figure out how to beat each other without ever having black both supervision and structures and so on and slowly getting better that way, coming up inventing new moves that way. And eventually they get better and better by that competitive process. That's the machine playing itself, without human supervision. The interesting thing is there's a lot of cases in which if you set up the competitive environment well enough for those two white belts, they'll learn to beat black belts. They'll learn to be not only black belts, they'll learn to be better than like exactly the kind of evolution that's happening in MMA right now. If you put that in digital space and speed it up, you know, a million fold, it'll continue to improve. Let me pause here because this is one of the things that I think probably translates to AI as it does to Jiu Jitsu. You need more than one opponent. Like you can't have one input. One person training with one person specifically and singularly, you're not going to develop the type of game that you need to become a real black belt in Jiu Jitsu. So 100% exactly. So that's part of the brilliance of this mechanism. So imagine you didn't just have white belts, you had an opportunity to generate a new random white belt. Like a fat big one, little one, and all kinds of different one that will be a good one. A passive one. And then let them play. And then what you find is like Jiu Jitsu might be simpler than the general problem sort of different kind of like stock Rats and so on. But there is sets of strategies in this giant space. These complex hierarchical strategies, like high level strategies and then specifics of different moves that emerge. Some of which you didn't even realize existed. And that requires that you start with a huge amounts of random initial states, like the fat person, the skinny person, the aggressive person, so on. And then you also keep injecting randomness in the system. So you discover new ideas. So even when you reach purple belt, you don't continue with those same people. You start your own school. You start expanding to totally random new ideas and expanding this way. And what you find out is there's totally surprising to human beings like in the game of chess or in the game of Go in the game of Starcraft. These, this self play mechanism can do what sort of AI people have dreamed of, which is be creative, creating totally new behaviors, totally new strategies. They're surprising to human experts. That's why Go was so astounding to them, right? Because it's such a complex game, which a hard game. And it's able to, well, the first astounding thing is able to beat the world champion. The second astounding thing about both chess and Go is it's able to create totally new ideas. So I'm not good enough at chess or Go to understand the newness of them. But Grandmasters talk about the way Alpha Zero plays chess. And they say there's a lot of brilliant, interesting ideas there, like very counterintuitive ideas. And that's such a, and that's all the first breakthroughs didn't have as much self play. They were trained on human experts, but Alpha Zero and Alpha Star and Open AI five, these systems are all fundamentally self play, meaning no human supervision starting from scratch. So no black ball in the struct, you just use it. And that means, so they're learning from scratch, that's the, that's exceptionally powerful yoke. So that that's a process from zero. You can get the superhuman level intelligence in a particular task in a matter of days. That's super powerful, super exciting, super terrifying. If that's kind of what you think about the challenges, we don't know how to do that in the physical space, space of robots. There's something fundamentally different about being able to perceive, to understand this environment, to do common sense reasoning. The thing we really take for granted is our ability to reason about the physics of the world, about the fact that things weigh things, that you can stack things on top of each other. The fact that some things are hard, some things are soft, some things are painful when you touch them. All that, like there seems to be a giant Wikipedia inside our brain of common sense dumb logic that's very tough to build up. That seems to be an exceptionally difficult learning problem that Boston Dynamics will have to solve in order to achieve even the same kind of physical movement behavior that we saw in those videos. And then on top of that, to have the ethical behavior, not the ethical sort of the objective, the complex strategies involved in first-falling orders and then getting frustrated and then shooting everybody. That's an exceptionally difficult thing to arrive at because ultimately these systems operate on some set of objectives. And what a lot of people that think about artificial general intelligence say, the objectives we need to inject in these systems that they're trained on need to have one uncertainty. So they should always doubt themselves. Just like if you want to be a good black ball, you should always be sort of always open-minded sort of relax, always need to learn techniques. It's okay to get submitted. So always have a degree of uncertainty about your worldview. The kind of thing we criticize Twitter outrage mobs for not having. So having uncertainty. And the other thing is always have a place where there should be human supervision. And I think there's a, I think we have good mechanisms for that in place that I think I'm very optimistic about where these kinds of learning systems can take us. The exciting thing is Boston, or terrifying, depending on where do you think I'm a trustworthy human being. But Boston Dynamics is not opening up their platform. So they're working with a few people. I'm trying to make quite busy these days. I'm trying to make time to make it happen, to work with them, to build stuff on top of the platform. So it's, I'm referring to spot many as a platform. So this robot is this dumb. It's like a room, but it's a dumb mechanistic thing that can move for you. But you can build, you can add a brain on top of it. So you can make it learn, you can make it see the world and so on. That's all extra. That's not what Boston Dynamics offers. So they want to work with people like me to, to add that kind of capability. And that's exciting because now you can have hundreds of people start to add interesting learning capabilities. And so I may, I may have to retract my words about how far away we are with the capabilities of these robots once you now open up to the internet. So I was speaking to Boston Dynamics. I think they're solving the really hard robotics problem. But once you open it up to the huge world of researchers that are doing machine learning and doing computer vision and doing AI research, the kind of capabilities that my athletes robots might surprise us. That's where people are concerned, right? The big leaps, the big leaps. And then sort of just not being aware of the consequences of these big leaps. And once you let the genia of the the bottle, you can never put it back. Right. The genia and the self play mechanism where you grow from zero to becoming world class chess player. That's that's the genia being out of the bottle. Did you see black mirror? Yeah, black mirror. You know that episode heavy metal? Well, heavy metal. Very difficult to pull that off. Very. So for now, for now, and yet a conversation with Nick Bostrom, who also talking with Anapakas, one of the things he mentioned is, so I don't think he thinks about this stuff a lot. I do about military applications. Mm-hmm. I talk to folks. That's one of the things people don't just like with me. They kind of put to the side. They don't want to think about military applications. But I would be more worried about drones than I would be about robot dogs. Right. Because the kind of stuff that's on the black mirror episode is really difficult to pull off to make a robot learn. Like, with drones are kind of more impressive, right? Because they hover. They can move through 3D space. They have hellfire missiles attached to them. I mean, there's a lot of crazy shit that they can absolutely do right now with drones. And you're talking about large scale drones, but you can think of small scale drones. And I think there's a I think there's also a black mirror episode with drones where they take over I haven't seen that one. So there's I think there's drones everywhere and they're kind of doing you know, your basic friend, the government surveillance, mass surveillance kind of thing. I think it's for I think they sell in the episode that it's for a good cause. Well, spoiler alerts, but I think they like start killing everybody or of course. Wasn't there there has been research done on making artificial insects that have like little cameras inside of them that look like like a dragonfly or some sort of bug. They fly around and they can film things. And the thing that terrifies a lot of people is going more microscopic than that more like robots inside the body that's help you cure diseases. Yeah. I hope not out of certain things, even at the natural scale. So basically creating viruses, yeah, it's a little tiny ones. Yeah. And they if they learn, they can be pretty dumb. But in a mass scale, you don't have to be intelligent to destroy all of human civilization. So so the real question about this artificial intelligence stuff that everybody seems to the ultimate end of the line, what Sam Harris is terrified of, is it becoming sentient and it making its own decisions and deciding that we don't need people. That's what everybody's really scared of, right? I'm not sure if everybody's scared of it. Yeah, they might be, I think that's a story that's the most compelling, the sexiest story that the philosopher side of Sam Harris is very attracted to. Yeah. I am also interested in that story, but I think achieving sentience. I think that requires also creating consciousness. I think that requires creating the kind of intelligence and cognition and reasoning abilities that's really, really difficult. I think we'll create dangerous software based systems before that and they'll be a huge threat. I think we already have them, the YouTube algorithm, the Twitter, the recommender systems of Twitter and Facebook and YouTube from everything I know having talked to those folks, having worked on it, the challenging aspect there is they have the power to control the mass, what the mass population thinks. YouTube itself and Twitter itself don't have direct ability to control the algorithm exactly. They don't have a way to understand the algorithm and two, they don't have a way to control because what I mean by control is control it in a way that leads to an aggregate, a better civilization, meaning like sort of the Stephen Pinker, the better angels of our nature, so it encouraged the better sides of ourselves. It's very difficult to control a single algorithm that recommends the journey of millions of people through the space of the internet. It's very difficult and I think that intelligence instilled in those algorithms will have a much more potentially either positive or detrimental effect than sentient killer robots. I hope we get to sentient killer robots because that problem I think we can work with. I'm very optimistic about the positive aspects of approaching sentient, of approaching general intelligence. There's going to be a huge amount of benefit and I think there will be a lot of mechanisms that can protect against that going wrong. We know how to control intelligent systems when they are sort of in a box, when they're singular systems, when they're distributed across millions of people and there's not a single control point. That becomes really difficult and that's the way for me is the distributed nature of dumb algorithms on every single phone sort of controlling the behavior, adjusting the behavior, adjusting the learning journey of different individuals. To me the biggest worry and the more exciting things recommend their systems, what they're called. A Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, YouTube especially. That one, that one has just like I think you mentioned there's something special about videos in terms of educating and sometimes indoctrinating people. YouTube has the hardest time. They have such a difficult problem on their hands in terms of that recommendation because they don't. This is a machine learning problem but knowing the contents of tweets is much easier than knowing the contents of videos. Our algorithms are really dumb in terms of being able to watch a video and understand what it's being talked about. All YouTube is looking at is the title and the description and that's mostly the title. It's basically keyword searching and it's looking at the clicking viewing behavior of the different people so it figures out that the flat earth supporters enjoy these kinds of videos. It forms a different kind of cluster and makes decisions based on that. By the way, it seems to make definitive decisions about it doesn't like flat earth, YouTube I think. Well, YouTube in particular are they're trying to do something about the influx of conspiracy theory videos and the indoctrination aspect of them. One of the things about videos is like say if someone makes a video and they make a very particular subject and they speak eloquently and articulately but they're wrong about everything they're saying. They don't understand the science. Say if they're talking about artificial intelligence, they're saying something about things that you are an expert in. They could without being checked without someone like you in the room that says that's not possible because of X, Y, and Z without that they can just keep talking. So one of the things that they do whether it's about flat earth or whether it's about dinosaurs being fake or nuclear bombs being fake, they can just say these things and they do it with an excellent grasp of the English language. So they say they're very compelling in the way they speak. They'll show you pictures and images and if you are not very educated and you understand that this is nonsense and if you're especially if you're not skeptical, you can get roped in. You can get roped in real easy and that's a problem and it's a problem with some of the people that work in these platforms, their children get indoctrinated and they get angry. Their children get indoctrinated. Now what's interesting is they get indoctrinated also with right wing ideology and then people get mad that they're indoctrinated by like Ben Shapiro videos. So they'll get pissed off of that. Well, but you're okay with left wing. Why? Because you're left wing. So then it becomes like, okay, what is a problem? What's really a problem and what is just something that's opposed to your personal ideology and how who gets to make that distinction and that is where the arguments for the First Amendment come into play. Like should these social media companies that have massive amounts of power and influence, should they be held to the same standards as the First Amendment and should these platforms be treated as essentially a town hall? Like where anyone can speak and there's a you know a platform and there's a real problem that there's not that many of them. This is a real problem. The real problem is like Twitter is the place where people go to argue and talk about shit. And then Twitter maybe has a competitor in Facebook but YouTube certainly doesn't have a competitor. YouTube doesn't have any competitor. I mean there's Vimeo. There's a few other platforms but realistically it's YouTube. You know YouTube is a giant, giant platform. What is this? Alphabet reports YouTube ad revenue for the first time. Video service generated 15.1 billion in 2019. Holy shit! Comparison I just looked up which ad revenue was supposedly around 500 to 600 million. Wow that's a big difference. And what about Facebook? Facebook is stupendously valuable. Probably way higher than that but just the first time. Facebook I don't think pays like YouTube paid for my McDonald's burgers yesterday. Facebook's not right. Facebook is not in Twitter and Instagram. I don't think I'm paying you like directly. But there's a lot of calls to break up Facebook. I'm not I mean I'm on Facebook but I'm not on it. I don't use it. I just it's just connected to my Instagram. When I post something on Instagram it goes to Facebook as well. I don't never go to Facebook. There's a Joe Rogan Facebook group that's that's a dumpster fire of brilliant folks. Let me just put it that way. Look at this Facebook's revenue is amounted to 21.8 billion Just the fourth quarter. Jesus Christ just the fourth quarter. The majority of which were generated through advertising the company announced over seven million active advertisers on Facebook during the third quarter of 2019. Probably they'll also add an Instagram that thing with YouTube is just YouTube not Google. Not YouTube premium. Anything else? Yeah and to be fair so the cash they have they spend like Facebook AI research groups. Some of them are brilliant. It's a huge group that's doing general open-ended research. Google research Google Brain Google DeepMind and doing open-ended research. Like they're not doing the ad stuff. They're really trying to build. It's that's the cool thing about these companies having a lot of cash is they can bring some of the smartest people and let them work on whatever. In case it comes up with a cool idea like autonomous vehicles with Waymo. Yeah. It's like let's see if we can make this work. Let's throw some money at it. Even if it doesn't make any money in the next five, ten, twenty years. Let's make it work. That's the positive sort of side of having that kind of money. Yeah that makes sense that there is as long as they keep doing those kind of things. The real concern though is that they're actually severely influencing the democratic process. So it's difficult. I mean I certainly in Jack Dorsey. Jack Dorsey in terms of the CEOs of interactive. I think it was one of the good guys. Yes I agree. Yeah. I mean he's he wants a wild west Twitter. Well he doesn't know he wants he wants a good Twitter. He's kind of thinking about Wild West. But he wants his ideas have two. One that's filtered and one that's like Anything goes. Yeah. But I think he the point is nobody knows what's what's the best kind of Twitter. Even having two Twitter's like do you really want the Wild West? You want the first amendment to say free speech for everyone. It's a difficult like the gray area there you're just talking about YouTube. Like do you really want the Wild West? You want the first amendment to say free speech for everyone It's a difficult Like the gray area there you were just talking about YouTube with certain people like saying that I'm an expert in AI Or autonomous vehicles But I disagree with a lot of people and for those people make videos and maybe they don't have a PhD God forbid like are they not an expert either am I right? I'm actually personally sick of the academic sort of cathedral thinking that just because you have a PhD and just you can be an expert Like I'm not an expert. I'm an idiot. Do you feel like that that Line is getting more blurred with the access to like all those MIT courses that are online and did the Extreme amount of data that's available to people that there are going to be a lot of people that even though they might not be classically trained They have a massive amount of information and have an open mind Yeah, like the best you know, I love like I like I record a podcast right? I do like would first of all shout out to Jamie for being Incredible mastermind of audio production right? What sir, yeah But the reason I'm getting giving a shout out because I suck so badly I didn't have to do it I do it all myself and But I learned that I do it, you know pretty good when you learn it yourself from scratch Just like would you just so with music and so on at Lenga tar? Mm-hmm. Let's scratch you can learn with the online materials. They have now. Yeah, you can become really good and the the journey you take is not the traditional Conformist journey through that education process you take your own journey and we have millions of people taking their own journey That process this is gonna be brilliant people with our PhD without ever having gone to college right and They I mean it's difficult to know what to do with that especially about political questions like economists there's these you know Paul Krugman Nobel Prize winner Economist Harvard economists, you know, there is supposed to be the holders of the truth of the fundamentals of our economy and When is there gonna be a crash? What's good for the economy? Is the left the right? What taxation system is good for the economy? But nobody really knows say we'd like nutrition science psychology economics anything that evolves humans It's a giant mess that expertise can come from anywhere like like around her Patrick I think she's pretty criticized for she's kind of young Yeah, and she's I would say you know She's an incredibly knowledgeable as one of the world sort of experts But I think academia probably doesn't acknowledge her as an expert She's like young she recently got a PhD. I don't not even sure you know like that there's that kind of hierarchy that people did she's been unjustly criticized by people who don't even know her actual credentials There was one guy who was criticizing her and saying well she's on a clinical researcher That's one of the things he was backing his criticism on like no That's exactly what she is and she's been doing that for years like you know what the fuck you're talking about people get very Touchy with her because she's young and also because she's incredibly brilliant like that lady She brings stacks and stacks and notes when she comes here She doesn't even look at them. Yeah, she just rattles off all those studies off the top of her head She has an amass of amount of data available and she's very unbiased in her perceptions of things like her She's all about what do the results say what have the studies proven? What can we learn from those studies and what do we have taken to consideration when we're where Assessing this data. She's brilliant. She's she's off the charts brilliant and People get fucking jealous and I've seen it. I've seen it with weaker lazy minds in academia The criticize her that had at least at one point in time had a larger platform And I think her platform is bigger now and I'm happy that I played a part in that But I don't want to be a social justice warrior, but that I've have seen women being criticized more harshly Yeah, a lot of domains of science. I think you're right. Yeah Well, you know, she's pretty too. There's a lot of things wrong there. Yeah Yeah, pretty sense for that too like good looking beautiful guy Funny yeah handsome no actually I get criticized as this guy's an idiot Boring like he'd be more like Joe Rogan. Okay. What else you got there? What else the notes wise? Yeah, I got to talk to you about martial arts, okay, I got to talk to you about Well, so I'm a huge man wrestling and if huge man a huge fan of the Dagestan region Yeah, I have up getting a lot of shit for it posted that you know Connor's gonna be cowboy before that happened I'm also a huge fan of the different styles of fighters in in a mate and I'm surprised how much shit actually Connor gets even though he brought besides besides sort of all the All the mess that came with him. He also brought an interesting style. It's an interesting way of approaching fights and it's just style thinking and Also the loss of fighting about fighting which I think is is amazing And it's it clashes with the ideas of could be to me like the could be them never gonna matter of it be so I posted that Connor would be cowboy and Why didn't know Dan was gonna say what's gonna say but face Mazvedal and I thought he could beat Mazvedal and then the biggest fight ever 30,000 people in Moscow With against could be for me for me and remat should be the greatest fighting past Mazvedal and not easy and could be getting past 20 Ferguson not easy. Yeah, yeah both of those fights and First of all Mazvedal is now gonna fight Uzman which is very interesting is there. Yeah, that's July Very very interesting fight. Who's Mon is such a tank? He's fucking terrifying they hate each other Certainly a lot of animosity in love shit talking, but it's also the more that happens the the better it is for both of them in terms of revenue generated It's a really interesting fight now. Let me tell you something when Mazvedal was at the Connor cowboy fight when they put the camera on him Biggest pop from the crowd the biggest at all the people laws like screaming people when nuts They saw him they're like yeah And he was like Like in that wearing that robe over him. He's hilarious dude I mean he's right look he's a slow starter in terms of his career Like it being recognized for the kind of fighter that he is now and also being recognized publicly as like a superstar But his time has come he is here. He is a fucking star when that camera went on him and the audience saw him that crowd went bananas The entire T-Mobile arena just they went crazy. Yeah, that would be I mean Yeah, with whose mom be it epic fight but in terms of like the great I just think the Maybe it's me the mad size notion like Rocky for mm-hmm, but Coniversus could be in Moscow. I could just see it with like Putin and fade or sitting there. I'll sit next to him Do you think they would do it in Moscow? Yeah? 30,000 people if Connor went to Moscow man, we're good luck getting out of here if you win Good luck getting out of there if you lose I feel no, but I he's so loved there Kabib is so loved in Russia, but they I think Russian people also love MMA generally mmm-hmm like the fan the number of people that love fighting in Russia is huge and I I know it seems like on the internet Kabib is like The love could be been Connor's hated, but I think ultimately they love a good. What is the what's Connor call it a good deal No, no A good scrap. I think you call it a good fight. Yeah. Yeah, so I think I think that would be probably the biggest fight of all time I think actually Connor has a shot like this what the I love Kabib is probably my favorite fighter. I love that style of fighting. I like the say ETF brothers that Frankie Edgar said mentioned to you about there probably Buwwe Sarr say TF is the greatest freestyle wrestler of all time just epic his brother Adam has a match against Was a good soldier of God? His name yo el Romero. Yo el Romero at the 2000 Olympics in the finals Y'all Romero looks like the most like if you were to imagine a tear the most terrifying opponent ever He's just like shredded ripped and then Adam say TF looks like I don't know dad bod very skinny like nerd And he just effortlessly like like destroys him really yeah with a trip like let me see that video Yeah, he said on what 2000 Olympic Sidney finals Adam say TF versus Adam say to say s ai T i e v versus You know Romero's fighting Israel at a sun. Yeah in March. I can't it's giant. I can't I Know that too much of a nerd, but well, he definitely doesn't look as built as yo el and yo el is a freak Yo el is probably the freakiest athlete I think I've ever seen personally in terms of his build like his small waist He hugged that guy and picked him up. I was at the end of it There's a couple moments where he takes his course points Well, it was down here I Yes, he's up by a four to one and I think once again he takes him down Just started off in the beginning so we could watch it There's a certain moment. I mean there goes just started right there They're basically technicians. Yeah for sure when you look at the Douglas not any people. I mean it's such emphasis on Technique yeah, but also toughness. It's like they don't they have both things like and this is one of the things that George St. Pierre told me about training in Russia Excuse me training in Montreal. What I'll take down right there. Fuck. Yeah spectacular. Yep. Oh my god. It's amazing. Look at that I think those are like inner trade boots. Yeah, you got eight that but the trip covers his mouth Would George St. Pierre told me about training with Russian nationals in Montreal He said they're so technical and that you get a lot of Americans that that are definitely technical but they emphasize Being hard and tough and grueling training and teens and grinding butting heads and practice And he said whereas the Russian nationals are far more committed to drilling far more committed to the technical aspects of exchanges and And going through you know one one technique after the other Chaining these techniques together understanding the paths also the one of the at least to me one of the differences It could be similar to your Romero's actually philosophy, but the philosophy of the Dagestani the Russian people the Soviet Union is that Recognition fame money all that stuff doesn't matter even winning doesn't matter the purity of the art is what matters At least with this idea of brothers is what they stood for Well, that's that's mirrors what kabib says about Connor, but he doesn't want to rematch with them Yeah, he's like fuck that dude. That's there I mean yeah, it could be was a little bit more of the modern age. I mean he has an Instagram and Twitter and so on right He's he and could be Despite what he says also does a little bit of trash talking and you know He's he still plays the game a little bit to change his face. Yeah, that's my face Send me location whatever changes face most people say especially where I'm unhear is basically If I'm if could be a bid science Take that as a compliment that's one of my favorite quotes he's ever said though I want to change his face It's terrifying because he can do it the cool thing is with Connor that doesn't affect him the the confidence He has the confidence that Connor has is just incredible well that he wants to do it again Well, I know for a fact that Connor was going through a whole lot of shit before that fight and did not have the best training He did an amazing training camp for this like he really prepared like he did for Connor or excuse me cowboy The cowboy fight his coaches were saying he's never looked better that he just was on fire and so focused and so So accurate and and precise and training and that he was just on fire and that just seemed to be that all of the Bullshit and the distractions and all the things that sort of come with being the kind of global superstar that Connor is He managed to figure out a way to get away from those and to just really concentrate on his craft and and pull everything to a Championship level again and god damn it he looked like it against cowboy and to see the contrast of those two cultures I mean it is a rocky four-step of situation that yeah the track because you better believe Connor McGurge will resume trash Talk who knows he might not he might not he might not I mean he didn't in this fight with cowboy at all He didn't do any trash talking I wonder if maybe he has learned and I wonder if you know his desire to beat could be eclipses his desire to get inside of his head and play all the games that he usually plays and the promotional games that Ultimately probably won't be necessary But I think you know the UFC is trying to push for it right now. They're pushing for it right now rematch with could be but they're ignoring Tony first in a lot of ways in my eyes And I'm like that is the bogeyman. That's gonna be exciting it can go it can go anywhere He's the lucky man dude. He doesn't get tired He doesn't get tired. He slices everybody up. He hasn't lot. He's lost one fight in You know X amount of years and that was because he had a broken arm Yeah, Michael Johnson broke his arm So when you think about what Tony has been able to do to world class fighters what he did to Donald I mean he just smashed Donald's face He smashed Anthony Pettis he smashed he smashes everybody Tony Ferguson's the goddamn bogeyman. He really is He doesn't get tired man and he's get taken down and for sure He can now do the his thing on him He's not scared to be taken down. That's the difference between Tony and everyone else if he gets taken down He might let him take him down and just attack off of his back and elbow the shit out of him off of his back He's fucking dangerous off his back. He's hard to control. He scrambles very very well He also has fantastic submissions and he catches him from everywhere I mean he catches triangle chokes dars chokes his dars chokes are spectacular He's one of the best dars chokes in the sport and he's he's not scared. Oh, could be you get submitted My god, that would be crazy when he puts could be asleep look Yeah, I don't like dusty boy. Do you remember when Dustin Poi a caught could be even a guillotine? Yeah, yeah, he did you caught could be even a guillotine Listen that is not what you want to be with Tony Ferguson. You do not want to be in that position with Tony Ferguson That's a different kind of guillotine. It's a Dustin Poi a is primarily a striker clearly he has submission skills He submitted guys before he submitted Max hallway and Dustin Poi is a bad motherfucker no doubt about it But when it comes to pure submission skills Tony Ferguson has an edge and You know he's a black belt and a tenth planted black belt He's a master of submissions and a great wrestler and a great scrambler and the thing about him That's so fucking terrifying. It's his cardio. He's all the things right. It's the striking It's the the grappling. It's the submission abilities. He's not gonna get tired. He doesn't get tired And his mind is impenetrable his minds impenetrable people are looking past that fight No, not me man. I don't understand it when I think what he's talking about You know look at everybody. He's fought beat the fuck out of everybody Edson barboza half El Dosa on Joe's yeah, I mean he smashes people He smashes people I mean it's crazy that I would I would say if I would say it's probably could be tough as fight I think it is as tough as fine and I do I think that's puts you know a lot of people put could be like in the Close to the top ten of all time. Oh, he's in the top ten of all time in my eyes. It's 28. No That's a lightweight cares about the record. You look at the people you've beat I sometimes we idolize people for the perfection of the record too much dude the way he ragged out Half El Dosa on Joe's the way he steamrolled Like I mean he's he's beaten top flight competition and made them look like they have no business being in there with them But I think if you beat Tony Ferguson. I mean that yeah, that's some athleticism That's it. Yeah, and people put him above like I don't know good I think Connor deserves to be in that story in that in that top like 15 top ten perhaps Perhaps a Jose all though. Yes like beating. Oh, yeah, I don't know why people look past like Josie Aldo or Eddie Alvarez oh, yeah, oh, the Eddie Alvarez fight was unbelievable like at least maybe I'm just By us in the sense that I thought there's no way that Connor beats Josie Aldo and then there's no way Connor beats Eddie Alvarez moving up a way class like I always thought he's gonna lose and it being surprised makes me like up Connor's ability my head well He's phenomenal. It's with Connor. It seems to be a matter of how focused he is and Who is he fighting and you know? Where is he at in his life? He's just his life is so chaotic. He's always filled with so many distractions I mean think about all the crazy shit. He's done the throwing the throwing the dolly at the bus and just all the nutty shit He's done, but it's nice that he seems to be still hungry to fight even though he probably has a lot of money in the bank Well, he was certainly was hungry to fight cowboy. I mean he looked fantastic in that fight And again, you know he's worth a couple hundred million dollars. It's so it's just the pure love of the game That your love of the game, and that's kind of the that's the worry though So that could be a concern and that it's cool to see that might if I nobody's ever Set anything in Russian actually probably in the Joe Rogan podcast. No, I don't think so if you ever need a translator. Okay. I'm your man No, can I read a so Say Tia just a few lines in Russian. Okay, so Buoy Sars say Tia would read a boy's barster knock which is a famous Russian poet want to know about rise Before every match and he kind of captures that ethic so this is the poem. I'll say in Russian. Okay, and then in English please Okay, the rookie is almost Slierdu breado toy puts a pad the pads No, parajena at my bed. This some you're dogenically chat Ado's in needini doi kai in yet pusti it's a No, bhijivum javum atoyka javum atoyka the kansa I know there's a bunch of Russian people that appreciate that all the translation of the crappy it's very difficult to translate to Russian language but it's The others step by step will follow the living imprint of your feet But you yourself must not distinguish your victory from your defeat and never for a single moment But trade your creator or pretend but be alive only this matters alive and burning to the end So this is the end of a poem that represents the fact that Fame that the most of the poem says that fame recognition money none of that matters The winning and losing none of that matters what matters is the purity of the art just giving yourself Completely over to the art so like others will write your story Others will tell whether you did good or bad others will inspire using your story But as the artist so in the case of posternoc he's a poet writer did road dr. Shavago the Is the art you should only think about the art and the purity of it and the love of it and so when you look at Bovacera say tea of and the brothers and that whole Dagestan region They shunned fame So I think the thing that could be this thrust into this MMA world which is fundamentally I mean it's a really is a popular sport It's an interesting It's an interesting thing. I mentioned I think last time I was on here the most terrifying human being You know investors when they like buy a penny stock saying it's gonna blow up to me the most terrifying human being in the heavyweight division The Russian tank I mentioned last time the Sadul I of who now just continues destroying everybody and it looks like he's already won the gold medal one bunch of world championships He's a heavyweight the heavyweights in that and UFC should be scared It's gonna fight MMA so the the heart thing spell his name. Let's get a video so we can yeah, look at it There is Jamie's got it. Yeah, bam. It's think of I will never join MMA No, hold on a second. That's not that's it the MMA That's a that's part of the quote That's and that's not that's that's not so Yeah, I love said live that's closer to where he was chasing he's still chasing the lift you so 2020 Olympics. How do you say the name? How'd you say his first name? Well, I just call him the Russian tank, but it's Abdul Abdul Rashid said alive okay, but 23 24 years old And I think his tension is and he says he has a lot of close friends who are MMA fighters He loves watching it. He feels a lot for them, but it's not That what the very thing that the poem gets at he doesn't want He thinks that wrestling the pure sport of wrestling is all about courage skill Like he describes in this way. He thinks MMA also has to have this component of So trash talk is showmanship and he is he doesn't he's doesn't like it But I think that MMA needs that guy too, right? They're gonna have the way it could be Heavy way it could be every Connor needs it could be like every every every showman needs a person who says showmanship sucks Every all he needs a phrase. We have Frazier, right? I think but this guy is terrifying. I think he would he would do the same thing to the could be a division Again humble technique is everything, but just a strength wise is also mom and is he really thinking about fighting or no? It's hard to say it's hard to say because again one of the greatest wrestlers of all time really focused on 2020 Olympics thrown punches here. I think what's gonna happen is once Likely wins gold at this Olympics. He's gonna he's gonna you know this this Titanic ship of 23 24 year old ship is gonna start Thinking and turning hmm. Maybe there is artistry. Maybe there is skill and courage and makes martial arts Well, there definitely is I mean he doesn't have to do the trash talking thing There's a lot of people that are very stoic that fight and they they don't participate any of that stuff You know, and then there's people that thrive on that stuff. I mean it's it's really up to you You have to tell you have to talk trash You know, I mean results are what matters Right and it's not even trash. That's interesting. I think stories are interesting. Yeah, that's why that's why people like like team sports I gonna fell Super you watch the Super Bowl yesterday. No, I didn't yeah, I wanted to Disneyland I wanted to talk to you about something that was that Disneyland. What's that? There's a new Star Wars ride Yeah, this crazy Star Wars ride and there's the year it's a 20-minute ride I mean it's just crazy long ride and a lot of it you're in like a vehicle Yes, and the vehicle is all programmed by computers The direction of the vehicle the way the vehicle means it's very complex. There's no tracks So you're riding around in this vehicle in the vehicle like the shooting at you the vehicle has to back up You go into this new door the vehicle knows how to go around a corner and what's that guy's name? Darth Maul is trying to cut through the wall spoiler fuck in this this new ride is amazing It's crazy how intricate and complicated it is and how far off the deep end Disneyland went to create this thing I mean it looks so crazy. I mean you were like how much money this cost? This is it right here So you're riding around in these things and stormtroopers are shooting at you and are there rails or no? No, there's no rails man Everything is done by computer the computer tracks out the environment and knows where each one of these does go and by The way there's several cars moving at the same time so there's people in front of you there in cars They get shot at you and look at the fucking scale of this place So that's one of them giant four four-legged robot things that's in Star Wars So you're moving underneath them. There's giant cannons that you have to move through. It's in cries of the resistance It's trackless. Yeah, so this represents on the ground. There's some I think those lines in the ground are just the wheels going the same way over and over and over again I'm sorry. I just wanted to sort of comment it But that they're probably not using the computer. It's not so so yeah, I think it's probably light our base. It's I don't know what it's based on but it's some the computer is Coordinating all of these different things at the same time you go through this room And you're seeing battles outside and you feel it you see the walls get hit like that Like it's fucking crazy man. It's it's amazing. Yeah, I mean it's a ride the line is bonkers So they're they're about access to this like the AI aspect to this is probably minimal you look at that Look at that like you're in this thing you move through this room and in the background You're watching these starships shooting at each other in the all-time Perfectly yeah, it's crazy man. Yes. It really cool make this happen And I mean these are people that are willing to probably invest hundreds of millions and yes like in this so guaranteed So I think there's some Like there's very minimal AI in this because AI creates uncertainty That's certainties very undesirable in situations like this. Yes. Yeah, I don't think there's any AI in it But there's some for sure there's some sort of automation some computer automation. Yeah, but it's basic software It's like it's software. I call this basic. Don't you dare? Don't you dare Lex? Star Wars is not even real. Oh How who are you there's reusable rockets being launched on a monthly basis and we're gonna colonize Mars for real So that's real right that's more interesting for sure definitely but this is dope While you know I'll be here playing fucking Disneyland And then I'll go home and sleep in a bed and breathe air and fuck you'll be out there on Mars in the history books What no air remember you okay? history It's you just you put so matter once you're dead. Yeah, I mean it's nice that we have access to the history books And I praise the historians for sure, but it's not I'm not interested in making history Yeah, I don't know actually what I said that because I don't care about the history books Well, I do the just the exciting it's one of the only Frontiers that we can actually be explorers and like we've explored well the depths of the ocean webin exactly right yeah, but the outer space that's like Man, that's that's like the most exciting Certainly one of engineering and science that we can explore in the mind like I mentioned like we don't know shit about the mind and Exploring that with the neuroscience with AI Just all of that the caught the cautious the all the other thing you talked about with bostroma simulation Yeah, it's gotten some I wanted to talk to you about that too Because you brought up bostrom what do you boss drum relies on I mean he was relying on theories in terms of like mathematical theories of probability to To say that he thinks it's more likely that we're in a simulation. Yeah, he has he has a The thing he's articulate. I don't think he's come up with the idea of the simulation He's just kind of really thought about it deeply he came up with a simulation argument which is these three categories that he described to you possible outcomes I think The first one is we destroy ourselves before we have a creative simulation the second one is That we would lose interest in creating a simulation at some point and the third one is We're living in a simulation. Yeah, what do you lean? I think to I think there's going to The three paths that he highlighted it makes it sound like it's so clear that it's just three But I think there's gonna be a huge amount of possibilities of the kinds of simulation like to me I keep asking You know, that's Elon Musk He's about the simulation where he said What's on the other side what's outside the simulation? Yeah, I think I asked what would you ask an AGI system? He said what's outside the simulation is the question that he believes in it I Or at least he contains it as a troll the Elon Musk embodies Like the best of the Twitter I at least he contains it as a troll the Elon Musk embodies Like the best of the Twitter internet troll a me and A brilliant engineer and designer in one. It's like a yeah It's like a quantum state that you can't quite figure out what's the coupling because I don't know if he's trolling But I'm the same way. I love asking people about the simulation even though I get a little bit of hate from the scientific community But it pushes you get hate from the scientific community about simulation because it's it's ridiculous notion if you think of it's like literally That because it's not a testable thing. What would we don't know how to test like why are you talking about this? Why do you sit down with Elon Musk and talk about the simulation? We when you're sitting with a world expert in particular aspects of rockets or robotics like I'm an expert What I can't just say that I'm not expert anything, but I know a few things about autonomous vehicles Why don't you talk to him about that? Right? Why don't we talk about simulation? Well, the thing is the simulation pushes you outside of the muck the messiness of everyday details of science and Makes you ask big questions about like the nature of our reality and I I like to think of it as Like what how would we build the simulation? Like what would be a compelling enough virtual reality game that you want to stay there for all your your whole life That's a first step there. That's useful to think about like What is our reality? What what aspects of the are most interesting for us humans to be able to perceive with our limited perception cognitive abilities interpret and interact with and then a bigger question than is like how do you build a largest scale simulation that would be able to create that virtual reality game which I think is a possible future We're already creating virtual worlds for ourselves on Twitter and social networks and so on. I really believe that virtual reality We will enter we'll spend more and more of our lives in the next 50 or 100 years in virtual worlds and The simulation hypothesis is simulation discussion is part of that. I think I Think there's the question of what's outside simulation is really interesting. That's the other way of Because like what created us? What started the whole thing? It's the modern version of asking What that what is God? What does God look like? What you know, it's it's asking? What is the programmer look like? I think that's a Fastening question, but arguing that we're already living this simulation. I think you've got stuck in that little point Mm-hmm. I think it's not that It's a bit of a language barrier to there's a technical. Yeah, I think It's funny. It's funny Nick is a legit philosopher Yeah, so he's been fighting battles in the philosophy game like you asked them Does somebody disagree with him? Yeah on these hypotheses? There's a bunch of philosophers disagree with him But including Sean Carroll on the philosophical level and a lot of the arguments are in philosophy and then sort of technical on They are about language and about terms and so on But I think yeah, it's very possible that we We live in a we live in a simulation. I think one of the this constructs of So physics theoretical physics with many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics as Sean has talked to you about Reveals some interesting sort of fundamental building blocks of our reality. There's something I don't think people have talked to you about which is like the coolest thing to me the most amazing thing that nobody can explain yet things called cellular automata and There's a guy mathematician named John Conway who came up in the 70s with a thing called game of life and cellular automata are these two dimensional one dimensional but came alive two dimensional grid Where every single little cell is really dumb and it behaves based on the cells next to it and it's born when there's a few When there's like a certain number like three cells alive next to it and it dies otherwise So it's like a simple rule for birth and death and all it knows it's it's nearby surrounding in its own life and If you take that system with a really dumb rule and expanded in size arbitrary complexity emerges you can have Touring machines so you can simulate perfect computers with that system and it can grow and all these behaviors grow Like if you watch if people go like you game of life and you can watch this extremely dumb simple system just grow arbitrary complexities and what you start to realize that from such Incredibly simple building blocks that don't know anything about the bigger world around them You can build our entire universe. You can build the kind of complexities we see it less so like we think that God is like Designing every little aspect of whatever of our world or a simulation hypothesis The simulation is designed by hand like I'm gonna craft these things What you realize is all you can all you need to do is just set some initial conditions set some really basic rules and Allow the system to grow as long as it can grow arbitrarily just crazy stuff Amazing stuff can happen from like from simplicity Complexity can emerge and that for like if you study this a little bit closer just like watch it people can watch that a game of life On YouTube and think about what it's showing like for 10 minutes Blow your mind the fact that from Simplicity arbitrary complexity beauty can emerge is like Incredible so for the simulation the creator of the simulation is probably some 13-year-old nerd living in like in his mom's basement It's probably just set some rules in this video game or press play and then arbitrary complexity can emerge It can have a Joe Rogan it can have an Elon Musk all the technologies that we've developed and probably Millions of other alien species that are living throughout our universe Jesus So the yeah that to me the cellular Tom at a Reveals that the simulation is much easier to create than we might think and But there's a lot of variability in the kinds of simulations will create like I think the simulation hypothesis thinks like you know There's like one I think there's gonna be a lot of varieties this There's that there's a lot of possible different rule sets. There's about a lot of different Physical mediums in which these simulations could be created. It can be completely virtual world The role of consciousness whether you make most people conscious or not Whether most of them are philosophical zombies that they're just like non non-player characters And it's just you or you have or is your mind simulated? like the role of Suffering so consciousness brings with it this idea of Basically, you know subjective experience it was subjective experience comes the idea of pain and fear and so on The thing again my Russian romanticization of it But I think fear of death is essential Scarcity is essential for for beauty for life. Yeah, and that that's a nice feature of this little simulation We got going on that there could be a lot of different alternatives. I think that could be less individualistic less less Consciousness can be present in different kinds of forms. So I see there's a lot more options than those three that heal highlights and we can destroy ourselves in a lot of interesting ways Entire civilizations from AI to nuclear weapons to biological to all kinds of weapons so it's almost like Whether it's a simulation or not it's almost irrelevant the complexity of the existence and all of the various pushes and pulls that keep everything together They're they're almost operating Like some grand plan Whether they like it or not whether it whether or not a grand plan exists All these different things are happening and everything is moving in a very specific direction, right? It's moving towards further complexity like I was having a conversation with the friend of mine last night where we were talking about phones and We were like you know like when are they ever gonna look at a phone and say I think we're good We don't have to the camera works great So signals great and call people you can text people. It's just stop innovating right here And we're both laughing like it's never gonna happen But even though we admit like if you have an iPhone 11 or a pixel four as we have It works for yeah, they work great But you don't really need anything better like in terms of the way our culture works You get so much done on these things you can bank on them. Okay, if I'm drinking all your water by the way Yeah, we have a lot of water. Yeah, please Your suppression That's very polite of you The just the existence itself Whether or not there's a design to it It seems to operate In a matter that would indicate there's a design the design doesn't have to be real doesn't have to be a simulation It doesn't have to be a grand plan, but it moves in this the same way as if it's a grand plan It's weird it's hard to put into words, but there's a different force and a Momentum like the evolutionary process the fact that life was created the fact that there's a kind of a progress and also Like I just like with the Native Americans The the fact that suffering seems to be a constant story that was weave in and like we we constantly progress, but we seems to be Like creating the other and torturing and there seems to be constant suffering and war and so on through this growth process and that seems to be Death is a huge part of that and Conflict conflict conflict. Even social conflict like we were talking about social justice warriors and and that type of thing I think they almost have to exist It's almost like the world creates a space for them and people find a way to fill that space. Yeah the conflict by the way also I don't know if you even aware you're kind of Even though you were thrust into politics, you know, we're politics, but there is the Iowa caucus going on today It's the first vote for the Democrats. Yeah, Bernie's leading in the polls, which is interesting, but that's that's the That's the fun little we got Americans have their own little conflict going on here. Oh, there's always going to be conflict With all groups of people with everything. I mean, there's conflict in the comedy community I'm sure this conflict in the AI and autonomous vehicle community. There's this conflict. I mean and and those things are critical You know you learn from conflict if everything was just simple and easy and there was no resistance whatsoever Nothing would get done and also your own personal systems would never get tested. I feel like every adversity that you experience is really a gift Because on the other end of that adversity there's an opportunity for massive growth. What was that thinking grow rich quote that? Lovato Lovato said the other day Every adversity carries the seed of an equivalent advantage. I mean, yeah, just that Yes, yeah Just that beautiful way to see it that that's a beautiful corner. I had to write it down. I bought that book too I'm gonna get to that once I'm Worn out on Native Americans. I got about seven other Native American books. I've been so like I mentioned doing the startup right this is since August and It's been has been a bit of a torture like the self doubt is pretty hardcore because I know because I've been failing that stop Like some trying to build spending most of my day programming and the kind of build a her She never it is that she or her was her her but no, there's on that path There's particular thing because you want to create a business you want to make you know You have to create tools that people would enjoy using on the path. That's a long journey to create a companion that can form a deep friendship It seems so weird. It's it seems everything seems weird until Your life becomes better because of it. Mm-hmm like flying car seemed weird. Oh, yeah To me still in fact uber and Hyundai just partner and they're still pushing this idea of flying cars Electric vetoes just feel like people are gonna slam into each other unless they are autonomous and they have like magnets So they repel You know like they can't hit each other they get close. It's your oh And what happens when they like to me the like what does an accident look like it fall in your head Yeah, you're hanging out in your house trying to watch you know black mirror or also Currently most accidents people can walk away from like cars today are incredible right and I don't know how you can walk away from a Quick crash good question very good question. It probably won't. Yeah Fuck that scary. Yeah, but the any technology kind of seems Aquar to weird you can you can be terrified of it or you can you know you can think it's weird until it until it takes over I mean it would none of us know What that would look like to have a Close connection with a eye systems. I don't know one of the things in this book that I'm in the middle of with I'm actually towards the end of this black elk book as it details the Invention of the automobile and the implementation of it so real changes that was the other surprising thing about this book is it's so recent It's crazy really really recent Yeah, so during this time where black elk was a young boy sees castor get killed takes his first scalp You know remembers the sound of the man gridding his teeth as he's cutting his hair off like cutting his scalp off and Then later on in his life as he's an older man the world goes from very few automobiles to Most people have an automobile during his lifetime Most travel is by automobile. What does he what does he say about this world? This this new world? That's no, let's read the book All right, because this is he he doesn't even know about this world He knows about the world in 1930s. I believe he died in the late 30s Just it's scary to be born not scary, but I don't know what it would feel like to Be born in this natural world to see the kind of suffering and the US military and Then see the technology of the industrial revolution kind of propagate and be faced with that I don't know what that would feel like I don't know which world is better. What the world represents progress is a Right, right. What is progress? Yeah, what is pro I mean it's it progress? Seems to be inevitable complexity inevitable never ending complexity and then There's just push towards that and I've always wondered if I Mean Elon has the saying that human beings are the Biological bootloader for AI and I've always thought that if you pay attention to the human beings Desire for materialism like materialism seems to be like a constant throughout cultures people want things and when they have things They want better things they want newer things well that generates a consistent level of innovation inside that Civilization that culture people are gonna make better stuff because people are gonna want better stuff so that they're gonna improve upon things Well if you just scale that and you keep going improving improving what do you get to you will you get to something like artificial intelligence you get to something like you know some sort of some some sort of an event some sort of a thing where the world changes and I think technology will help us ride that way I am an optimist in that sense We haven't talked about much, but I'm an optimist and you're a link. I think there'll be a few Exciting developments there so Newling brain computing interfaces. I think it's really exciting possibility there that Nick Bosom is too also skeptical about more positive about Increasing the bandwidth of our brain being able to communicate with the internet with the information It doesn't necessarily need to be through brain computing interfaces, but increasing that bandwidth to expand our ability of our mind to reason Not not to expand the ability of reasons Sorry to take the mechanism of our mind's ability to reason and expand it with access to a lot of information Mm-hmm and increase that bandwidth to be able to reason with facts just like we can look up stuff on Wikipedia now Increasing the speed of which we can do that can I think fundamentally transform our ability to Think do you think that that's ever going to be a wireless option because right now they have to drill holes in your head right? Right, yeah, I think I think this could be out There could be other interfaces. I think yeah, I think so, but also like I said weird technology holes in your head sounds terrifying right now But it could be normal look ear piercing here. Well. Yeah, here piercings. Yeah But this is a standard like hey, did you get suited for neural link yet Billy's only 13? He's not ready for neural link. We're gonna wait until he's 16 is like dad all my friends have it. Yeah Come on dad. Yeah, I want to get fitted and just like surgery You take knee surgery you take all surgery except brain surgery and you take that it's for granted. Yeah for you You're like okay with it, but on the brain. It's yeah, it's scary sketchy. Can I because I know you probably gotta go? Yeah What do you got last kind of can I close it out with a poem? Let's do it with some of that guy Okay, because I've been doing the start-up and been suffering so I'm reading a lot of bookowski. Oh Bookowski poems you get drunk when you read them. Of course some whiskey roll the dice vodka Vodka is for friends and family. Yeah, when you buy yourself a twisty. No, I don't knew it Man, it's not drink by himself. It's all that you do well This man doesn't but it's more like relaxed thinking drink is whiskey vodka is we're going crazy. Okay. We're going we're going dark We're gonna raid and pillage Roll the dice or go all the way by Charles Bukowski If you're going to try go all the way Otherwise, don't even start If you're going to try go all the way This can mean losing girlfriends wives relatives jobs and maybe your mind Go all the way it can mean not eating for three or four days It can mean freezing at a park bench. It can mean jail. It can mean derision mockery isolation Isolation is the gift all the others are a test of your endurance or how much you really want to do it and you'll do it Despite rejection and the worst odds and it'll be better than anything you can imagine If you're going to try go all the way There's no other feeling like that. You'll be alone with the gods and the nights will flame with fire Do it Do it all the way all the way You will ride life straight to perfect laughter. It's the only good fight. There is Take a picture you wear Pick up that piece of paper real quick What's this like a fake it fake it for Instagram? All right, fake it fans are gone People on Instagram that watch it will know fake fake look up fake That was awesome Appreciate your brother. Thank you very much for coming in here. It's always pleasure. We got to do it more often at 10 more years Yes, 10 more years. Bye everybody