So I just love the idea of the documentary so much where you actually go to the places along the trail of migration into the west. Where did you start? We started in Mauritania and then we went to the Canary Islands, which is a Spanish territory, but you know, so to Spain, the Canary Islands, and we went to mainland Spain to France and the United Kingdom. Unbelievable. What's more, Tania, for those who don't know? Tania is a West African Islamic Republic, and that is the launch point where a lot of these so-called migrants leave on boat and head to the Canary Islands. They leave from other countries as well, but Mauritania nowadays is the main launch point. Why Mauritania? It's just a convenient point. That's they sort of come from all over the Sahal and Magreb up north and then from South they'll come from like Sierra Leone. They'll come from Senegal and other countries and they sort of meet there and it's also geographically situated near the Canary Islands. So it's convenient. That's where they'll leave from. But they also leave from countries like Senegal or like I think they leave from Jordan sometimes. It's kind of crazy though that you as an American and your brother also just two Americans can know exactly how this works. You're just two ambitious young guys. Right? You don't work for CIA. That's right. Now you know the migrant route and the means of transporting hundreds of thousands of millions of people illegally. Right. How do you know that? Yeah. We've been studying this for a while. We studied this very intensively here in the United States. As I said to you earlier off camera, you know, we were the first Americans as far as I'm aware. I mean somebody could contact me if this is incorrect, but I'm not aware of anybody else that's done it. We were the first Americans to go from South America from Ecuador to the US border. And when you look at what's going on in Europe, a lot of the same organizations are running the show out there as well. And so if you know, okay, you just read the news. Okay, they're landing in the Canary Islands. They're taken off from Mauritania. From there, it's not really that difficult to start putting it together. And you know, as long as you know what NGOs to go check out, you know, what questions to ask you'll figure it out. I think in the minds of most Americans certainly our view of immigration is from Latin America to the United States. It's like, starts with Mexican farm workers and then it's all of Latin America. Okay, great. And then when we think of Europe, we think of refugees from the Syrian wars. You know, Muslims from the Levant. But African migration is like a lot of it from the most violent continent in the world. And who's facilitating that, do you know? Yes, it's not an easy answer. So I can't say that. Well, it's just like this one group. Right. Yeah. Right. So it's many people, you know, I would say, you know, at the highest level, like if we're looking at this from an airplane, it really is the populations, the native populations of Europe, not realizing that this is an existential threat. Because if they did, you know, they would be up in arms tomorrow. And these politicians, these are effectless people for the most part. These are not people that really give it down. They're just trying to win the next election. They're less concerned about the present and more concerned about winning the next election, right? And so, you know, if there was enough pressure from the native population, this would stop tomorrow. So like at the highest level, that's really what it is, is that, you know, the natives don't realize what a threat this is. And it is. It's existential. And it's the end of Europe. And it will be the end of the United States as well, the West in general. It calls for revolution. It really does. Yes. 100%. So that's at the highest level now at the lower levels. If we're looking at who's actually doing this, you're talking criminal organizations, you're talking opportunists countries who use this as a means to get, you know, financial aid, financial support, almost like blackmail. And you're looking at non-governmental organizations, many of them. And, you know, that's, we could get into them. They should be investigated, audited, prosecuted, a lot of them. But, you know, I notice they haven't been. Well, a lot of them haven't been. No. Right. 100%. Can you name some of those NGOs? Absolutely. So the King Daddy above everything is the United Nations. Yes. And their migration wing, which is the international organization of migration. The acronym is the ILM. And really everywhere you go and where you see this stuff. And by everywhere you go, I mean, when you're at key border crossing points, I'll give you an example in the Americas, for example. You know, when you're going to, when these people cross the Darian gap, which I've crossed with my brother, we've tracked through that jungle, there is a town called Nokokli, which is on the Colombian side. And that's like the launching point where they, from there, they got on a boat, they go to the mouth of the jungle and they start treking across. You have ILM workers that were there. Now the flow has stopped under Trump. The infrastructure is still there. So I do think if we get, you know, Gavin Newsom, for example, in 2028, this could start again, but, you know, we don't have to go there for now. But you have ILM workers there. And what they were doing is they were handing out, I don't know what else to call them. It sounds crude, but rape kits where these women, they would hand to migrant women kits that had condoms, day after pills and whistles. Like in case you're getting raped in the jungle. And then they pop out in the other end if they make it, God willing. And then they're putting UN camps and you have the ILM there as well and giving them aid, handing out maps. That sort of thing. And then in Europe, it's the same thing. You know, what we got on camera was honestly the most incredible thing. Maybe that I've ever gotten on hitting camera where we were in the Canary Islands. And we were, I was, you know, telling a bus, these, a boatload of these people had just got off in the island of El Hiero. And, you know, they're taking off the boat, they're processed and they're putting a bus and they're driven to a camp. But so I'm telling this bus to a camp. And the entire time I'm looking for the United Nations, I'm trying to find these people so I could talk to them. Haven't seen anything. And, you know, I'm feeling like we can get anything out of this. And I see this man in a blue vest. And I know who that is. Okay, that's the United Nations worker. So talk to him and we arrange a meeting and we take him out. And this is when people watch the documentary, they'll see this. And so this guy's job was to, or is to, I believe he's still working with them, is when these so-called migrants come in to pay them money and get information from them. You know, who did you pay to smuggle you up here to Europe? You know, how is this working to get information ostensibly so that they could prosecute, be prosecuted by European countries. Well, we can get into, and what we call it on camera, this guy was so corrupt and admitted to such a corrupt system that he was part of. It blew my mind and we get into that. But that's the IOM. There's the Red Cross. There's the Norwegian refugee council. There's many other organizations. There's, you know, Catholic charities. There's an organization called ASIM. That's another Catholic charity that flies them from the Canary Islands to Europe. Hebrew and McNaite societies, the Alejandro Miercas sat on the board of. So these are just a few. So the net results of this, the end point of this long journey is Western Europe where the benefits are the highest, you know, they were the richest countries in the world because of this they no longer are. And the effect has been a radical decline in quality of life for Europeans and in the state of their cities. There's a clip in this documentary that I just want to put on the screen now. This is Paris France, center of the world for centuries. And this is your exchange where they migrant in Paris. It kind of tells the story in pictures. Here it is. There's this way in front of the Eiffel Tower. Yeah, all these guys, these vendors that sell out here in front of the Eiffel Tower. Oh, fuck. Oh, fuck. All these vendors that sell right here. Huh? No, we want to talk to you. Fuck off. Why? See, they get very upset when you start, when you start talking. What's the problem? What's the problem? What's the problem? What's up? What's up? Oh, hey. Did you go over there? Oh, shit. Did you just give me an email, my pocket explain what's going on? Do we lose our GoPro? Just give us an email. We just lost our GoPro, bro. Just play with the fuck happening. You explained this is your moment. Explain what happened. They try to tack in you. I tried getting them off. I, to be completely honest, I didn't even feel this one happened. I didn't even realize that it's bleeding. There's just a bunch of blood coming down my face. Even right now, I don't even feel it. But the pain is starting to come in a little bit. I just can't believe how much I'm bleeding right now. Oh, I started to hurt. When you would not take a bit of a- This is what happens. When you let a bunch of foreigners from our bare cultures that can't assimilate completely overtake their country. It's really an amazing clip. I felt sorry for your brother, but I'm also grateful that you got that on tape. Who was that? Who attacked you? Do you know? Beats me. And you know, the thing is in Europe, you can't get that information because they have these very strict privacy laws. So we couldn't even get security privacy in Europe. I mean, they put people in jail for COVID facts. Is this privacy for African migrants? That's right. That bash over the head with, you know, Eiffel Tower souvenirs. Is that what he hit him with? 100%. Yeah. Well, we got jumped. And, you know, my brother saved my life. Basically, yeah, I could mob by these people and he came in, started throwing hands. He got bashed over the head and then I got up and sort of broke away. And then the police came in and they took off. Nobody got arrested or anything like that. No, we got arrested? No, no, no. No, they got away. And they got away with a lot of over $1,000 with the stuff. His phone or GoPro and yeah. Our new partner, Dose, is a way better option than big pharma. That's not damning with fake pricks. Anything's a better option than big pharma. There's a much better option. Some things are just out of people's hands and cholesterol is often one of them. Everyone gets blamed for getting bad cholesterol because they eat crappy food. But the truth is a lot of it's just genetic. It runs in your family and there's not a lot you can do. So pharma decides the only option is take some pill and they can help. But a lot of them have unintended consequences to put it mildly. And if you don't quite trust that plan, no one can blame you for it. That's why you should think about Dose. Very different. Dose for cholesterol is a clinically backed cholesterol supports supplement. Target's triglycerides, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol. Lot of people use it and the results have been remarkable for them. And it's easy to take. It's a daily two-ounce shot that tastes like mango. So that means no pills, no powders, no injections. And it works. And it's filled with natural ingredients like turmeric, a lot of bunch of weird chemicals that you can't pronounce and may again have unintended consequences. Visit dosedaily.co slash Tucker and use the code Tucker for 35% off if you want to try it. We recommend it. Dose daily.co slash Tucker code Tucker 35% off. So they hit them in the face with a statue and then stole your stuff. And then they let them get away too. And then they didn't get arrested. And they let them get away. He started chasing them. I was getting up. He starts running after them. And the police were right nearby. They gave a very BS attempt to try to get them. They didn't even try. And that was it. They got away. And the police out there told us that if they make the wrong move with these so-called migrants, not migrants, I hate even using that word. These are invaders. It's an invading force. But if you use the wrong type of force with these invaders, you might wind up in prison. And so they're afraid to. Yeah. I mean, the racial dynamic here is just almost done. It's almost unbelievable. They're protected because they're not white. And right now that's the truth. Of course, it's same in our country. So do you know what country they were from? It's really hard to say. I mean, I have no idea. My guess would be Senegal. I mean, I don't really have any reason to say one way or the other. That's just my guess because I know a lot of them come from Western Africa. But they could have been for many where. Who knows? Subs to heroin though. I'm sorry. It kind of takes your breath away to watch that. It's just that, well, in Paris. Right. But the thing is the center of civilization, supposedly. Right. Well, that's the thing. It's one of the most beautiful cities, right? But it's been overrun. And you know, the thing is though that is a pretty light occurrence compared to what's going on. Which is wrong. The role one is someone else's con. And when asked a question, just physically attack someone and steal stuff and then get away with it is like a level of a, like where's the gratitude? Oh, right. Right. 100%. Well, that's the thing. And you know, certain fish don't mix in the same aquarium. Like these people, you know, I will tell you this. One of the takeaways that I got from this was, and I'm not downplaying with the US is facing. Because the US is, you know, facing its own sort of existential crisis when it comes to this. But I, you know, I will say when you compare these people that are coming from Africa and the Middle East compared to the people that we got from like Venezuela, Colombia and so the Central and South. Yeah. It is much different. I mean, yeah. People, those people will assimilate much better. You know, they're all, for example, you could film them and they're cool. The Africans, if you try filming them, they would try to take your head off much, much different. Well, it's a very different place. Right. I mean, Latin America is very different from Sub-Saharan Africa, completely different. And that's not a valued judgment. It's much worse than Latin America by any measure. 100%. Wow. Wow. So I want to put this up. This is a second clip from the doc and this explains, this is a UN worker explaining to you how this happened in the first place and that there are incentives. The rest of us don't see. Here it is. Everybody that arrived here, they might be a guest between 50 to 50 thousand years. That is a game. Is a game. So there are money involved. Connecting money involved. Everything's everything's. Oh, it's our new amount of movela. What I'm saying is it doesn't seem like Spain wants to stop it. It seems like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Spain doesn't want to stop it. Why does the Spanish government want this to continue? It seems like a big problem. Because, you know, the Spanish government, when I went for a test job, because every year, the Spanish government received a huge amount of money for the European Union. Every year, the European Union gave more than, what a three billion to speak. So, what's three dollars? Three billion. Spain teach two billion. Spain takes one billion in total in total. In two cases. In two cases. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Spain government would take one billion in two cases. Yeah. For a flight, good to meet you. Maybe the government spoke with like 10 people from the region. From the top. From the top. Yeah. Those people that go away with them, anyway. The money is not like check. It's not like transverse. It's in fact only. It's in luggage. Wait, what? Wait, you're serious. Luggage, luggage, luggage, luggage, luggage. We actually bring us in case of cash. So, the whoop is on the table. That's how I make it a game. Where are you serious right now? Where? Where? Okay, something serious right now. Whoa, they actually pay in cash. I've got any cash. I love how the random African guy tells you the truth about the economic. behind it. Yeah. Well, it wasn't a random African guy. That's the guy I'm telling. That is a United Nations representative. No, but I'm just saying there is. And you notice this when you go to Africa. There is a kind of lack of guardedness. Like, oh yeah, it's not a place where people say what they think they have to say. They just kind of say what's obvious, which is what I like about Africa. But he knows he's part of the system. Oh, 100%. 100% and he's been with the IOM for years before that. He was with another NGO. I believe he was with ASOM. That's one of the that's the NGO that flies them to from the Canary Islands, the European mainland. But that was the most incredible undercover footage that I've ever gotten. You know, when it comes to this beat, like, deal legal immigration beat, that's like the holy grail. Because everybody asks, you know, how was this allowed to take place? What's going on here? And here you have a United Nations representative emitting on camera. That the, at least one of the reasons why it's allowed to continue is that, you know, Spain gets this money ostensibly to stop the flow. But what they really do is they slow it down enough to a trickle, or it's not really a trickle. There's still thousands coming up, but they slow it down a little bit. I'd like to do something. So that's it. They could keep getting the money, skim the money off the top, and then use the rest. A stencil, we just stopped the flow. But of course, then ever stop it. I mean, you just got that on tape. I mean, yeah. I got it. What's interesting is who, how old are you? 29. Bad to be 29. How much did you spend on this whole enterprise? Yeah, between 20 and 30, probably about 25 thousand. Yeah, and it took us about two and a half months. Yeah. God bless you. We're proud to run this. But if you're you and your brother taking off with 30 grand and some cameras and getting to the truth of the situation, like we're the rest of the news organizations in the West. Look, what I will say is this. I'm going to give the Europeans a break here because I'm an American. And so, you know, when we got this footage and then we're, you know, we're trying to get it today, beyond TCN and we're talking to lawyers about, you know, getting E&M insurance and all this stuff. There was discussion like you can't really be doing this in the European Union. It's it's different out there as far as their rights to film people and get certain things. But, you know, I'm an American now. And I have the first amendment on my side. And so if they try coming out, there's really. Okay. Well, we're seeing. We're supposed to watch them post where's Reuters CNN like we have companies supposed to be covering the news. This is the biggest news story in a thousand years. And they're not covering it at all. Sure. I guess I'm given the Europeans a break because if there was a European that tried doing this, it was living in Spain or Germany, they'd have, well, they live by the Iron Curtain. Exactly. So I get it. They're not free peoples, but we are in our news organizations have a lot more money and experience than you do. And they're not doing this. And you just, you just went and did it yourself. Correct. It's quite an indictment of them, I would say. 100% well, it's institutional capture. You know, these, there's supposed to be purveyors of truth, which some are to some extent, but, you know, real journalism and, you know, I'm friends with James O'Keefe and James O'Keefe talks about this a lot, which is that it's just so costly to do real journalism. That's why, you know, organizations like Fox, they just have the independent people come on now because they have the independent people break the story, take all the risk, and then Fox could just report on it. And I don't, I mean, you were with Fox, maybe you know better than I, but I feel like that wasn't the case 20 years ago, maybe they would do their own stories, but now it's just mostly independent people because it's just so costly to do these things. And so dangerous for the big organization to say, yeah, really, I mean, I saw Fox, I was there 15 years. I saw them spend millions and millions and millions on fake interviews. They'd fly out, you know, 30 people a week early to do some interview ahead of state where they never asked a single real question. So they have the money. Of course, it's the most profitable news organization in the world. They just don't, just don't want to. Yeah. I mean, you spent 30 grand. You can't even buy a nice new car for 30 grand. Right. But that's your total cost. Like that's not much money in the scheme of things. Yeah, 100%. 100%. Yeah. To get to the heart of a global crisis. Right. Well, where there's a will, there's a way. And when there's not nothing's going to get done. No, that's right. I just, I just think that your initiative is a mark of shame for the rest of the media. I guess that's what I'm saying. Yeah. Well, I appreciate that. Yeah. So here's a clip that I'm not sure I really understand. What I know what it means. Um, French women explains queers only migrant facility. Let's just watch this and then you can interpret it. Sure. For the normal person. Just a few miles from where we were jumped. Men like the ones who attacked us turn up at artists. And NGO that helps illegal immigrants apply for asylum. Could you tell me more about what's the, this is, this is for me, going to help people for asylum. To help migrants with asylum. Yes. Okay. But queer migrants only queer migrants only. Yeah. So if they're not queer, not here, not here. Only queer. If they're not queer, not here. Mm hmm. Kind of love that. Um, what did I just watch? Well, you know what speaks for itself. You know, the clip that comes after that is we're in Catholic charity's facility in Northern France. And then we were talking to a guy. And we asked, you know, hey, do people like BS about being, you know, gay or LGBT or whatever. And the guy says, yeah, he's like, all the migrants, they come over here that all the migrants that are coming here that claim to be LGBTQ. It's BS. They're just trying to get their papers. And that's what they're at. Is there a test? Do they have like a sodomy test for orders or some way to test for gayness that these facilities? Not that I've heard of. I, I, I lead out. So, but to be clear, the reason that people are saying. they're gay is not because they want to be more fashionable because the French government or European governments give them preferential treatment if they're gay. That's right. Yeah. Why would they do that? Well, it's a victim class. And why would they let these people in to begin with, right? Right. Yeah. Right. So, well, now if they're gay and they come from some Islamic Republic, wow, well, now they really have a case to be here, right? They could be facing persecution. Oh, my God. So they're just thrown off a roof and change or something. Exactly. So there you go. So, but there's, is there any calculation at all in the part of European governments as to like what will these people do to improve our country? Not that I saw. Look, they show up. Okay. And I'm, this is happening in many different countries, but I'm telling you about the route that we saw what we saw first hand. They show up in the Canary Islands. They're there in these camps for months. Then they're flown to the mainland. And we talked to Peter flown. Oh, yeah. They're given plane tickets and they're flown to Madrid or Barcelona. And they're put in camps where they'll be there for many years. Like over two years, some of them are telling us and they're just waiting for their papers and they don't do anything all day. They don't worry. I mean, it's in the documentary. People could watch it. They got, they're saying, you know, no working, no eating, no working. No, I forget what else he says. But he's like only eating sleep. That's, that's what he's only eating sleep here. But the point where you fly them to your continent, like what does it occur to nobody that the population doesn't want them? There's no evidence they've added anything only detracted. I'm sure individuals have, but overall they have not added anything. They've only made it worse. So why would you accept the fwaju at the Plainsland? And why would you pay for the Plains? I'm so confused. Yeah. And maybe it's that clip you showed a minute ago that they're getting paid to do it. It's a good thing to start the New Year feeling fresh and cozy earth can help. What better way to give yourself a brand new start than by revamping your bedroom, your sacred personal space. You feel clean, crisp and original. That'll make you more creative and happier too. Our friends at cozy earth just launched their new Baja bedding set. It's perfect for a comfortable sleep to give you energized, well rested sheets, covers quilts, more all with premium fabrics to make your spot your personal cave more beautiful. The bedroom is one thing, but what about the bathroom? Coziera has that covered too. Their bath towels are pretty amazing made from a blend, believe it or not, of cotton and bamboo. With zero twist technology, that means that plush absorbent make you feel like you're a resort when you step out of the shower. All of this comes with a hundred nights sleep trial, a ten year warranty, no risk whatsoever to you. Start the year with comfort. Visit cozyearth.com. Use our code Tucker up to 20% off. That's cozyearth.com code Tucker. And if you get a post purchase survey, let them know you heard about it on this show. Well, again, there's many different interest groups you could say that are facilitated, that are allowing this to continue. Again, that its core is that this is national suicide and the general population doesn't realize it. Beyond that, it's just opportunists, clearly, and people don't. You could say they hate the country, you could say they simply don't give a damn. But whatever it is, that's ultimately why this is allowed to continue. I mean, at the highest level, 100%. It's this adherence to international norms, you had the 1951 UN refugee convention. That came after World War II and then you had the 1967 protocol, which, so the 1951 convention basically said, you have to take care of these refugees. There were so many stateless people after World War II. You have to give them a place of safe haven. You can't kick them back to a country where they could be facing persecution. The 1951 UN protocol only applied from that moment and before. So any future events, the 1951 protocol didn't apply. Then you had the 1967 protocol, which basically said, okay, now going forward, this is the 1951 convention is going to cover everything going forward. And so you have a lot of countries now that have basically enshrined this in law. I don't know what it is in Spain. In the United States, it's the refugee act of 1980. And if we didn't have that, for example, a lot of the people that come over here that are just economic migrants claiming that they're refugees and they really have no standing, but they claim that they're facing some sort of violence. The only reason why this whole system exists where they come here, we catch them, we give them a quortain and release them is because of the 1980 refugee act, which is built on this 1967 protocol. And my point is, it's this idea of these international post world war two norms that national leaders are just too cowardly to do. And the whole point obviously was to eliminate, you don't want white majority countries in Europe because they're dangerous. That's the whole idea. I'm behind them, but they're actually not dangerous in their the source of our civilization. So to destroy them is a big step. I wonder if it's not stopable is it? Well, it's stopable, but you know how reversible is it? That's that's the question. Exactly. Thank you. You could stop this to my word. We're talking about the most powerful countries on earth here, you know, France is a powerful country. It has nuclear weapons, believe it. Nuclear weapons, that's crazy. Absolutely. Germany is a nuclear threshold state, right? So you know, Spain, maybe less so, but regardless. I mean, the European Union as a whole, I look, they're trying to go to war with Russia, right? So I think what's interesting is it hurts, has admitted in private, at least that they can't raise an army in Germany because it will be majority Muslim because the Germans aren't having kids and the Muslims are and they actually don't want to give hundreds of thousands of young Muslim men weapons. Like they're worried about what would happen if they did that. So they can't raise an army in Germany already. That's incredible. That's a fact. And so I wonder, I guess if it's gotten to that point, we just have to readjust to a new understanding of Europe, right? You know, it's sad to say. And I don't really want to speak for the Europeans. I mean, I'm an American. I will say that it's almost feels like impotent to say it's sitting there and be like, well, something's got to be done. It really is a matter of life and death, national survival. And you know, literally every day that goes by, it gets worse. Every day counts at this point. And the only way that I could see them reversing it is with, is not without some sort of serious like civil conflict because these people will fight back. I mean, these are high testosterone men. The IOM worker just to give you some kind of a fight back. Exactly. Oh, 100. I mean, look, what do you see here in the United States? Ask your brother. Yeah. That was just one example. That was just from pointing a camera at the guy. Oh, yeah. Now try to get him out. I mean, look, when we were in France, there was a Frenchman who not far from where we were in Calais and not far from there. While we were there, somebody got beheaded and parking lot by these people. Okay. So these are very serious high testosterone men that IOM worker, the one that we played the clip over earlier. This guy was so corrupt. And he when we were there, I paid him 500 euros and he sold me an Excel sheet that showed all of the arrivals from the beginning of the year till the date that I met him, which was like four months. It was like from January till April 15th or something like that. And you know, it showed how many women, how many men, how many children. And it's like, it's like all men. It might be like less than 5% women and the smaller percent children. Really. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. High testosterone and these are very, very serious people. Yeah. You have no idea what these people are by the way. I mean, these could be Islamic state militants. You have no idea. And I wouldn't be surprised. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. Are they getting their biometrics taken when they get into that? That I do not know. They try. I mean, they jump in their documents. So, but they do. I mean, I know they fingerprint them. I'm not sure if they do like rent a scans or what else they're doing. But I couldn't tell you. I mean, once with HIV get fast-tracks and citizenship, I'm sure. Or have that's true here. Wow. Did this change you? Did it change me? Well, you know, it's a pretty intense experience. Yeah. I mean, we've been through a lot doing this. I mean, we've gotten. We've I've rode the train of death like three times in Mexico. We've been kidnapped by the cartel. My brother and I. We've and now we've done this. I'll see what here's what I will say. And this is kind of an indictment of Europe. And I don't want people to think that I'm shitting on Europe. I mean, that's where my ancestors come from, right? But they got to take back their their continent. But I will say this when so as I told you before, my myself and my brother, we were the first Americans to go from South America to the US border to fall the whole. So as I told you before, myself and my brother, we were the first Americans to go from South America to the US border to follow the whole route. It took us about a month. And when we were doing that, the fear there was criminal organizations. Yes. Right. And rightly so. I mean, we got kidnapped by the Gulf cartel at the end of it, encountered other cartel organizations here when we were doing it. Now there was still the criminal element there. Like, more and more, I believe I was, you know, that we were trying to meet up with smugglers. They were trying to set us up. There's a whole other story. But really what I was afraid of, not just a more attainy obviously, but of course, like in Spain and France in the UK was not criminal organizations, even though we're going and trying to, you know, embed with migrant setting, getting smuggled. It was the government. The entire time I was worried that they were going to realize that there are two Americans walking around with hitting cameras and they're going to bust down our hotel room door and pick us up and, you know, haul us off in a patty wagon. That was honestly what I was more afraid about. That's how intent they are in committing suicide. And now, here, Starmer is pushing, you know, government killing of its own citizens, government assisted suicide, government committed suicide, as if like native board Britons need more excuses to die or something. I mean, what is going on? National suicide, man. National suicide. That's what it is. Did your views change? Did my views change? Well, look, it is very sad. I will say probably not because it was more or less what I expected. But, you know, it's just another thing to see in a person that it changed now, but, you know, it was a learning experience. Did you feel more threat from the migrants coming into Europe or the migrants coming into the US? Oh, definitely the ones coming into Europe. Yeah. 100%. These are very serious. You know, we've been embedded. My brother and I have been embedded with caravans in Mexico. We're walking up with them, through Mexico. We're like in front of the caravan. There's videos that we have with us. And, you know, we're literally taking selfies, we're flying a drone that's in front. And they're cool. They don't mind. Oh, totally. You go, see, cars at these people and they almost think it's like their moment to be on TV or something like that. Hey, I'm going to America and out there, man, in Europe, it's like if you point a camera at them, look, if there's no police around, they will slit your throat. And I don't say this flippantly because look, I love all people. You know, there's great people in Africa too. You know, I've employed people in that are in Zimbabwe and South Africa, very smart people that I've worked with. But you know, on the whole, certain fish don't mix in the same aquarium. Yeah, there's a real difference between someone from El Salvador and someone from Sierra Leone. There just is 100% on many levels. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I can't tell you much. I appreciate you doing this, Doc. And letting us hear it and your brave man, your brother's brave too. I'm looking at him sitting over there scarred his face. Thank you. Oh, what's your next, Doc? The next documentary, well, we could talk about this. Maybe I mean, we'll collab on this one as well. We, yeah, we'll talk off camera. It's in devolves, look, in devolves people that have had there, we've already got footage of people that have had their faces sought off and it's really bad. What's going on? And let's just say South of border. I don't want to see much more than that because we're trying to arrange certain issues. So we'll leave it at that. But we'll talk off camera. Good. I can't wait. Thank you for doing this. Appreciate it. You can feel the people here. They just came out of the dunes. We've got to be around 100 of them and now we're both going to try to come around and pick them up. In a single generation, Europe has changed forever. More than it has in the last 2000 years. Whoa, easy. Whoa, whoa, whoa. This is the result of decades of mass migration and that migration has destroyed social unity. It's reshaped the cultures of Europe completely. It's transformed once beautiful cities into slums. Many cities, natives, are now the minority. This was not an accident. It didn't happen organically. You're not imagining it. But the police do that because they're working with the criminalists. The world will smuggle people. The governments of Western Europe and the United States and Canada and New Zealand and Australia did this on purpose to their own people. They opened their border and they paid for the rest of the world, the third world, to move into their countries. Whatever happens happens, I suppose. How exactly did they do that our cameras found out. We followed one of the deadliest trade routes on Earth from Africa to the Canary Islands to Spain, France, and India, UK. This is what happens when you let a bunch of foreigners completely overtake their country. Along the way, we uncovered the entire system of criminal networks, NGOs, and criminal governments coordinating together to destroy the West. Every bull died right there. They might be a guest between 50 to 50 thousand years. All played a role in this massive human trafficking scheme. Moving people across borders to reshape the West. Europeans are being replaced racially, spiritually, culturally in their own homeland and so are we. We inform them what to do and not to do, what's all they don't cast them there and they bring them back to Spain. The only question is will Europe awaken before it has disappeared? Do you think we could get killed? It's not killed at least you will get like beta. Such replacing Europe only on Tucker Carlson dot com.