Beck lover is back, What's going on, Beck? Danny, it's always a pleasure and an honor to be back on the Danny Jones podcast. We got a lot to talk about, bro. A lot to talk about since the last episode where we spoke about the aliens and demons, but that's not what we're going to talk about today. We're going to talk about the double standards that exist in my opinion when it comes to Muslims versus every other religion. And I can clearly point them out. So I want to cover some of that in this episode. I also want to talk about what's going on with migrants in Europe and here in the US and clearly another double standard and I'm going to point these things out and let your audience decide. Just before we get into this, I just want to clarify my stance on a few things. Number one, I don't believe in open borders. Not for America, not for Europe. That's number one. Number two, this guy Dominic Tarinsky, the MP, you know, part of the ministry of Poland, who was just on Value Tamement Patrick Bed David's podcast, basically putting all Muslims into one box. You know, I want to address some of those things that he does and his hypocrisy and his double standards. And I do actually in principle agree with 90% of what he's fighting for, you know, and what he believes in. I actually agree with his policies and protecting Poland sovereignty and protecting the borders and putting up walls. And that's what he did. He literally built the wall, right, to protect his country, but we're going to get into why he's a hypocrite. And then lastly, I want to talk about, you know, marriage and these slanderous accusations that are made against a religious figure of what is soon to be the world's largest religion. And that is the marriage of the prophet Muhammad peace and blessings be upon him to his wife Aisha and the misperception people have and why it's important to address that issue publicly. And on top of that, just for the record, if someone tried to marry my daughter at 6 or 9 or 12, they would be hanging off a tree. So, I want to clarify that stance, but I do want to show why anyone that wants to attack that really doesn't have a right. And I don't care what part of the world you come from, cuz you better be start talking about your great-grandfathers first. Especially you Europeans. And I'm European. You guys, before you want to attack the ancient Arabs of the sixth century and seventh century, you better look in the mirror to your uncles and your grandfathers from not even 80 years ago. Yeah, I know. We're going to we're going to And I got receipts, Danny. So, how do you want me to take this thing? Wherever you want to go, brother. I'm ready for this ride. Did you Did you see I'm buckled up. I got my seat belt strapped in. We're doing very important work. I I don't know if you realize it at that time at Huh. I don't know if you realize. I mean all of your work is important but as far as interfaith understanding between Christians and Muslims which I think is very important to push back to not allow what I believe will be one of the main instigators of World War II is an interreligious battle between Christians and Muslims. That's not something I want and I don't think that's what Muslims want. I don't think that's what Christians want. But I feel like there's a lot of agitators in the background that that's what they want. They want Why do you think it'll be between Christians and Muslims? Because just look at the animosity they try to build between these two communities, right? Yeah. But Christian I mean the Muslim world is does not is not a threat to America, right? But there's plenty of Americans that feel that that they are. I mean it is to an extent, right? Like when you have side bombers and you have terrorist attacks and stuff like that, but if it was an all-out war, I mean, the United States could flatten the whole Middle East if they wanted. The problem is Russia and China, Iran, Iran, however, Russia is aligning itself with certain parts of the Muslim world, right? So you know [clears throat] and what's funny is even in Muslim prophecy they believe towards the end of time there will be an alliance between a certain group of Christians and a certain group of Muslims who will fight against the antichrist and his army. So there's actually a Christian Muslim alliance we believe in our end of time signs where they join forces to fight against the forces of the antichrist which is not what this episode's about. Who's the antichrist? The antichrist [clears throat] will be and again that's not the word for it in Islam. The word in Islam is the the Jal. The Jal means the false one. [snorts] Aljal al-Mi, the false messiah. Based on Christian and Muslim perspectives, that figure will be someone who rules from Jerusalem who will be a physical being. You can see them. There will be a a human being who is instead of the real Christ, instead of the real Messiah, meaning Jesus or Issa as they say in Arabic, there will be a human being who acts like he's the Messiah, who promises to save the world at a time when the world is in complete and utter chaos. And this person, this is also based on the Christian perspective. This person who will come to deceive humanity to worship him instead of God will be in place of the real Messiah. And the only place that he can fool the world that he's the chosen one is from Jerusalem itself cuz he has to occupy the third temple. He has to deceive humanity that he is the Messiah and not Jesus Christ himself. And that is in the Christian perspective and the Muslim perspective. You know, Revelations, end of the world, mark of the beast, that's more of the Christian, you know, look on it. But they both have the same concept of a false messiah who will have supernatural power that will deceive the masses of humanity, except for those that either, depending what denomination of Christianity, get raptured before that happens, or, you know, are present during his time, but don't fall into his deception. He's the great deceiver. In Islam, the symbol for the antichrist is the one eye. The all, you know, the the one eye that you see even on the back of the US dollar. And what's interesting is when you look at that, it says anus casspus. You know, casspus. I can't pronounce Latin that great. Novos or seclurum. It's a symbol of the house of Pharaoh. Pharaoh was the last human being on earth, right? Who says, "I am God." The Pharaoh of Egypt was, "I am God." Right. Mhm. But he wasn't God cuz he was destroyed by the true God. He was drowned at the bottom of that sea. That I which comes down. So my interpretation and many scholars is that the anuitis casseptus means he is pleased with our work. Well, who's pleased? Because that's what that means. Anit casspus. Who's pleased? What [clears throat] does that mean in what language? Latin. Now the novos. Type it in. Steve Novas odor secure if I'm not mistaken. That's the translation. Let's well let's verify. We can we can pull up the um the I know the Novasur means new secular order. What's the uh So the new secular order meaning when you wipe out religion Mhm. what do you wipe out? He favors our undertakings. Coeptus. He favors our undertaking. He is pleased with our work is what it means. Well, if you're taking out religion, no odo, meaning a secular order. Secular means you're wiping out religion. I approve. When you wipe out religion, who are you wiping out? In essence, you're wiping out God. So, who could be pleased? It's not God the way they want us to think. Why would God be pleased that we're wiping out religion? Think about that. So, who's the who that they're happy about? Who's this person that's pleased that they're creating a secular world? We're seeing what secularization looks like. The breakdown of the nuclear family. These are conservative values. I've noticed more than anything right now a insane uprising of Christianity. It's more happy about that. I mean, I just talked about this the other day. Like I literally watched a podcast where Russell Brand and Alex Jones are praying to Jesus Christ before they start a podcast. It's like a fiveminute prayer as a Muslim. And this is this is why what we're doing with like and I thank you so much, man. Like seriously, forget the impact you've had on my career. I'm serious, bro. Like, you've you know, I haven't reaped the riches from it, but you've you've helped me really catapult my voice and my message. You know, we've covered these in previous episodes. Man, I lost family in a war. I lost 28 people. They were massacred by the Serbian military during the Kosovo War in 1998. And there's plenty of videos. You can do the research. during the Bosian war, Croatia, Kosovo, you have plenty of videos of Serbians, Serbian monks, right, blessing Serb soldiers before they commit atrocities, right? My family was massacred by Christians. I never once in my entire life ever blamed Christianity for what happened to my family. So why am I not given the same respect as a member of what is soon to be the largest faith in the world? And that's [clears throat] what this episode today is about. I'm going to show the double standards. I'm going to show how you have bias in your heart. if you're watching this episode and you don't really know why you hate Muslims except you've seen a few movies on uh TV and have been programmed to feel this way towards the people because I feel like all that does is dehumanize the Muslim world so that when bombs are dropping in places that maybe shouldn't have had bombs dropped on them, you're desensitized and you don't care. Ah, they got those Muslims, those pedals, those women hating people, those satanic people. Well, okay. [clears throat] But as a Muslim, right, I am so happy that there's a resurrection of Christianity, of people believing in God. I don't know what the this drink's doing right now to me. It's hitting right now. So, it's kidding, right? It's good. It's very good. And I do drink a lot of white rabbitum, baby. I do drink a lot of here and there, folks, is I don't drink alcohol. These types of drinks, by the way, I'm not sponsored by them, but I would love to be. I've been drinking for over a decade, and I've taken long breaks from it, and I usually drink crushed leaf and all that. There's there's different versions of it, right? There's a lot of different strands. There's red, there's green, there's gold, there's white. Some of them spike you up in energy. Some of them make you very sedated. This one definitely has This one's more If you drink one of these, it gives you super This feels like This feels like this has white strand in it. I could tell that. I mean, I've been drink So, yeah, it's very If you drink two of them, you're just like, you're done. Yeah. Then it sedates. So, in the beginning, there's initial you get up and then sedate. Mhm. I do uh I do one a day. I don't I very rarely will do two of those in a day. Getting back to to where I was is, you know, it's important that [clears throat] we understand what's real and what's not. [snorts] I do believe there's a global agenda. I believe there's people behind the scenes that are putting the world on fire to create one secular order for the entire world. This is bigger than the US. What do you mean when you say one secular order for the entire world? a world completely without God. The perfect environment for what Christians and Muslims believe to be the Antichrist, the false messiah, this being that will come to deceive the world, to trick the world into worshiping him instead of the creator. So that's something that Muslims and Christians have in common. Jews never accepted Christ as the Messiah, but Muslims do believe he's the Messiah. They just don't think he's divine. We don't worship Jesus Christ. We only pray to God. But [clears throat] we love Jesus Christ. We believe in all his miracles. We believe in his miraculous birth. We believe he was born to the Virgin Mary. She's the most important woman in all of Islam. And if we're being fair here, I think it's the Muslim woman who kind of dressed like her and, you know, kind of cover their modesty like she does. I mean, if we were in the streets and someone stopped a random majority, how old was she? How old was she when she had Jesus? So the Christian scholars say they if they all say that unanimously she was probably around the age of 12 right when the when the father based on Christianity placed Christ into her womb. Mhm. Which is fine. That's past the age of puberty in 99% of the times. Right. So she was of childbearing age at the age of 12. What I have a problem with is the attack of the character of the prophet Muhammad peace be upon him. Cuz you got to remember you have the Quran and then you have hadith. Hadith are what people think the prophet Muhammad said. I heard him say this. I heard him say that. And some of those hadith his wife is the author of most of them. You know, a lot of them. The prophet's wife that they always accuse him of being a you know underage with her and all that stuff because I'm avoiding certain words for you know you know why. Sorry we can censor it. So they accuse him of being a pedo. Well, I would say if he's a pedo, then all of Europe, all of America should shut their mouths. Yeah. And I'll tell you why. Pull it up, maestro. Pull up marriageable age in the USA, my brother. And I want you to read this. Now, go scroll down. Now, this is up on Wikipedia, but you can do your homework cuz most of you don't. You want Danny to do all the work for you. And he does a phenomenal job, folks. Thank you. Scroll down. Okay. I don't know if this is where I told you to pull up. Go back up. Did you leave the ones I told you or No. Okay. Yeah. Go down. Marriage age in the US. Here, let's start here. Let's start here. Start age of consent. Start at age of consent. Let people go do their homework. In 1275 in England, as part of a law, the statute of West Minister in 1275. It was a misdemeanor to ravish a maiden within age, whether with or without her consent. The phrase within age was interpreted by jurist Sir Edward Ko to mean the age of marriage [snorts] which at the time was 12 years old. Okay, 12 years old. Now we're going to go down deeper into this. So 1275 is almost 600 years after the prophet. And they consider this a normal age to have intercourse. But go down. I guess ravage a maid. Go down. Go down even more. Start right there. [clears throat] Actually, go down a little more. Okay. Age of consent here in the US. Go down. In Delaware, the age of consent is was 10. 10. And 1871. Now, stop. Pause there for a second. 1871. Danny. Okay. 1300 years after the life of the prophet, peace be upon him. And they they said, "No, that's too old." No, no, 10 is too old. We got to lower that to seven. I don't know if that's cuz it's Joe Biden's home state. I don't know. Almost a hundred years after America became a thing. Okay. And they want to go now and try to prejudge and not and not in context. So, let me give the context. Wait, wait, wait. Until 1871 when it was lowered to seven years. That's why it's Joe Biden's home state, bro. What? Delaware, man. There's a lot of a lot of great a lot of people's home state. A lot of politicians. Let's zoom out. Maestro, continue down. 37 states 1880. We're talking about 1300, you know, almost 1300 years after the life of the prophet Muhammad. 37 states set the age of consent at 10 years old. 10 states set the age to 12 and back and forth and so on and so forth. Okay, hold that. Now, let's go to the next one. Now, pull up the royals in Europe. Let's pull it. This is America. Yeah. Okay. The age of consent was just changed a few years ago in Europe. I think it was like 13 and they just officially changed it. Okay. How long ago did they change it? If I had a daughter and somebody wanted to marry her at 10, I would put them I would bury them alive. Right? I'm not defending in that aspect, but we need to put things into historical context. And we can't just point and say, "Oh, you Arabs, oh you Middle Easterners, oh you prophet this, and you this." When let's look at Europe, man. These are the royals. People still love. Look at Mary, bro. Mary was 12. She had not only was she married, she was impregnated. She was uh she was cosmically impregnated by the father. So was the father a pedo? Probably. But they don't have a problem attacking Muslims and creating Islamophobia and creating hatred. When if we look at their ancestors, this is all of Europe, 15 years old, 13 years old, 12 years old, they were married. Now, there's a difference between being engaged, Danny, and consummating the marriage. They were consummating these marriages, bro. 8 years old to a 30-year-old. Look at Cecil of France. Okay. Where's right there? 12th century. Oh, 12th century. 8 to Nine was married. Yeah. Okay. All right. The So, look in the mirror. Yeah. This stuff's ubiquitous. Yes. Yes. Because the rule of the world up until about 100 years ago, really until feminism, right, till their movement, you know, women's movement, child was also ubiquitous back then too. Not only was was marrying kids really young and then like doing like sexual stuff with with with children like right after they hit puberty. I think I think the law in like ancient Rome was like if you if there was some sort of abuse of an underage kid, underage they defined by uh prepubescent. It wasn't even like you don't even get in trouble. It was only like a um like a a civil lawsuit like it like I could if there was damages I could sue you or whatever. These are centuries and centuries of the royals, princes, you name it. Throughout all of Europe. Oh my god. Throughout of all of Europe yet most of the people that come from eight or nine Elizabeth of Cumin, okay, a Christian background here in the US. Yo, go look at your grandparents. Your great great grandparents, man. They were pedos. They were pedos. And you guys want to attack what? Now, let me set the background of the prophet's marriage. No one knew her age. She She wrote hadith. I was around six. I was around eight. What? She didn't even know her own age. That's a fact. My grandmother, God rest her soul, born in Albania. They didn't keep documents. She didn't even know her owning age, bro. That's a fact. I know Albanians that were engaged in the womb. They were engaged. Does it mean they consummated the marriage? But they were engaged. That's just the way the world was. Families traded. You have a son. I have a daughter. That's how they kept ties. That's how they kept power. That's throughout the world. Asia, if we pull up Asia right now, same thing. But we don't have to. You guys go do your homework. So, where am I going with all this? Yeah. Where you going with this? First of all, anyone that marries a 10-year-old today should be hung. Okay? I'm not saying it's right, but in context, the rule of the whole world was once a woman had her period, she was of the age she could bear children. That's just nature. They didn't keep track with records and this and that. The ancient Arabs in what is known as the time of ignorance before the prophet Muhammad came, it's called Jalaliyah, how they say in Arabic, not Arab, but I know some words. It was the time of ignorance. These are a people that were burying their daughters alive. They had a rule, the ancient Arabs before Islam came to them that if they had a daughter before they had a son, they were not allowed to keep a daughter. They had to have a son first. So, they would bury their literally a couple days old, they would go to the desert and bury that baby. Okay. If I'm not mistaken, you have you have a what do you have kids wise? Two boys. Okay. So, you would have been okay to have a girl now, but if you would have had two girls before a boy, you would have buried both of them alive. Literally days after they're born, this is before Islam came to them. Women were obvious. They would have identified as males, so they'd be fine. But you know what I mean? Well, in today's world, they would have got away with, "No, no, I'm I'm a girl. I'm a girl. You know, I'm a boy." But so, you know, people think they know the history. They listen to a couple blips. They have people like Sam Schuman who does these debates. And I find religious debate harmful. The only reason I'm stepping up to the plate is because you find it harmful. I find it harmful when because my mission is the opposite. I don't want Muslims and Christians going at it. I'm trying to say, yo, you guys have way more way more in common that you even want to admit. [clears throat] Clearly just proved it to you with receipts before you attacked the nature. But then they'll say, well, well, Jesus did it. Well, his mother was pregnant at 12. Let's start there. Let's start there. Right? So, if you want to be real, let's be real. But if we're going to debate to be harmful and not reach an understanding, I may never believe what you believe as a Christian. You may never believe what I believe as a Muslim. We even have a verse in the Quran that's called the non-believers or the antichrists. And and and then and in that verse, God tells us to say to people, "Hey, you that don't believe as we do. I will never believe what you believe. You will never believe what I believe, to you your way, and to me my way." Meaning, God's going to judge us. No Muslim can tell a Christian he's going to hell or a Jew. We're actually a religion that still promises them salvation. Meaning if they follow what God sent to Jesus, which I don't think they have, and I don't think they follow because of the corruption, the way the the uh Bible was constructed 60 to 300 years after his alleged resurrection. It was written by people like Paul who massacred the first Christians. It was spread by the Romans who were pagan, which is where I believe the concept of the trinity comes. But from the Islamic perspective, we believe as [clears throat] long as you follow the original teachings of Christ, like what he said in Mark 10. And a man falls beneath, you know, on his knees in front of Jesus and says, "Oh, good master, how do I seek eternal life?" Jesus responds, "Good. Why do you call me good? Only God is good." So I'll ask the Protestant, "You're telling me he's God, right?" Okay. So why is God telling you not even to call him good? So how's Jesus God? It's either the Bible's wrong and he's God or he's not God and the Bible's right. You can't have both. We all can read simple English. This is it. Okay, brother. The rich. And I can go on for days with this. Why do you call me good? Jesus answered, "No one is good except God alone. You know the commandments. You should not You shall not murder. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal." False testimony. It will be harder for a wealthy person to go to heaven than a camel to go through the eye of a needle. Correct? Is that down there more? Let's see if I'm starting to memorize your book now, too. All I'm saying is this, and it's not to prove who's right or wrong. By debating, all the Muslim and the Christian does is push people away from God. Period. The only person that's happy is the devil. There's actually verses in the Quran. No, look at that. Look at that. It's easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God. I quoted it, huh? Did I quote it? That was on point. Be back. So, because people don't even know anything about my faith, I can quote a Christian's book. They'll take a couple sentences out of context and try to paint this picture and then the part I love the most is like you have all these people online like they believe in these like the global agenda, which I do believe in, right? And they say, "Well, those buildings that came down on 911, I was in those buildings." We we spoke about this. I know you've interviewed so many people, but if you go back to the previous two episodes, I think even the first one, I discussed how I was there that day underneath the building when it got knocked down, right? So, it's not like I didn't experience the show. What were you What were you doing there? I was going to school, bro. Second year, sophomore year, I'm going to Pace University. Doors open, people screaming, yelling. I'm like, what the I didn't know what was I didn't even know the building's on fire above us. It was crazy. But I love how people go, I know that it was the Muslims didn't do it. They just blamed them to start war. Because there's a lot of people that believe that, right? I'm talking about what do they believe? They believe you're going you're going really fast. They believe that those buildings were taken down to false flag and take, you know, to do what they've done in the Middle East over the last 25 years. There's large swats of people that believe that, right? Okay, I'm not even getting into that, but I'm talking about even non-Christians. What I find it funny is if you believe that that was a false flag and that those were destroyed by anyone else except the guy with the long beard who miraculously flew two jumbo jets into this building and they miraculously found the passport on the floor and they miraculously killed him and then dumped his body cuz they didn't want to give the American people the right. I as someone that was in the World Trade Center, I want to see his body. I deserve that justice. Did you Did you I just saw this recently. I read something. They just threw his body over. No pictures, no nothing. Come on, man. Did you read the story about And Steve, you're going to have to look this up and find the article, but there was a story that he was flu flown to Saudi Arabia by the CIA. Fahrenheit 911. The doc had covered some of that. He went to a hospital because he had some sort of like a a liver a thing with his liver or diabetes. No, he had diabetes. Something was going on with him medically where he had he had had emergency procedure done in Saudi Arabia in a hospital. And this was like a year before 9/11. and he went to the hospital and he was being supervised there by like CIA people. He definitely existed. I'm not denying his existence. He was a real person. His family. Yeah. There's people that think he's just a boogeyman. No, he existed. I just don't know if he was really alive. You know, how do we really know, bro? I wanted to see his body. Yeah. I think the American people deserve to see his body as a 9/11 survivor. And I hate to use that word. Mhm. But as someone that was underneath those buildings that day and watched people die right in front I thought hundreds of thousands of people were dead that day. I mean I cried. You were there right under the tower before I was on the E train. Last stop is World Trade. I'm underneath it, man. I'm in the sub levels coming up. I was probably on the last subway ever went into the World Trade Center ever. I actually have a clip of that on my on my it's a a reel I have right now on my Instagram. It show Did you find anything on that Bin Laden hospital visit? But what I'm saying is getting back to your original point is if you believe that that was a false flag and all that and that they weren't really responsible for it, then why do you hate Muslims so much? That group of people, I'm not saying all that believe that. I find it to be a contradiction. If you feel that they use that as an excuse, then why so much animosity? Because there's a lot of people that believe that we don't know the truth about that day. And yes, we're off a tangent here, but that's what happens when we're together. Are you familiar with like the history of Syria and Iran and how how the idea of side bombers was started like the the it was called but you have different sex right the poor man's nuke I think is what they called it it was uh they gave him keys you're going to Bashar Bashar al-Assad's father uh was the one who when the I think the Reagan administration went into Syria during his administration they they wanted try to find a way to push back the Americans. And then I think Assad went to Iran and they basically they met and they talked about this idea. That's where the um whoever the leader of Iran was at the time. It was probably his father Al um Bashar's father probably. No, no, but yeah. Bashar's father went to Iran to meet with whoever the head of Iran was at that time. That's where they they It was Kmeni, man. No. ' 89. Yes, I think so. I think you're right. It had to have been Kmeni. That's when they came up with the idea of because I know Reagan was in power when the hostages were being held, right? And he got them released like he's like either you release these hostages or we're a nuclear war basically and they right released them right away under Reagan and then that's when they first started using suicide bombers. It was not a concept of Islam right right understood. But that's when it first developed and they started using that against the Americans in Syria and then eventually Reagan pulled everybody out. They pulled all the Americans out because they didn't know how to deal with this. But let's give credit to the Japanese first with their kamicazis. They're the first true kamicazers. Right. Right. Yeah, that's true. That's true. There's [snorts] even a famous Albanian man who technically did that. But he didn't do aside bombing. He lured the He's one of the most gangster people ever read about in your life. Pull up. This is the most gangster is that this you can't classify as aside bomber, but it's a guy that basically which is still forbidden in Islam. I I think I've explained this in episode. Here's the thing. You can never under any circumstance in Islam commit suicide even if you know you're going to die. What I'm getting at is the creation of bombing in Islam in the Islamic world was in that time between Iraq and Iran also those wars is when it really started. That's when it created a different version of Islam where somebody in Egypt I can't remember the name of who it was now. Wahhabi. Wahhabi. Can you I don't know if the Wahhabis were the ones but to my understanding Wahhabi movement was to create a version of Islam that has no mercy. Yes. And when the whole faith is about mercy it really is right. The first converts to Islam were really literally prisoners of war. Mhm. Okay. The the prisoners of war are treated in such a fashion that they were like this is how you treat your prisoners of war. We want to be like you guys. So they would convert because they're like this is how you treat your prisoners. Now you look at what they did over the last 20 years. They're chopping people's heads off in orange jumpsuits and filming it with camcorders. Like this is not Islam to anyone that studies the religion. My whole point on this episode is why are we not given the same respect and why is there double standards? You want to accuse the prophet about being a Peter? What about all the scandals in the church? What about all the scandals in the church? That's what hobbyism is like version of swept under the rug. One of the largest denominations of Christianity, Catholicism. swept under the rug in our time. Yeah. Forget 600 when right now in our time. Yeah. They're paying giant settlements. Thousands [clears throat] and thousands and thousands of victims across the globe in every nation. You want to talk about a scandal. So then you was a Christian or a Catholic. You really have the audacity to point fingers and say he was a pedo. Yo, look in the mirror. Mhm. Look in the mirror and be real. Right. I showed you why what he did is normal. We don't know her exact age. does not matter what the hadith wrote about Aisha's marriage, okay? But it's a tactic to create animosity towards one of the largest faiths in the world. We know for a fact that she was well past the age she was engaged before the prophet Muhammad. And if he was such a pedo, then why was his first wife, the love of his life, who's out there was 25 years older than his first wife that he didn't want to be with anyone else until after she passed. Okay, he was with her like he went crazy for her. Katijah is his first wife. She was 25 years older than him. His enemies that wrote stuff about him. How come they never accused him of being a pedo? Because it was normal. Whatever was going on at that time. You explain to me why they were doing this 100 years ago in Europe in the US. That you explain to me. Don't talk to me about an ancient Arabian culture that you understand nothing about. The girl was clearly past the age of consummation. That we know. I don't care if it was 12, 13, whatever it was. It was past the age of consummation. Some scholars think she might have been even 19 years old. No one knows for sure. They want to use some hadith [clears throat] in a in a culture and a society that was not keeping accurate records. They were more of an oral people before Islam. That's why it's known as the age of ignorance before the prophet came. Then what happened after he came? You know, a tree by its fruits. Algebra pulled Europe out of the dark ages. That's a fact. Islam was spread by the sword. Really? Yeah. There was battles. There was some wars, but Muslims were never allowed to invade Christian lands. That's a fact. I'll say it here on the record. I don't support what the Ottoman Empire did. Many of the things they did is against the tenementss of Islam. You're not allowed to invade and occupy Christians. Christians and Jews have a protected class in Islam. They are known as the people of the book. Anyone that received previous revelation. Now, the Muslims believe those revelations were corrupted, which is why we needed the last testament, which is what we call the Quran. You have the Old Testament, the New Testament, which is the Gospel of Christ, and the Quran, in our opinion, is the final testament. The last book that God sent to earth that he protected because any human being that puts energy into it can memorize the entire book by heart from the first word to the last word. I will ask the Christian audience, how much Aramaic do you speak? You can't even agree on what language Jesus Christ book should be in. You have some in Greek. You have some in Greek, by the way. doesn't even exist anymore. Some of it's in ancient Aramaic, some of it's in Hebrew. Well, every Muslim, whether they're white, black, whatever they are, they know that the only original version of the Quran is in Arabic. Only in Arabic. We know anything that we read in English is a translation to the best of their ability. When was the Quran first written? In the [clears throat] six six. Pull it up, brother. It was after the life of the prophet is when they finally compiled it. Okay. But before he died, he had many Hafi. Hi are those that can memorize the book by heart. I've witnessed this phenomenon many times in my life. During the month of Ramadan, you can witness this phenomenon. Okay. So that's when it ended. But then they compiled it after I think it was it was revealed by the angel Gabriel to the prophet Muhammad in western Arabian towns of Mecca and Medina beginning in 600 610 and ending with Muhammad's death in 632 CE. Why are they called CE? Why is this called BC? I have no idea. But what's important about all this is that we believe that that book was sent CE is basically BC, right? I'm I'm not an expert on that either right now. I'm fried. What is CE mean? They've changed it. They used to do they always change it. BC A D, you know, B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B C E C E common era Ker. So it's B. So it's a So it's AD. It's basically AD, bro. Yes, it's AD. You see CE and AD both refer to the 610 A. Yeah. Ano domin common era B say before the common era before Christ our Lord. You like those like you like those accents. Yeah that's good Danny. So what I'm saying brother cuz this is a lot of information here. People have to listen to these types of episodes three four times and make sure you listen to the whole thing so you hit Danny's algorithm. Now listen it is very important that I am not trying to push but I have to push back when you just see for 25 years all I've seen is hatred, lies, propaganda, Then people say, "I hate what's going on in the Middle East." Well, this is why they justify it because you guys don't know these simple things I'm trying to point out and the double standards and the hypocrisy. And you think Muslims are supposed to treat they treat their women like animals. I don't want to hear about what people do in their cultures. There's a difference between culture and faith. Big difference. Religion and culture. Sometimes they're intertwined. We pray in Arabic, brother. I'm a white boy. Okay? I speak English first language, Albanian second language. I am not fluent in Arabic, but I can recite many verses of the Quran in fluent Arabic. In the name of God the most gracious, to you alone I pray. To you alone I seek guidance. guide me on the true path, not on the path of those who have incurred your anger or your wrath. You know, you will that so I know what I'm saying in the Arabic language. I know what the words mean. Every Muslim prays in Arabic. Why? To preserve the book, whether they're white like I am or Asian and and China. They probably be in a camp though if they're a weager. Why is this such a threat? It's not because we need to invade. It's because people want to look at everyone's becoming Muslim, though. Who who's knocking on their doors? We're not Jehovah's Witnesses. We're not going, "Hey, you want to be a Muslim today?" I've had Mormons come to my house like 30 times already. Hey, like people there's it's funny how there's these uh We just saw people read, guys. We dare you to read. Yeah. There's people online that are becoming Muslims, you know, like Andrew Tate and other people. And then there's all these other people that are just like joining Christian, like born again Christians like crazy online. And going back to that point, I'm happy, man. I want I'd rather have people believe like if we had a choice if we could say everyone believe in Christianity like if people actually follow these faiths any of them even Buddhism bro people if they follow them like follow the and understand the logic behind it we would live in a better world but people say they're this that and they don't follow the rules you blow yourself up you're not a Muslim brother you're going to hell forever if you're watching this and you're some you know crazy Arab dude somewhere just want to let you know you'll probably end up going to hell forever. Not probably. You will go to hell forever. You can under no condition ever take your life in that religion. And I'll explain why. There's a concept known as the okay in the Arabic language in the Quran means the wisdom that only God possesses. The divine wisdom meaning things happen and we don't know. Right? So one verse in the Quran says it may be a thing you thought was bad for you is actually good for you and something that you thought was good for you is actually lead you to your destruction. But only God has that wisdom. Right? So, I'll give this scenario and I want you to pull this up, brother. Os kuka. He was an Albanian guy that led the army in and basically did a kamicazi move, but it wasn't a bombing, per se. He got the enemy. He's one of the most gangster that oho ever lived, bro. Okay, dude. This guy was rugged. Go to images for a second. Just look at this guy's images, bro. Albanian. Shout out to my man Joseph. Look at this guy's mustache. Big Joe. Big Joe taught me about this guy's history. No, no. Go go go go go like like this guy's like a a thing of legend, man. Go back to the Wikipedia. Read this guy's story, man. This dude lur lures in like thousands of soldiers and blows up a whole thing with himself in it to take out the enemy. Bro, no Read this story. This is like this guy should have his own movie, man. Hollywood. You want some crazy movies? We'll give it. The Albanians will give it to you. Go up. Go up. What are you doing? Read the story. Uh he was a Albanian border guard on the Ottoman Montenegrian border surrounded by Montenegrian soldiers in a tower on the island of Ranina. He blew it up killing himself and many of the Montenegrian soldiers. In the following decades he became a rallying figure of the Albanian independence movement. So he basically lured them into this tower and blew it up. Wow. Scroll down. He was a straight ra. He gave his life. But see even that technically 1840. See, even there, to my understanding, even though you're fighting in war and you're willing to sacrifice your life, which is basically what you're doing when you sign up to find war, I don't know how God will judge that. Because I know we're not allowed to take our own lives no matter what. Why? Because maybe it was God's wisdom that you would be captured. So, let's say I'm surrounded by the enemy. I'm like, I'm a goner. Or if they get me, I'm going to be tortured to death. From the Islamic perspective, it's you don't have God's wisdom only. That's why Muslims every time they say something I just read an article today which I would actually bring up as a reference point of a poor man that was killed in New York last night cuz a car went the wrong way. He's supposed to get married today. He died last night. So he's one day before his wedding and some wrongway one-way driver smashed into his car and killed him. He thought he's going to get married today. His wife thought he's going to be his future now. She's single again. Unfortunately, I hate to even say it, but that's why the Muslim every time they say something, they say inshallah by God's will. I have plans, but God can laugh. So, right, the reason why my understanding why suicide is forbidden, maybe she maybe she's the one who killed him. No, I don't think maybe she got cold life insurance. Well, the guy No, the guy [clears throat] she got a key man insurance. It's sad, but to think about that to go from that point to to to tragedy is really, you know, my condolences to that family. Yeah. But from my understanding, Danny, as a Muslim, someone studied theology most of his life, bro, since fourth grade, man. On my own. I don't come from a religious family. They hate me talking about religion. You understand? This is some guy that was spoonfed his beliefs and someone that went out and sought knowledge. I'm not saying I'm God. And I also want to say I can make mistakes. And please cross reference everything I tell you. All of you. That's both Christian, Muslim, Jew, atheist, Hindu. I can make mistakes. I can make errors. Only an arrogant person would would think they know everything and are smart. So like please cross reference my dates, things I say cuz I have a responsibility to your audience and to you to give you as best as I can my knowledge, my interpretation, my studies. Why is suicide bombing forbidden? Cuz maybe even if I'm surrounded by the soldier and I think I'm going to get killed or I think I'm going to be tortured, right? And then killed, which is even worse. The way God would perceive it probably is it's okay. You're going to get captured. You're going to maybe as you get captured two days later you get rescued. You don't know. You don't know if you're going to be rescued or not. You don't have God's knowledge of tomorrow. He knows the future. It may be that it was God's will that you get captured by that army and they tort you to death so that he purges you of your sins in this life and grant you paradise. That's how he was going to let you be purified. You don't have God's wisdom. So for anyone to take their own life and try to take other people's lives, especially civilians, you're going straight to hell. I can promise you. In Islam, this is the doctrine. You will burn in hell for the rest of eternity. You never get out. You don't have God's wisdom. To say you have God's wisdom is to say you are God in essence. And that's what people don't understand about this faith. It's not the Muslims are coming for you. The Muslims are coming for you. This is what they've been telling you for 25. It's orange today. It's green today. The Muslims are coming for you. Why don't we look at it the other way? That guy in Poland, Dominic Tashkowski, whatever his name, pull up his his he was just on Patrick Bed's podcast. I don't know if you could play the clip. Listen to the that comes out of his mouth. Man, by the way, Stephen, I found that article that I was looking for with Bin Laden and the CIA agents. Oh, yeah. Yeah. What's it called? I'll send it to you right now. Okay. Yo, this White Rabbit fire, right? Yo, for someone that drinks crowding, bro, it's good It's the best, man. I'm I haven't If you guys are watching, you know, I I am an advocate for this industry and I do have a big following. I even made an episode about what it's like to go to a Cava bar and try out drinks and cuz a lot of times they serve crowd with cava hands. I've never had cava. Yeah, cava is great, man. But I'm just allergic to it now. I can't really Yeah, it sucks. I loved it. But cava led me to this. What does kava make you feel like? Cava is very chill, bro. And it's made from this root in Micropeneia. They grind it into a fine powder and they mix it with water. It was a ceremonial drink of the, you know, Pol micropollynesian and Polynesian cultures of the Pacific and they didn't have alcohol until the colonizers came, right? So, they would drink this drink and it's like, I think the legend has it that there was a a mice or rats that were chewing on the root of this and he saw that they were acting dumb. So, he's like, "Hey, let me try it." And then he he that that's how it was discovered from what I understand. And then they make this drink with it. It tastes like paint. Okay. It literally tastes like if you took Benjamin more paint, mixed it with water, and drank it. But you get it's like hey everything that tastes makes you feel good tastes like anyway. Right. Except for this. This is delicious. This is mixed. I'm saying that it's raw form. You know what I mean? So they take the root, they mix it with water. It's really really good. So a lot of people that want to give up alcohol, they drink cava, right? People that want to like kind of have a crutch to get off of heroin or deeper drugs, they use catam as a crutch. And it has saved a lot of people's lives. I think I'm an advocate. I'm an advocate for the industry. It can be addictive though. It can be, but so can anything else. Yeah, I've drank it for years. I've gone years, you know, months without touching it. You know, some people, the problem is I think what happens with it, Danny, the people that are addicted to drugs, a different type of drug, when they get sober and they use this as a clutch, they use it so much to try to like curb and that's not healthy, right? Not at all. That's the only time that they those people have a problem with this, but they're addicted to anything. But at least this keep they don't die right away, right? Yeah. Heroin, they're playing roulette, right? For sure. Cocaine, they're playing roulette. Even alcohol, get in a car and drive when you're drunk. All right, here's the here's the article that I was alluding to with Bin Laden. CIA agent alleged to have met Bin Laden in July. French claims terrorist leader stayed in Dubai hospital. Two months before September 11th, Osama bin Laden flew to Dubai for 10 days for treatment at an American hospital where he was visited by a local CIA agent. According to a French newspaper Le Figaro Lefiguro, the disclosures are known to come from French intelligence which is keen to reveal the ambitious role of CIA and to restrain Washington from extending the war to Iraq and elsewhere. Bin Laden is reported to have arrived in Dubai on July 4th from Queda in Pakistan with his own personal doctor, nurse and four bodyguards to be treated in the urology department. While there w while there he was visited by several members of his family and Saudi personalities and CIA. The CIA chief was seen in the lift on his way to see Bin Laden and later it is alleged boasted to friends about his contact. He was recalled to Washington soon afterwards. How And now he's probably in a ditch at the bottom of the Baltimore River. This is Yeah. [laughter] This was posted by Anthony Samson in the Guardian on Wednesday. October 31st, 2001. Brother, there's just so much shady stuff going on, man. I'm trying to stop World War II from breaking going down. Okay, you may have already started. This is insane. So, how do you explain that? How was he in American hospital two months before 911 with CIA people there? I'm not killing myself. I'm not suicidal. Say it for the record. Say it for the record. Danny Jones, that Glover is not suicidal. No. Say it for yourself, too. I'm not suicidal. Yo, no matter what. I don't give a what they show you ever. Cuz I just explain why you can't. If you do, you you're in trouble. So, how do you explain it, bro? Times don't match up. Story doesn't match up. You don't show me the guy's body. Okay. And I didn't This is not what this episode was about, but that's why you watch the Danny Jones podcast. You never know which way it's going to go. Danny, I am trying to reverse some of the damage that was created because of that day, because of that conflict, because of where it led. There's millions of people dead because of that day, man. But now I know why people can be fooled so much. Because during the day when they were showing us the Puff Daddy video where he's railing on that poor woman, Cassie, what's released the same day? They admitted on record that they funded you know what overseas was what led to the gain of you know what function which shut our nation down and costed millions of people their lives. We were too distracted watching Puff Daddy on a video he can't even be charged with that they released by the way when they raided his home. It was the feds that got that video. So, while they released that video, you have the number two guy admitting on record in our government, the NIH admitting the number two guy. Who's that? I forgot. You could pull it up. They he admitted to this happened on the same day as the no. Where the you been, Danny Jones? That same day they released the Puff Daddy video. Okay. It was on the floor, I think, of either the Congress or the Senate. It was one of the two, right? hearing on record. Yes, taxpayer money funded that lab. Yes, it funded the boom boom of function of the of the of that illness that they used to close the world down on record. Meaning your family that you lost. I lost people during that time period. My cousin, God rest his soul from the Jerka family. My friend Izzy who passed away in the first three days of CO. my friend Haziz, his son. May he rest in peace, Rusty. Okay, I talk about this stuff because our our family, our friends, they deserve justice. This is bigger than just America. This is bigger than Muslim verse Christian. This is bigger than all this crap that they use to divide us, that they use to fuel hatred, that they use to make an enemy that you can focus on when these people at the top of these There you go. There's the This is on record, man. Play the sound. NIH official officially admits taxpayers funded gain of function research in Wuhan after years of denials. And only Rand Paul's talking about it, man. Still, okay, your family died because of this. Your friends died. Your children deserve justice, man. Your your your marriages ended because of this. People got divorced. People lost their businesses. People lost their livelihood. They kept you caged in your homes. People are still traumatized. They're wearing masks. They're scared to breathe the air that God gave them. This is the damage done to our world, the fabric of society. And you guys were focused on Puffy beating his girl. And it was on record that day, bro. The same day that they released the Puffy video. The same day they released the video. It's on record. Look. And even you. And you're one of the most red I know. You're one of the most in-the- people. You didn't know about this, Danny Jones? No, I didn't. You think it was an accident that video was released the same day? Cuz that's all anybody was talking about that day. Yeah. Here we go. Did NIH fund gain of function research at the Wuhan Institute of Urology through Echo Health? It depends on your definition of gain of function research. If you're speaking about the generic term, yes, we did because but this is research. The generic term is research that goes on in many many labs around the country. It is not regulated. And the reason it's not regulated is it poses no threat or harm to anybody. That doesn't make your blood boil, bro. Huh? They know how to make They know how to make That doesn't make your blood boil as an American. Seriously, there's a lot of things that America does that makes my blood boil, brother. But that destroyed the whole world. Yeah. That using our money. I know people that lost their children, man. I know people that are injured from, you know what, okay, I have to speaking code here cuz we're not even in a free country anymore. So to understand what happened there, that's what that's my enemy. That that people that support that that you should be forced to take things that you don't want to and you can't speak your mind. These are anti-American. Did you see the video of Fouchy? The video that the the recorded Can we get one episode that breaks over half a million? Cuz the words we're using already mean you. That's not cuz the content. Sorry. We censor it. We censor it. We'll be fine. We've been good. Our highlights go crazy. We've been in our highlights. Me and you go crazy. I want this episode out there cuz it's important. The high priest and church fathers at YouTube have really had us in their high regards lately. We we haven't gotten in any trouble recently cuz to take it easy on me, man. [laughter] You guys you got to cut out the inflammatory man. What is it? Teach me, man. Give me a course. Censor it. Censor it. Okay. So, how does the people know what we're talking about, then? That's the game you got to play, man. Okay. Stop saying this. You're making his job harder. Can you f There's a Have you seen the You know what's even from now on you should say from now on we use R to represent Yeah. the video of Fouchy where he's on the phone. It's a recorded phone call where he's talking to I forget who he's talking to. Steve, maybe you can find the context for this. But he's basically saying like no vaccinations, you're getting kicked out of school. No vaccinations, you're going to get you're going to lose your job. All this stuff. And he's like that video was phenomenal. He's being arrogant about it. I just saw and I won't mention her name. A very good friend of mine. Okay. She works in my community and I saw she lost her eyesight in one eye and her arm's like this and I'm like you know hey what happened to you? She's like I don't know about 6 months after I took you know what she's like this is what happened to me. She lost sight. She can't move her arm. She said her brother got massive blood clots in his heart he survived. She's like I know matter what they say. She's like that's what caused they didn't they didn't do real trials on They were both healthy and they thought I was stupid cuz I'm like, "Hey guys, after 911 they told me that the air was safe at Pace University." I knew it wasn't safe. So, I let her walk out. Then I met with the EPA who ended up lying to all of us. Christine Todd Whitman's people at the time, former Jersey governor, and she reassured all the people of Southern Manhattan that we were safe. And guess what? today is a multi-billion dollar fund open for anyone that lived or worked or went to school in lower Manhattan. And they said an apology after 10 years after 10 years after more people died from that. I promise you trusting that the air was safe then that fell in the tower. Is that the fund that's funded by Saudi Arabia where they have to pay all the all the victims. Yeah, I guess it's still open too. I could still sue right now and probably get like 40 50 grand. I don't want it, man. I I just I don't I don't got time for that Play this real quick. So this is the Fouchy thing. You think can be done about it? I have to say that I don't see a big solution other than some sort of mandatory vaccination. I know federal officials don't like to use that term. Once people feel empowered and protected legally, you are going to have schools, universities, and colleges are going to say, "You want to come to this college, buddy? You're going to get vaccinated. Lady, you're going to get vaccinated." big corporations like Amazon and Facebook and and and all of those others are going to say, "You want to work for us, you get vaccinated." So, let's not work for any of them. Proven that when you make it difficult for people in their lives, they lose their ideological and they get vaccinated. Yeah. And you don't lose yours, you piece of But they're going to give us a Listen, we're going to get the next That guy is the Antichrist. Listen, we're going to get him. But that's not who I want. I want the above him that funded him that used him as a cover guy because there's more to this story than him. They're going to give us him, bro. We're going to get him. Public trial, rich trial. People live in this illusion now and it's like it's it's goes back to hypernormalization. People live in this world dystopia. We're living in it's a hypernormalization thing. It's like the Soviet Union right before it fell. People live in this world where they we think that the government and these politicians and these corporations control everything. They run everything. They control us. They have more power than us. But they really don't because did you see what happened with Theo Vaughn when he was interviewing uh Dana White a couple months ago? He was talking about he randomly brought up how he was going to have on Robert Kennedy Jr. on his podcast or he had Robert Kennedy Jr.'s podcast and then one of his sponsors, Pelaton, called him up and they were like, "Yo, we don't want to run we're not running the sponsorship on on his podcast. A B we want you to take his podcast down. Take that episode down." And Dana White's sitting there while they're recording. He's like, "What?" He's like, "These people that sell stationary bikes told you you couldn't post a podcast with Robert F. Kennedy Jr. who's an American who is like a lawyer who's done all this stuff. Like, they're telling you, first of all, they're going to subvert your free speech. Second of all, you have to silence this guy who's done lots of research and knows a lot about what he's talking about based on ideology. people who sell exercise bikes are going to tell you to do this. And Dana White, like in the middle of the block, he's like, "You know what?" He talks to his guy on camera. He's like, "What do we have in our UFC gym? What what are the stationary bikes?" The guy's like, "Pelon, take rip them all out tomorrow and throw them in the trash." A week later, the CEO of Pelaton literally steps down. They have to He's has to step down from the company. got to fight. You got to fight. Everyone online saying, "Fuck Pelaton." It was like the worst billions of dollars. Push back, Push back. People don't realize how much power that I mean obviously Theo Bond's got a huge voice, but and what's crazy to me is that people that are on the left, and again, I'm not right or left. I've made this clear many times in public record. Do I lean towards the right in in principles, you know, like you know what it's supposed to be? Yes. But do I think they're good and the politicians there are doing a good? No. I believe in this country everyone has the right to pursue their dream, their goals. Do in your bedroom what the you want. Doesn't mean I agree with it. Doesn't mean I endorse it. Do whatever you want. It's not my business what you or how you I don't care. Don't push your on me and my kids. And I promise you, we got no problems. No one has a problem, bro. Yeah. Cuz we have to be fair. If we're going to be everyone gets to be treated the same, cool. But that also means if you can't make kids yourself, then shut the up and stay out of the discourse. I will teach my children not to hate anyone. Don't tell me how to reach or teach my kids. If they decide to do something, that's on them later on in their life. I don't need this injected into their brains when they're five years old, 10 years old. I don't need it. I respect everyone's decision to choose what they want to do. You have that right as an American. Leave me the alone. Leave me and my kids alone. That's it. Leave us the alone. Do your thing, man. You want to two guys at the same time. You want to jump and chop, like, go ahead, bro. Knock yourself out. Leave us alone. do your thing. Go dance around. Pull your dinglings out. Whatever it is, I don't care. I don't have a problem with it. Just leave me and my kids alone. That's all. If they my kids decide that's something they do, I can't stop them. When they turn 18, 19, 20, they feel that they want to do whatever they want to do. Go do it. That's between you and God. I raised you a certain way. You choose your path once you reach a certain age. And I truly believe that regardless of who you are. There's plenty of people that are the best people in the world and their kids turn out to be garbage. There's people who their parents were complete trash and they turn out to be the most amazing human beings in the world. Yeah, it's mostly goes that way, right? It's so like, you know, you only have so much influence even on your own children. I don't need strangers influence on my children. Let me let me try to give them some of my ideals. Yeah. I don't need strangers trying to enforce and put into their heads regardless of what it is. It's not just that lifestyle. It could be anything. You know, I'm trying to be fair here and I am. I think I'm very fair for someone who comes from a religious, you know, belief and and all that. Um, but it's this animosity that I'm fighting against. There is no reason for us to be at each other's throats. And it only benefits the people like that that you just played clips of, okay, that we're so focused fighting each other that he should be in jail already. He should be executed, bro. He should be tried for crimes against humanity. Mhm. And me and you were worried about what you're doing in the bedroom. So your dick is more important than millions of people getting killed and vice versa. We're arguing over sexual parts. Am I this? Am I that? Like that. We're arguing this And crimes against humanity were just committed that affect all of us. All of our families got killed. All of our businesses got shut down. You know, all of us got affected by this. But because me and you were too busy firing each other left and right, they're getting away with this And they're probably taking us all with them. So we need to like wake up. That's really what my mission is, is to unite people, man. And it's not to divide. And the reason I'm pushing it back is not to do what the Christian did to me. I'm trying to turn the other cheek. Let me turn the other cheek. You've invaded countries on false pretenses. You paint this picture in Hollywood that every person that's from this faith is a animal or they're not a human being. You've been you've been, you know, your complete view of these people. And I'm not even Arab, man, you know, but I feel an obligation when I see something that's just wrong. Like this is wrong. I don't group anyone. I don't hate anyone. I don't care what anyone. Leave me alone. Live and let live. It's not that hard. It's really not that hard, man. Remember, my family was massacred. I never blame. Not once. I swear to God. Not once. And this leads me to my next thing with this Tachesky guy. Never once, Danny. I've been on your show how many times? Julian show. This show. That show. This is your I think it's your third time. Third time. And I feel blessed, man. I feel great. I love being on your show. you're such a great, you know, back and forth person. Like, you like really, man, you put me to shame with my But I'm getting there. Like, come on. Come on, man. Like, like just watching that clip of him talking and the lies and the this and the that. And I lost family. And I don't know if you lost anybody to to the 2019 stuff, you know. Did you lose any friends or family? I lost, man. I know some people I have like friends of friends I know who Okay. I lost a cousin, you know. I lost a cousin. May he rest in peace. My cousin my other cousin lost her husband. May he rest in peace. Okay. So it's like our dead deserve justice. What is I mean even the statistics if you look at it like look at the actual statistics if you really believe this right we had I think 16% of the COVID deaths across the world and we are like what percentage can you find the stats? what percentage of the world population the US is. And if you adjust it per capita basically by the amount of people we have in the country and how many deaths there were, we had like 10 times more deaths in our country compared to the next uh country in line as far as deaths. We have the Do you think that's also caused by as long as we stayed down as long as we did how much we were closed and not just that depressed and drinking? We have the highest coorbidities of any country. We have the highest percentage of obese people, obese young people, people with diabetes. I was this close to dying, by the way. Any other country. If I didn't lose weight, I've lost about 70 since the last time I was on this. Yeah, bro. You look great. Okay, I'm telling you now. If you're heavy out there, if you're heavy, listen to me. Listen to me closely. You have to get that weight off of you. You are going to die. I was on the verge of death. If you are snoring in your sleep, if you have sleep apnea, until you get rid of that sleep apnea, you're never going to have energy. That's why you don't feel like working out. Please listen to me. Listen to me if you're fat out there. Yeah. From Danny Jones podcast. Please cut out carbs. Lose the weight you need to unrestrict your neck and your air flow. Once you stop snoring, you're going to wake up and have energy. It's going to be easier to move. If you got to use a crutch or something or whatever the it is, I'm not a doctor. Get medical advice. Use something because you will die, okay? If you're 50, 60, 70, 80 pounds of overweight. Bro, I feel alive again, man. It is worth it. It is worth living your life again. Being heavyweight and staying like that and making excuses for years, it's not worth it. I will never be like that again. Bro, I'm back to life, man. I feel like I was born again. Losing 60 lbs is like the best thing that ever happened to me. Like, please save your life, man. Save your life. Life is worth living. The reason you feel sad and you're depressed, you're tired all the time, you're not getting enough oxygen to your brain. This is a fact cuz I'm talking from my own experience, man. The minute the weight came off the neck, I'm not snoring. No more snoring. I had to start giving blood cuz my And all cuz you lost weight. I got rid of it. Just because of losing weight, man. How did you lose all the weight? What did you do? I cut out carbs, man. Cut out carbs. I've done it twice, man. I just watched you eat a whole like five cookie, bro. [laughter] It's my birthday. Happy birthday. But it comes back quick. It comes back quick if you don't pay. Very quick. So please, man, save your lives, man. So, so tell me what your diet is like. Just no carbs, no sugar, mostly meat. What kind of are you eating? None, man. That is the worst you've seen me in a while. I mean, in general, like what kind of food are you eating every day? Usually steak. I'm going to steak. Yeah, steak. Steak, cold cuts, burger without the bun. Mhm. Uh, eggs, omelets, you know, stuff like that. No carbs, veggies, cheese. That's great. My numbers are good. My cholesterol is good. Everything's great. It's crazy how much that can help everything. And people think it's the opposite. You eat too much meat, it can destroy. I mean, talk to your doctor, folks. But my cholesterol everything got better. Any fruit? No fruit. Yeah. Fruit is like when I'm really really like I can't take it and I want something nice. It tastes like dessert, bro. Once you start eating right, you're like, "Yes, oh my god, this apple." Like it's amazing. You're like, "Wow, an apple." The banana. Yo, shout out to them. They got to pay us. Who? There's this company. They make these bowls with coconut and then they put like fruits on it. It tastes like ice cream, bro. like an acai bowl but better. They make theirs like they have that too but they make like coconut. They got to pay you, bro. them. I give them too much money. I spend like $100 a week in their place. Really? In New York. It's called Uh-huh. Bowls. I'm not giving them a shout out. They don't deserve it. Why not? If you want a shout out, pay Danny Jones podcast. 10 years, man, to get here. How long you been podcasting, bro? How long have I been? Uh, not 10 years. since like 2020. Damn You just put my whole life to bro. I started before all you bro. Before you. It's funny laughing. I know. It's funny. I started before you, before Julian. Man, I got to get my game up, man. My problem is I'm too busy being the guest now. Yeah, you're great, though. You're when I should go back to But that's It's weird, man. Everyone's like, I want to hear you and not your guest anymore. So, I was like, okay, I'm at the crossroads in my career. Do I go full-blown motivational speaker? But some people some people are just better solo, you know, like there's like Tim Dylan. He's great. I don't want to watch I don't want to watch That's great. I don't want to watch Tim Dylan sit there and interview somebody. He's not the same. If I watch him sit there and rant on it's great. Same with Julian. I enjoy listening to Julian sit there and just you out. So, let's Yo, shout out podcast. That's right. I love watching him sit there by himself and just riff on for an hour. It is so goddamn entertaining. The dude is is a welcome down the block, bro. We should be shooting this back and forth all I don't know why we're not doing a daily rant or at least I'm right I'm literally but I wanted to strangle him when I saw you and him in New York together and the pictures I'm like we went to Jeffrey Epstein's penthouse. I was going to call I was like find me these guys like I would have I [laughter] swear to God there's Albanians everywhere but I would have found you. I swear to God I would have found you guys in like every super every superintendent in New York City is Albanian. find these Every building in New York, I'd have been like this. I would have sent the double-headed eagle bat signal into there. I'd be like, "Find me, Julian, Dory, and Danny Jones now." And then I would have got you guys, you know, rounded up and you come to my city unannounced. We were hanging out right in front of Epstein's uh It was like that that scene in American Gangster. Don't ever come to the city unannounced again. That's what I would have been like. I would have got you two and like you ever come to the city again unannounced. I was hurt, man. You're too busy helping him build that wood table, I guess. Yeah, I was. It kind of looks like the same one. I had to show him how to use his hands. He doesn't know how to use his hands. I'm not that great anyway. But in any event, man, so there's a few more points I want to finish up and then I got to go. I hate leaving. Every time I come here, I hate leaving you and I hate that I have to leave the amazing state of Florida. Stephen pulled up percentage of the US population deaths versus the world. Okay, now where is this coming from, Steve? Scroll down. This is coming from CIA's website. [laughter] That's funny as Steven pulls up mortality rates of the world brought to brought to you by the CIA. Let find find COVID death rates. Um, my episodes are Every time I do an episode with you, we go off the deep end. And you don't want to use a website like this cuz this shit's all going to be skewed. You don't want to use CNN. That's going to be Listen, I know we were high. That I know. So if you want to So the problem with this, look, we're looking for something and we can't. We don't know what's real anymore. No, we don't know what's real. You can't even You look at websites and you know it's not going to be real. We're living in this crazy world where nothing is real. Did you pull up that clip with Tataski? I say his name differently. I got it. I got it. Tatars, I think it. So my other point was, man, and again, this whole episode's basically about how there's double standards. The hatred only seems to be pointed towards Muslims and the media. And that's what makes me angry, man. Why is a terrorist a Muslim terrorist? And they never use the word Christian terrorist when a Christian does the same thing. It means, first of all, I don't think you could be a Muslim or a Christian and do any of that stuff, right? It it's contradictory to the, you know, religion to take life and do things that are wrong and blah blah blah. My whole point is, you still with this stuff? Yeah. I don't know what the this is. Let it go, man. Stephen, we're over it. We'll do it live. So, so my thing is this guy goes on Patrick Bet David's podcast, okay? Dominic Tachowski, okay? He's like a minister in the Polish Parliament. He deals with the European Union and I got to say I agree with almost everything he said. Like I actually support it. Okay. Okay. Play play some of it. Let's hear this. You will be killed. Senate. Yes. In Poland is the same. We've got poly same which is congress let's say and senate and then president right so and every country in European union has similar system we have 27 countries in European union and from every country we have delegates to the European parliament it's over 700 members of European parliament depending on the country population the representatives uh the the the delegations are There. Right there. Right there. Right there. Right there. Go back. Right there. Clip. Here's a Yeah. Go ahead. Go ahead, Kelly, if you can play it. How many refugees has Poland taken? Zero. And you're proud of that? If you are asking me if you're if you are asking me about Muslim uh Muslims illegal immigration, none, not even one will come to Poland. Not even one if it's illegal. We we took over two million Ukrainians who are working who are peaceful in Poland. We will not receive even one Muslim because this is what we promised. But I asked not about illegal immigrants. I asked about refugees. And Jean Claude Junker, the commission president says they racist. So that's actually two separate issues in itself. But wow, he took refugees from Ukraine. Mhm. But he don't want to take him from the Muslims, from the Gaza Israel thing. I don't know. This is before then, though. Okay, but but here's my whole thing. Pull up Polish involvement Iraq war. Just pull it up. Now, let's show you why he's a hypocrite. That's my only issue with him. Do I agree he should seal his borders, not just allow anyone in, protect his citizens first, protect Polish people first? Absolutely. I wish our people were doing I wish America was doing this. as an American, all the crime being committed in New York right now, the most violent crime, I can't just say just them because who knows if the media is pushing it more, but it is a lot. It seems every day it's the migrants, bro. And they are a desperate population, right? Pushing people off subway tracks. We have criminals from foreign government, you know, foreign countries that we don't know who the they are, bro. They're kicking people off subway platforms. They're robbing. They're raping. A nine-year-old was just raped on the upper east side. Cops just got shot. Every last one of them was a migrant. Yeah. Okay. So, we're letting them come in. They're committing horrible acts against the citizens of New York City and America. You have $5 billion of our resources used by Eric Adams and the last administration projected to hit 10 billion this year. You want to overt tax the hell out of New York. You want to destroy business in New York. Everyone's leaving New York. Even companies have left just like they're leaving California. So, what the are we supposed to do with New York? I love New York. I don't want my city. My city's fallen, man. There's no Batman coming to save us. So when are we going to wake up left and right and say there's something wrong here, but they got you an ideology, you They think that you're going to make abortion illegal and that they're going to try to make your kids gay and they got you two going at it while they all of us. Yeah, that's what the is going on. That's the crazy thing about You're scared that you're not going to be able to kill babies in your stomach anymore. You're scared they're going to make your kid gay. You go at it. That's that's what's going on right now. M that's the ideology that they have the lines drawn and they play these strings. Meanwhile, these are on Capitol Hill at the best restaurants in DC flying on private jets preaching to you about climate control while they're sipping down bottles of the most expensive wine paid for by their lobbies while me and you don't even have enough money to feed our families. That two packs of Doritos, I couldn't believe what groceries costed last week when I went to go buy groceries. I was looking I said, "Yo, we are in Weimar, Germany, man. We are in the end of this nation if we don't wake the up, bro. Our dollar is on well on its way out. Well on its way out. We bought lunch yesterday for the for my kids. Me and my wife. We bought like a couple like I bought a chicken wrap and like a Cuban sandwich and like some tacos for my kid. It was $70. Bro, Taco Bell. Was that Taco Bell? No. It was like this little Taco Bell is like 40 bucks. Taco Bell. Taco Bell. Bro, I'm not talking about the movie Demolition Man with Sylvester Salone. Insane, bro. Okay, 40 bucks. It was two soft tacos. Going to fix it, bro. Listen, even if Trump wins, he ain't fixing bro. Cuz when you have that much corruption beneath you, no one man or woman can save America. No. No one man or woman can save our nation where it is right now. And how much corruption is beneath in each position, each agency? How, bro? Even look at look at his first term. They didn't even let the guy work. How's he going to fix it this time, bro? Unless he declares some type of martial law and gets everyone out of power. And until we get public servants to be public about their financials before they go into office, just like they like to have us tortured with agencies, they should have to reveal everything they have publicly. You want to be public, right, You want to be public public servant. We need to see who you are before you step in office. every year while you're in office and audit. Yeah. Every year [snorts] and lobbying illegal term limits. That's how you begin to fix America. Unless that happens, we're done. We're finished. Y So, getting back to this guy, he wants to talk about we will not take one Muslim refugee. We But you helped create them, you hypocrite. You helped create them with the rest of your pock army. Look, Polish person army. It just sounds funny, right? That's racist. Uh, isn't it? I love them. Hey, they call me a terrorist. I laugh. Strike that from the record. Poland. Don't believe in that. We're going to expose you. Hey, they make those jokes themselves, man. [laughter] Poland would send about 2,000 troops to the Persian Gulf to take part in the invasion. In the invasion, in the destabilization, the 2003 invasion. Okay. Yeah. And he was like, we are proud. We do not take one Muslim refuge. Then why did you help create them? Why did you help destabilize the Middle East? This single action right here is what led to the Arab Spring. Didn't Russia help, too? They all helped, bro. My point is this. I find it hypocritical. I'm not saying they should open their doors and let these people in. But you made them. You helped create how desperate they are cuz they didn't have this flood of migration until Syria fell, Iraq fell, all these countries fell. Then you had this flood of immigration. same way like why like the same way we have to instigate other countries and even not just Muslim nations but superpowers and China trying to interfere with with all of their goals. But do you ever hear the migrants in America being classified as Christians cuz they're mostly Latino? The majority there are Christian migrants. No, but most Latinos are Christians and Catholics. But they don't use that to reference them as a migrants, right? But the Europeans, they say no, the Muslims. It's like why can't you just be called migrants? Well, you could be you could be a migrant and be from Sudan. So, if the majority are from Sudan, let's just say, or from Syria, shouldn't it be called Syrian migrant? Mig why does it have to be classified by religion? But they don't do it for the other religions. Yeah. These are the double standard. Most people don't know what Syria is. But these are the double standards. Yeah. That I've pointed out over and over again. No, because they use these methodologies. It's perception. It's public perception. When a quote unquote terrorist takes out people with a bomb, they make sure they put Muslim terrorists. When the in New Zealand, was New Zealand or Australia, went into Christ Church, right? Took out a hundred people while they pray. Crosses all over his rifles. Manifesto talking about Christianity, playing Serbian nationalist music. Okay. He wasn't Serbian though because he thought they were amazing because they were wiping out Muslims. That's why he like looked up to the Serbians, right? the war that they did in Bosnia. This guy takes out a 100 Muslims that literally they welcomed him in. Welcome, brother. The first words the Muslim guy said to him, "Welcome, brother." The guy opened fire on him. Okay. Killed a 100 people while they're praying. Clearly a Christian extremist. Never called him a Christian terrorist. Why is that title only reserved for sick people, mentally ill people? Clearly, if I had to bet my life pharmaceutical grade psychotropic drugs and every one last of these mass shooters, I'll bet my life. Until the American people demand autopsies and blood work done on these mass shooters, we will never have the truth. But the clues are on your TV. The clues are on your TV. If you're taking such and such and experiencing suicidal thoughts, please contact your daughter immediately and stop, you know, taking the pill. Yeah. If that's what's saying on your television, imagine the they're being prescribed. Why aren't the American people demanding blood work on every mass shooter that should be made public? They did a mass shooting on the public. We want the mass results of his blood test. I bet you there's a common denominator. But as long as lobbies have trillions of dollars to conceal their footsteps and what goes wrong, it's like that movie Fight Club where he's like, "Well, if it's X amount, we only lose much. Then we'll let people die." But remember, he's like calculating the insurance. Yeah. In the movie Fight Club. Of course, Ed Norton's character. He's like, "Yeah." So then they'll do a recall if it's less than this. Many people die. Like we're nothing to these people. They got you focused on your dicks. Chopping them on, putting them on, changing them. Make your kid gay. He's not gay. They're going to make your kids gay. You can't be gay. Kill your baby. Don't kill your baby. Right. It's all It's all ideology. Yeah. And they're destroying us. Both of us. You idiots. Yep. We're easily like like I said, we don't what's there's there's no boundaries between what's real and what's not real anymore. his ideology is it's insane. I had a guy in here recently. He was said he was the best way to describe how far America's gone down this rabbit hole is he was talking to a leader in the Congo. This is a former CIA guy. And he's like, "Why are you guys so cozy cozy with the Russians? He's like, "We don't get it. We're trying to do deals with you. We're trying to do business with you, but you guys keep cozing up to the Russians. What's this all about?" And he goes, "My brother, you guys, America promises us ideals. The Russians promise us food. Simple. They're practical. It's ideology versus practicality. The rest of the world is practical. We're all America is only ideological. And we don't even live up to our own ideals. Let's be real. We don't even live up to them. I have [clears throat] my cousin that served in Fallujah, you know, down in Texas, and he's definitely still battling PTSD, right? And and I was sad to see that he's still after all this. And he was in those battles in Fallujah, you understand? It was really bad. And when I got down to it with him cuz he was having a few and he was a little loose and opened up and I was like, "Let me see if there's some way I can help heal this guy a little bit." You know, they do call me Beck lover for a reason. So, and I'm talking about healing him like that, so take it easy. So, we start, you know, asking him some stuff and I'm like, "Man, why are you still carrying these bricks on your conscious, man? Like, what what's eating at your soul?" And he tells me this story about how he was like uh I believe a staff sergeant and he had a crew and his job was to train these Iraqi police that actually cared about their country, wanted to help build the new democracy post Saddam. And he gave them their word that he would never leave them down or, you know, leave them on their own if they get into an attack, right? Because they were a target by all the insurgents from all the neighboring countries in Iraq. It was a war zone of many different countries and agitators 100% and foreign intelligence and all that He goes one night when they became, [snorts] you know, you're working with these people every day and you think you're doing the right thing cuz he signed up young to protect America. You're proud of your nation. You feel like you're actually, you know, taking down a piece of which I thought Saddam was a piece of and helping people get their freedom and, you know, that's why he, you know, signed up. He goes, "Man, I'm on the base one night." And just the walkie-talkie start going up. Brian, they're they're coming for us. The Iraqi police like, "We're in trouble. We're being attacked. We're being attacked." He's like, "Hey, we're coming. We're coming." All of a sudden, his commander, step down, soldier. He's like, "But these are our guys. We trained them. We always told them we're not going to leave them. Like, they're under attack. Stand the down." He's hearing these guys begging him, bro. Calling his name, begging him, "Please, you promised us we're under in trouble." He's like, "Bro, I had to sit there. I couldn't take it anymore because I jumped in the jeep. Me and three of my guys, we didn't care if we were going to get court marshals or anything. We went right for the door. These soldiers pull guns on them. I guess they get foreign soldiers to kind of guard the bases over there. So they don't have an American soldier guarding. They have like This is what he was explaining to he was and they were like basically if you don't turn this jeep around, we're going to open fire on you. Right? Imagine now he's wanting to do what he came there for to help the Iraqis to defend them. Right? He promised he wouldn't leave them down. He had to make a decision whether he goes for it or not. He decided not to get killed. But he feels so guilty. I said, "You didn't do anything wrong. You You should You got to judge yourself sometimes on your intentions and not your actions. Why did you join the military? Did you join it to kill innocent people or protect innocent people?" He's like, "Protect innocent people. Did you do it to help America and defend America or to oppress?" He's like, "I did it to defend America." I said, "Okay, those police, weren't you willing to literally risk your life? You jumped into a car. you were willing to drive off that base and try to go help them, right? Mhm. He's like, "Yeah." He's like, "But I hear their screams." Like, he's still haunted by the sounds of them screaming, right? I said, "My friend, you were willing to give your life for them. You were the one that was betrayed. You didn't betray them. The people above you betrayed you. They betrayed you and so many of our soldiers that they sent all over the world to fight corporate feudalistic wars that benefit the American people. Zero. And I have family that in my opinion was used for these types of battles that what the did we accomplish in Afghanistan, bro? What did we get? Cheaper heroin for a while. I mean, what did we get? Have you heard the stories of um Afghan uh Afghanistan were sending like a couple like a couple hundred million or like $70 million a week to the Taliban to like lower the to not grow to not grow it, right? To not grow heroin or something. Is that why? Or I know originally we did that for a while. No, a lot of people are like really getting upset. There was a bill that was just passed or not passed about now something right now. There was a bill that was proposed I think so one of the congressmen proposed a bill. I think it was Tim Bashett to stop the funding of the Taliban. For some reason we are giving the Taliban $70 million a week a week in taxpayer dollars. For some reason we're funding them. And one of the ideas, a lot of people are getting really upset about this, but one of the reasons that I had another guy on here, he elucidated why he believes they're doing that is because the Taliban are trying to destabilize China's trade routes for like their oil and their food that are coming from that part of the world. So the Taliban are going in there and like sabotaging these Chinese trade routes. And that's the idea is why we're giving that. So look at this control. They still haven't figured out what camouflage looks like. I don't get it. Like, how do these guys beat America, bro? They don't even know what camouflage is. Yeah. $80 million in cash infusions every two weeks. I mean, when do people wake up, man? But they say that we're doing that to destabilize China. Yeah. I remember when George Bush Jr. said, "We're going to take out the Taliban." Well, no. You You clearly didn't go there to take Now, watch this drive. You clearly didn't take the Taliban out. We left them stronger than we found him. We're funding them. We're literally funding them. And then people think that Muslims are the bad guys. The Muslims are coming for you. The Muslim Yeah. with American money. They're coming for you with American money. Brother, I can go on and on between the hypocrisy. This is my message to the audience. This is just another example of the hypocrisy. You, if you still have animosity towards Muslims, dig a little deeper in your life. See the See past the propaganda. see that at the end of the day, especially if you're conservative, we're on the same team, man. We really are. Well, there definitely is a sect of these Muslims that do believe Yes. that this bombing America extremist. There's extremist in Christianity, too, though. Yeah. And would it be safe to say that there's definitely some in Judaism, too? Every religion has extremist. Fair to say. Every religion has extremist. Every group has It doesn't mean that that represents the whole. Mhm. I promise you, brother. Every faith has a group. You see, [clears throat] like what's going on with Candace Owens and all that stuff that's been going on. You've seen it, right? We don't need to get into too much, but you see, I don't agree with what they're basically trying just got arrested again. They spent the night in jail, him and his brother. Yeah. But they got released on house arrest or whatever. My whole point is, you know, you might have a a real grievance, Candice, you know, about certain things, but to put the entire group of people, that's where I draw the line always. Is that what she's doing? Well, no, but it sounds like it to some people. I would say that there's certain people that do. And I've been on some of these spaces, bro, on X. Like, they really they basically every last one of them's evil. I'm like, no, they're not, bro. Some of my best friends, like I've grown up with them. Like, they're great. Like amazing, right? No, it's very different. There's a very different there's a very big very very very big difference between people who practice Judaism and Jewish people and Netanyahu's war cabinet. Exactly. That guy Ben Gavir who Julian Dory taught me about Ben Gver is literally one of the guys who's been in Netanyahu's cabinet forever. And the guy is uh by definition a terrorist. He he had a uh portrait of a guy on the wall in his house who literally went in and like bombed a mosque by definition. Like the guy, if we're being real, they were the first ones, man. Go learn about the King David Hotel. What happened there? They blew up their own and made it look like it was, you know, I mean, bro, I'm trying to save your channel, not take it down. That's okay. We'll be fine. People need to dig deep. You always you worry too much about this. Just let it rip because look at the look at the treatment. Get this thing off your forehead. There's a piece of my thing. There's a black There you go. You got it. It's bothering me. You see, but I'm traumatized because when I try to be open and have real conversations, I' I've paid the penalty for it, man. I got taken off Clubhouse, you know. I definitely noticed a significant decrease on my channel, but I should have been at a million followers a long time ago on YouTube. I've broken the internet a million times. And it's not to brag. I'm not saying it from a place of arrogance. I'm saying I've put 5 years of my life into this work. I don't have no sponsorship, no no help. It's just me and I don't do it for the money cuz I would have stopped a long time ago. I know how dangerous hatred is. I know where it can lead. I I've lost family in every conflict you can think of. Yeah. World War II, my grandmother's two brothers were hung by the Nazis. COVID war, I lost my family. 9/11, I almost went down. So my point is like I understand where all this animosity comes from and I'm trying to fight back against it man. I do believe in the good of humanity. Yeah. My faith teaches me anyone only God can judge you. No one can judge you. Only God. I don't hate anybody. It doesn't mean I agree with your thought or your life. But I believe that you have the right to. I'm taught to believe that in my own faith. You have the right to believe whatever you want. Only God can judge you. Doesn't mean I agree. Doesn't mean I think it's right. It means that that's between you and God. You know, there's people that don't believe there's one at all. And I don't blame them. The way things have been, you got all these people that should really be have more in common killing each other every two seconds and debating and and and going on Patrick Bed David podcast talking about religion and and and just looking so an you know, so much full of animosity that's just pushing people towards not believing in God at all. It's actually hurting faith. And that's really my stance on all this. Feel like I've kind of ranted my brains out here. I mean, you want to keep going or Yeah, we got plenty of time, man. Did you see the uh Did you see there's the interview? I think it's an old interview that just came out of Waltz, the new VP for Com. And I felt bad about the kid, man. Everyone was making the memes, man. And I didn't know that he had I didn't know he had I posted I made a meme myself. I'm not going to lie. I made a meme of him, right? Not even watching the debates or nothing. I didn't know that he had certain conditions. Mhm. As soon as I knew he had some type of, you know, physical or mental condition, I immediately took down the meme cuz I I just think it's wrong. Regardless of how you feel politically, I can never be a part of a joke making fun of someone that has some type of challenge or disability. Like I'm just not down with that. And that's the case, right? He has some type of like learning. I don't know. He has something. Yeah. Yeah. But everyone meme'd the hell out of that kid. He was me'd. It's ridiculous, dude. I use it for Shia Republican versus Democrat is like Shia versus Sunni in this country now. It's insane. Well, I would say it's further. It's more like Well, I guess you could say that. But the ideology between Sunni and Shiite is not really that far off. It's just like who should be the the ruler, you know, and then there's more deviations of that, but there should have never been the wars between the Sunni and the Shiite based on Islam, you know. And uh I just believe that's the devil at work. Same thing happened in Christianity. Same thing happened in Judaism. Even the prophet Muhammad in prophecies of the end of time, he said, "What happened to the Christians and the Jews will happen to you also, you Muslims." And they were like, "Well, what do you mean? Soon you will divide like the branches of a tree. There will be 72 versions of Christians and only 70 and only one of the versions is on the true path." This is what the Prophet Muhammad said. There'll be 72 versions of Judaism. Only one goes on the true path. He said there will be 73 versions. Well, we don't know what anybody said of Islam. We don't really know what the anybody said. We weren't there, but we weren't there. Neither were neither were the people who wrote the Bible. But he said we would be more divided than those religions themselves. So imagine now we talk about how this man is supposed to be full of whatever. He said that the Islamic faith would divide. It would splinter and fraction off and that there would be more versions than even the Christians and the Jews have. This isn't his tradition. Yeah. And that's happened. He predicted ISIS. By the way, I can give you his prophecy. He said, "Soon there will be those that come out from us," meaning out from the Muslims. They will grow their hair long like women's hair. Go look at the pictures of ISIS, bro. They will have long hair. He said, "Soon they will raise black banners and wherever they go, they will cause fitna, meaning they will cause destruction. And when you wipe out one group, another group will pop up in place." These are his words. He says, "And you will know who they are, for they will name themselves after cities and towns." Who was the leader of ISIS? Albec. Albagghdadi, right? Oh, Alba Bagghdadi. Yeah. Yeah. Name. This is his prophecies. He said towards the end of time, there'll be groups that claim to be from us. If you see them praying, you will say, "These people are righteous, but they're not." He says, "They're the wood of the fire." This was his prophecy. They will be the wood of the fire. And if you hear of them, don't join their ranks. Imagine now this is the prophet Muhammad's words peace be upon him. He predicted ISIS and terrorism. He said there would be groups that claim to be from us. This is in our prophecy. There's no like you guys are all debating and stuff. The Muslims are like yo this is the first time the Muslim scholars are like it looks like we're probably like we're getting close to the end of time. Like the Christians have been saying Jesus is coming. We believe he's coming too. But this is the first time like our scholars are like it's not looking too good. Like it might actually be the time soon. Like do you think do you think Jesus really was a divine being? Do you think he really was powers who was God? He was he was sent by the divine. So he was created the same way Adam was or John the Baptist. God blew his soul into Mary's womb. But he didn't physically, you know, do something with Mary. John the Baptist's parents never had physical relations to make him. They were too old. His father was way past the age and his mother was barren. She had no eggs. Jesus cousin. Yeah, he had two parents, but they didn't have physical intercourse to create him. I don't know if a lot of people understand that. So, yes, Jesus birth was miraculous in the fact he had no father and there was no one physically there to get her pregnant. And I of course I do believe that as a Muslim and it sounds crazy. You live in a fairy tale. You've lost your father. Like that's one thing like Muslims and Christians should laugh about. Like everyone thinks we're crazy that we believe in this woman Mary who got pregnant with no man, right? Muslims and Christians. So like you believe you believe that the sun and the moon stood still because of someone a man on earth commanded them to? Or you believe some guy actually stood here on earth and talked face to face with God? You believe these crazy fairy tales? You believe I mean [snorts] something that goes so against nature like if I told you common sense, not even nature, just common sense. If I told you I had a conversation with God face to face, came down, sat in my studio yesterday, Beck, I literally talked to God yesterday. He was standing right there. Would you believe me? I I probably wouldn't. [laughter] So, why do you believe So, so if somebody you know, right? You You know me. And I'm being fair. You know, I'm not a liar for the most part, as for as well as you know me. And if I told you this, you probably wouldn't believe me. So, why would you I might still give you more of a chance though for someone that I don't know at all, right? Like, cuz I at least know you now kind of. It would be a little easier maybe to believe you if I didn't know you at all. It would be almost impossible to believe. So what if I said Beck, some guy I know who's anonymous, who I've never met, it's even harder, right? Told me that they talked to God. That's crazy. And their sources are also anonymous. And they claim that their sources were 500 years before they even wrote it down in the first place, which is crazy. I I I It's all crazy. Noah, the first time Noah was ever written about was a thousand years after he died, his alleged life. And I do believe in Noah of the Ark. I truly do. You know, a lot of Bible scholars believe that he ever believe in Moses. I believe they were all over. My son's name is Aaron. I named him [clears throat] after Moses's brother. For me, this is way more complicated to explain. And how is that reasonable to believe? It's not It's not until you look deep. I think it's the I think it's the same way people like to quote unquote ET the gaps with things like the pyramids. A lot of people like to believe the pyramids. It's unreasonable to expect human beings were able to four 4,000 years ago build these crazy structures that we wouldn't be able to do today. Shout out to Matt Bell. Oh yeah, look at these things. Create these things which are made out of granite which are accurate to within the width of a human hair. The deviation in the circumference of these things Right. And they're they're thin as paper and they're made out of the hardest stones on earth and they were thick as hell. So how it's it's we can't in our minds come to a reasonable explanation with with reason and logic to how these were created. So what we do is we et the gaps. We say it was alien. It's something that's completely unexplainable. So that's what we do with God. It is only by the gift of reason that human beings have reason that we can come up that we are able to believe in God. Do you believe in a higher power? Who do you believe there's a god? I don't know. You really don't know. I don't know. So, you don't take a stance? I'm not saying denomination. Do you believe there's thunder up there? Right. Be careful for this office cuz the last time there was thunder up there was when a guy was in here saying hail Satan to us. That guy. Yeah. So, but there's thunder every 5 minutes. I've been down here all week, man. [laughter] So, it's only by the gift of reason. So, you don't know for yourself. You don't know personally if you you don't know if you really ascribe to a higher power creating this. You think it was by randomness? I don't know. I definitely don't believe the stories in the Bible. I definitely don't believe that all those are real. There's so there's way too many contradictions. Sound crazy. Listen to me. There's way too many contradictions. And it's and it's and it's like I said, how why am I to reasonably believe an anonymous source of something that was written a thousand years after it supposedly happened? Do you know why I accepted Islam? It was because so many scientific miracles that couldn't be explained were in that book. I challenge anyone that's listening to this, Google scientific miracles of the Holy Quran. So for me, the reason I accept those stories of Jesus walking on water and bringing people back from the dead and Moses part of the Red Sea is not using my own logic. It's using X + Y equals Z. I believe there is a God. There's enough scientific evidence to me at least to prove that there's a creator. Leaving denomination out of it all. I just don't find it anything to be random. Meaning if the sun wasn't where it is, the seven layers of the atmosphere, trees give us oxygen, we give them what they need. And I can go on and on and on. Like thousands of points that need to be perfect for us to even exist and to be having this conversation right now, right? Like millions of points that need to be in order for you to even exist. Which makes me think of this verse from the Holy Quran of which of the favors of your Lord do you deny? And it goes through this whole list that God's basically I that that's that's what I'm trying to get at first because it is so incredible that we are here and that we exist and that we were the create that we were the created. When was the first human? How was the first human created? How was the first plant photosynthesis? How does all this work? I believe the earth was created long before humans. I've spoke about this in our episode when we did aliens and demons. A lot of this subject matter is there and I don't want people to get bogged down on this episode. But we spoke about this on the last pod. So go back and check it out folks. But that was last December. For me, for example, let's just pull up one of these. Go ahead, scroll down, buddy. Let me just give you an example of what drew me to Islam. Do the big bang theory. Number two, big bang. Here we go. So in surah alyah, okay, also states, have this is what God says in the Quran. Chapter 21, what did he do there? Okay, chapter 21 of the Holy Quran, verse 30. What did he do here? So have those who disbelieved not considered that the heavens and the earth were a joint entity and we separated them. In 1929, American astronomer Edwin Hubble proposed the Hubble's law according to which all entities in space are moving away from Earth at speeds proportional to their distance. The greater the distance from Earth, the faster they are moving. Soon after this, he discovered that galaxies are moving away from each other, meaning the universe is still expanding, right? Continue down the big crunch theory. Like all these like things that are now being proven were in this book. This is the most fascinating one, by the way. This one blew my mind away. embryology in the surah um which means the chapter of the believer in Islam it says in chapter 23 of the Quran verse 12 we created man from an extract of clay we made him as a drop in a place of settlement firmly fixed then we [snorts] made the drop into a leech suspended thing he describes exactly there's echoes of the Sumerian the four the four stages of the human embryo the first microscope didn't come out to a thousand years later how could he have known a man that couldn't read or write. And it goes on and on. So I see all these scientific miracles. Okay? There was no way to have known. So I'm like, okay, I see this book sung by people without even looking at it. Man, every Ramadan, bro, every Ramadan I see people get up in front of the mosque and lead the prayer for the whole month. They're called Hafi. They literally recite this book with without see and word for word. And if they make a mistake, there's a 100 500 people that know at least one of those ver like they all everyone knows the verses. Mhm. So I've witnessed many times in the last 42 years of my life where people pray and say the whole book. That's how God protected this book. That's why to me it blew my mind away as a Muslim and that this religion said that God sent messengers and prophets throughout time all over the world throughout time. He didn't just pick one people. And my theory was the demonic realm shifted people away from God, you know, through statues and idols throughout history. That's why a lot of the Anunnaki claims are they make sense in some ways, but to me that's just a deception of the devil using the same trick throughout time to get people away from the creator. If he types in I just want people to hear this recitation just to understand and I think it's a good place to maybe we can pick it up next time. Type in on YouTube Omar El Hishami the pen. Okay, and just listen to the like how amazing this is. Most people have never even heard a recitation of this book. You understand? The Quran is not original in English. It is only original in the Arabic language. No, that's not it, brother. You're doing it wrong. Go back. Go. Just type in om not u m a r space hash shabi h i right there. Right on the h i. There you go. Now click down um and put go down one more. Click that and then put the pen. The pen. Yeah. Space and then the pen. The pen. I want the audience to understand the difference. Now click this and let's just listen to a little bit. This is the verse of the pen. The chapter of the Quran. on the pen. Look at how it's recited. Danny, this is the miracle of this book. No book is recited like this. I don't speak Arabic. I'm not Arab, but tell me what you feel even if you don't know the words. Which of you is afflicted with madness? So, in this chapter of the Quran, couple things I just want to point out here. A, that's the Quran, brother. It's only original and it's Arabic. Do you see how it's sung? We believed that every other book God sent to earth was corrupted. And we can prove it. I can historically prove it whenever you want. They were corrupted. They were altered. There are contradictions in there that don't make sense to the original ten commandments. How can you tell me Jesus is God and then in one verse he tells you, "I'm not even good. Why are you calling me good? Only God's good." So which one is it? Ten Commandments said, "Don't make pictures. Don't make images. Don't worship anything but God." But you guys are making pictures, statues, crosses, idols, like forget Muhammad. Explain. And I love how Christians go, "Well, what do the Muslims know?" Because Muhammad came 600 years after Jesus. Well, how about Jesus came how many thousands of years after Moses? Who was he then to give a new rule or a new book? Your logic for that already, you cancel yourself out. They have no argument, right, against that for you to argue, well, why did Muhammad come after Jesus? And then who was Jesus after Moses? And that's why I love Islam. Islam says that all of these prophets work for the same boss. You're not allowed to make images. You're not allowed to pray to anything but God. You don't pray to St. Peter or Saint anyone. You pray to God. He doesn't share his power with anyone. And I say he's not even because he's a man. We can't even comprehend this being. I find scientific miracles in a book written by some guy in a cave that couldn't read and write. And even if he could, how the hell? There's like a 100 to 200 scientific facts in that book that no one could have known. Like for example, that the Dead Sea is the lowest point above sea level in the entire world. There was no way Muhammad could have known this. It's impossible. That's the same area that Sodom and Gomorrah, we believe, was smashed into the earth. That's why it's called the Dead Sea. And it turned out in the last century, we found out it is the lowest surface point on Earth. How could the prophet Muhammad have known that back then? There was no way to have measured that or known anywhere in the world. No one could have known that. So when I see scientific facts, [clears throat] I know algebra came from Islam. The science and the technology. Where would we be without algebra right now? But we would be as advanced as we are. I mean, is it possible that humanity, different parts of humanity and and civilizations were more advanced mathematically or tech? I agree. Then then we are today some fusion and we lost knowledge. Absolutely. It's either that or there was civilizations or different species that were on this planet that were locked into another dimension. One of my theories of the pyramids, I just came up with this recently cuz I was been looking for ways to describe it for a long time and I kind of covered this on our episode, but there was one theory that I never said on your episode when we discussed is it aliens or demons? And that was a really big episode that I had with you. Mh. I think it was one of three things. Either A, they had knowledge that we no longer have. B, it was the demonic realm. The same way Solomon had the power to command the demonic realm. We know that Pharaoh was doing black magic. We can see that in the movie Ten Commandments when he throws his rod and Moses throws their rods and he has sorcerers and magicians. And I do believe black magic is real, 100%. I believe you can summon and work with that dimension. I believe we're in an interdimensional war in the aspect of the demonic realm versus humanity. They want to destroy us since before we were even created, the devil species, but not all of them. Cuz the Muslims don't believe that all of them are evil. So what I think is going on is that maybe the ancient Egyptians worked with the gin. They worshiped them. They did sacrifices. Whatever they did, and they got knowledge from that demonic realm, the same way I proved to you on your show that Jack Parsons was doing all this crazy with Alistister Cwley. He's the reason we went to space, brother. How did Jack Parsons get to space? He tells you himself, we were doing all these rituals and I was contacted by a being named Belellio Dejal. So, just like we may have hypothetically advanced our technology today through demonic means, it's in Jack Parson's autobiography. So, for those of you that believe in that story, because I've seen your comments on my episode with Danny, if it worked now, imagine it. Why wouldn't it work in the time of the Egyptians to get knowledge that we don't possess? Cuz that's what black magic is. You sell your soul to get knowledge or a power that you're not supposed to have. But you lose the hereafter. When you perform these rituals, you no longer have any shot of going to paradise. And I do believe there's groups of people that have sold their souls. Where do you think this paradise is? Where do you think heaven is? It's in a different dimension. I think I think God is outside of the physical universe just like I'm outside of this pot. And God can see it. And that's why time doesn't apply because they say time is circular once you're outside of it. So we're kind of like DVD players for God probably. Who knows how many more species and creations he's made. We're like DVD collections that he could watch at any time. The allseen, the all knowing. So for me it's I I agree with everything you said. Like I I've made these jokes with people. I'm like I know you think I'm It sounds for someone I'm very analytical man. Like extremely even. And I go, man, I sound like a idiot. I believe some guy who walked on water. I really do believe Jesus Christ walked on water. I believe he brought people back from the dead, but it wasn't his power. It was God that gave him that power. I know that there's a God, Danny. I've studied for 30 years in my life. I don't care if people believe in what I believe in. I am telling you, please look. Most people follow their religion like a tradition and not a true faith, not something that they truly believe. My dad was Catholic, so I'm Catholic. My dad was Muslim, so I'm Muslim. But like, they don't know anything about their own fates, let alone to judge other faiths. And that's the whole point of this entire episode. Seek knowledge. Stop getting your your your information from biased places. Like, if you want to know about Islam, ask a Muslim. Let them explain it to you. Stop asking some guy in your church whose only mission is to keep you in his church. Get your donation. Like, be fair to your discourse. Be fair to your search for knowledge. Be fair to the people you're learning about. Learn from them. Ask them. They're not going to bite you. I promise you some of the greatest people we look up to as Americans were Muslims. Malcolm X, who was full of hatred. He became a Muslim. That's why he died. When he actually became a true Muslim, he went from preaching hatred, the white man's the devil, to no, we're all brothers and sisters. Now, imagine the switch on this guy. He sees the real Islam when he goes to Mecca. He comes back and gives his lecture as soon as he gets off the airplane. He's like, I don't think all white people are the devil. I think we can actually live together if we all learn Islam. Mhm. Bang bang. Get your hand out your pocket. Game over for him. The minute he started preaching the word, the true word of Islam, which is that all people are brothers and sisters, regardless of their color, their creed, or where they come from. To have racism is to be against God, for God made all creation and all color. So for me to say one is good or the other, and that was another problem I have with Christianity. So what was he? Was he white? Was he Arab? They have these debates amongst themselves. They can't even agree on his skin color. Which is why God, in my opinion, would never take the shape of a man. He would never lower himself to his creation. A God prays. He God gets prayed too. A God doesn't pray. Why did Jesus pray like the Muslims? Matthew 26:36. And we end it right here. We end it right here, right now. Danny Jones, before I miss my flight, you got time, bro. Do you think Do you think there's other worlds out there with life? I think that there's there may be. I would never go to say yes or no cuz only God has all knowledge. I know there's definitely life on this earth in a parallel dimension. 100%. Yeah. But do you think there's other worlds in the universe or in the galaxy that there may be I don't know. I know for one thing for certain there is other things alive Danny in dimensions even on this planet. The demonic realm lives on a parallel dimension to this earth. I believe there's even a crossing coming soon. I think science has figured out a way. Kind of like your picture in a way, man. Like a portal. I feel like they figured out a way to allow that. There's a way to get that dimension into this dimension, which is why they're releasing all the alien now. I think they're future humans coming back. I've heard that that theory. I I I recently had a guy on here to tell me to explain that thing to me, and I I think I believe that. Anthropologist came here and explained it to me, and I think it makes the most sense out of everything. I want to go and dig into that episode. You have so like you have encyclopedias, man, of theory. like your your work is phenomenal, man. It's like anyone that just wants to really go deep into any subject of life, religion, politics, like the work you've done, Julian, all of you. It's just phenomenal stuff, man. I've done a little bit, nothing like you guys, not even close. Because we are so rare human beings, the way we look and the way we walk upright, we're so rare on this planet alone, it's astonishing. There's over 2 million cataloged species of animals on this Earth. Yeah. 20 of them are hominids and then we are a subcategory of those 20. What happens if you take out we're the only one of the tw 20 that walk upright and that have figured out how to create technology to get off the planet. What happens if you take out the ants though? What do you mean if we just wipe out the ant species? What happens? No more ants. No, we're all dead. So, as arrogant as we can be that we can walk and make spaceships, we're still relying upon the insects to be alive. We need flies and fleas and because it's called what, Danny? An ecosystem. Yes. I'm breathing oxygen releasing what kills me, dioxide, carbon dio. The tree breathes it. There's too many things in order for this to have been random, right? Too many things, too many perfect dots connecting for us to exist, which is why I know it was designed. It is a simulation created by the creator to try those of us that have been best in character. The game board of life is rigged, but how you respond is your salvation. How you respond is your free will. You couldn't control to what family you were born. Your timeline was set for you. You couldn't say, "I'm going to be Danny Jones. I'm going to be some white boy in Tampa. Be me in Scotty." Like, no. God said, "You're going to be born to that family." I couldn't choose. You're going to be born to a family that's going to escape communism, get massacred. Like, my timeline was set. I can't control the things that happened to me in my life. I couldn't control that my my brother died in a car accident. I say my mom's brother, but still, he was my brother. He destroyed my life when he left me. Tomorrow's a very sad day for me cuz I always celebrated my birthdays with him. I haven't celebrated my birthday since he passed. Tomorrow, I'm going to try. I never a new relationship. I just don't either. It's a It's a moment of reflection for I get really I I just really feel the passing of time. I know how precious every moment is. Every second. That's why when someone gives you their time, man, you can't get mad at the guy honking the horn on you. If you're sleeping at the wheel, I need to go. Every minute counts. If I keep missing these lights cuz some checking their Facebook, I just lost five minutes of my life cuz I stay I have to stay there for five. But I also believe in the concept you're exactly where you should should be through divine wisdom, which I explained earlier. My point is, Danny, I don't know where the I'm going on this rant. All I'm trying to say is I truly I don't believe there's a God, man. And I I can't explain this all in two hours together. I know there's a God, man. And it's not cuz I have a hund feeling. It's like too many dots connect, man. I understand these stories sound crazy. That's why I said earlier X plus Y equals Z. I know the Quran has never changed. In the Arabic, I don't want to hear about translations. In the Arabic, Muslims pray in the Arabic. Christians can't even speak Aramaic. The majority can't even say 10 words in his language. Don't compare the two. And it's not to be arrogant. The reason we pray in Arabic is to preserve the book. That's why me, a white boy, I pray in Arabic. A Chinese Muslim prays in Arabic, not to glorify the Arab culture. Sometimes there's a lot I disagree about it. It's to preserve what we believe to be the final book of God, which is why it has miracles that I can show you. There's no way this guy could have known, man. There's just no way. How did this guy that couldn't read and write? And even if he could read and write, how could he have known these things that fresh water and salt water don't mix? You have to know how to calculate density. Mhm. It's to the invisible eye, you can't tell they're not mixing cuz it kind of goes like layers like pancakes on top of each other. You have to know how to calculate density. So to me, there's like two 300 scientific miracles. That's what drew me. I was like, "Wow, okay. So scientifically, this guy like how the hell did he know?" But then there's things that you are even more crazy like the signs of the end of the world. The prophet Muhammad said that towards the end of time the buildings of Mecca would reach for the skies. If you look at Saudi Arabia today, they even built a massive clock tower. He even said soon the time will come where the shadow of time covers the Cabba. Cabba is that black box that the Muslims pray towards. They don't worship it for your tools and the comments. black box. You know the box in Mecca that all the Muslims paint. Pull up Cabba, man. How do you spell it? K A B A. Cabba black box. The black cube. The black cube that the Muslims pray towards. Pull up an image of that. So now pull up that picture towards the right. You got these guys out there trying to say, "Oh, the Muslims, they worship the box." No, we don't worship the box. Because during the time of the prophet Muhammad, they used to get on top of the box and call prayer. You're not going to stand on top of your own idol. Could you imagine a Hindu standing on top of a statue of Shiva? Or a Christian standing on top of a statue of Jesus. Oh, they worship the black stone. No, we don't. There's a concept in Islam known as Nia. Nia means the intention. Where is this thing? This is in the heart of Saudi Arabia. Okay. We believe that this is where Abraham constructed the temple to worship the one God. He left his wife in the wilderness. Now you see that clock tower. Yeah. That's one of the signs of the end of the world in Islam. The prophet Muhammad peace be upon him, please double research this stuff. Please double check my references because if I make an error, I'm responsible for the information that I give you as a human being. To God, I'm responsible to God. Not to Danny Jones, not to Google, to God. If I give you information that's incorrect or that can manipulate your opinion without giving you facts, [snorts] his prophecy towards the end of time is that soon the buildings of Mecca will reach for the sky. The mountains will be pierced, which they just did. They built tunnels right through the mountains. Okay, he said this during his life. And he said, this is well recorded. He said that soon the shadow of time will cover that black box. At the time they were looking at shadow of time. How can time have a shadow? You can't see time, right? You think he was talking about a clock tower? Look, when that sun goes behind that tower, it cast its shadow over the box. [snorts] They call it the Saha, which literally means the watch. They the locals call it time, the time tower. Uhhuh. How could he have known, man? How did he know 1400 years ago? How did he know that? He said, "Soon the betters of our people." Look at the deserts of Arabia 67 years ago. Is this sand there and a bunch of camel riders literally milking the camels and drinking the milk and eating dates in Heiha That's what they were doing out there. Okay. Today, the biggest skyscrapers in the world, where are they? Dubai. That's right. He said, "Soon the time will come where the better of our people will compete with one another to build buildings that touch the sky." These are exact words, not all I'm guessing. He says, "One will build one and then the other one will say, I can build one bigger than you." What year was this again? 600. This is in the 600s. Yeah, we're talking this started 40 years ago over there. How did the Prophet Muhammad know if he wasn't from divine influence? I dare people to research the signs of the end of the world in Islam. I dare you to. How did he know about this? I mean, you think it's that much of a stretch to be able to predict that people would build skyscraper towers? Yeah, but think about it. He said from their people, not anyone else. They were a joke before he came. They were like a forgotten civilization. Well, maybe he was just talking about people in general. And he said the better. And he described how they're going to boast. And think about it. That's what they're doing. They're having a race between each other to build skyscrap. We're going to build one bigger than you. It's exactly what he said. He said, "Soon the time will come where a man becomes a woman and a woman becomes a man. And they will dress like one another. The family unit will be destroyed and the bastards will take over. Bastard children. Children born out of wedlock. They will be full so so full of rage they will destroy all those that are around them. That's the country we're in right now. The bastard generation. You said that my first time with you, but I was right about it. The bastard generation. 90% out of wedlock. These children are full of rage. They commit 90% of violent crime because they don't have a father. Because their mother didn't want them. They were conceived with no love. Therefore, they show no love to the world. They were conceived out of deadly sins. And that's why all we have from them is death and chaos. This is the bastard generation. He predicted that also. He said that the war of all wars would start over the Euphrates River. Now, it hasn't happened yet, but that's the footwork. Syria, Iraq, Iran, Turkey, that's the Euphrates. He said a war will start there that will engulf the whole entire world. It'll be the basically Armageddon. basically Armageddon that supposedly there's something under that river under the Euphrates River that the whole entire world's going to fight over. Maybe they already know, man. Maybe that's what this is all about. Maybe these powers that be already know. Maybe they read the prophecy and they went to go see what's under that river. What is under that river of the Euphrates? This is also in the Bible, by the way, that when the Euphrates River runs dry, there's there's uh end of the world stuff. But in any event, this is an episode on its own where we can go over prophecy of the end of the world in Islam. And I'd like to pick it up maybe the next time around. It would be an amazing episode just talk about the signs of the end of the world and maybe the correlations to Christian uh doctrine. Let's do it. In any event, brother, I got to get to that airport. Go get to the airport, bro. Back to New York. I love you. I love you, brother. There's a lot going on. As far as the migrants are concerned, I think I made my stance clear. I'm against open borders. I am for letting some people in with screening. Protect your sovereignty of your nation, but stop putting all people in one box and talking in disgusting terms because it's not fair and we could do it to any group if we really want to. I've shown you the contradictions between what they want you to think about Muslims and their figures and then when you look at your owns, you guys are even worse. Like I showed earlier in this episode and I think I gave receipts, did I not? So, all I'm saying is please be fair. Stop hating people. Look in the mirror first. And it gets real hard to throw that first stone. This is Beck Lover. You can check me out at BK Lover NYC on Instagram. BK, that's boy belover.com. Continue following Danny Jones for the best in podcast episodes. Thanks for listening everybody. Shalom. Salamkum. God bless America. Love you. Adios. Adios. Chowo. Chiao.