Clinton versus Trump. We're talking about the fate of human civilization. Yes, I say this to this day And I believe with all my heart that the people who voted for Trump in 2016 Did the greatest act of human charity and maybe human history because tens of millions would have died had another Clinton one the table was sat For war through a thrasha. We were able to delay that anybody who tells you don't shelter your kids Gruber shelter your kids. Why do you why do you why are you telling me not to shelter my kids? Say don't lock your doors at night. Really? Okay, you're you're an armed robber. Oh, that's weird. Don't shelter my kids We appeal to the second circuit court pills in New York This is during the Trump administration Epstein is still free has them arrested a friend of mine One of the good guys in the intelligence community said hey Just so you know you shouldn't mention Epstein anymore You're you're in a real problem. They go you got into something really That you didn't know you were getting into and I go okay What do you want to do? They go just stand by you need to not draw attention to this issue or yourself? Okay, that's message received How do you live on the internet without having it destroy your brain? I went through that 2017 and Where I felt like my brain was becoming a little bit dopamine fried so for me. I just said I'll just Do last and I went to DC last and I did last of I Made myself irrelevant anyway, so there was a point where I was on a and I was on a real arc to be a big deal and Then my brain was getting fried. I looked at videos in myself My face was all red. I was just hella's inflammation because the cortisol and I was getting calls from people in DC three or four in the morning And I was breaking a bunch of stories so I was like phone kids and I realized I was losing myself To this world this digital world. Yes, and then I go man. I don't want to the socks dude I'm gonna have to figure something out. I ask you what does it mean? It's cortisol. What does that mean? a stress hormone so when you're under stress Fight a flight response you're gonna have cortisol and then cortisol is inflammatory and then that's what makes a lot of people who may be Are healthy you look a little stressed out because you blow you hold water. Yeah, there's a lot of things that go with it So a lot of people when you lose a high when you leave a high stress job People will be all I lost 10 pounds No, you lost about five or 10 pounds of water. Yeah, because you're not all the buzz the buzz right? Oh, I gotta respond to that which you felt like you were succeeding too much. Oh, yeah Yeah, I love that. Yeah objectively Yeah, and then most people fret about not being successful now. Yeah, but I is how you define Your spiritual world or how you define what you want to do with life and I noticed that I Got tired of people like for example like me doing this Episode with you. I almost didn't do it because I go oh man I'm gonna have a bunch of people texting me. How do I get on talker? What's Tucker's number can you get this thing never? That's my number. Yeah, no, I know The people like everyone on the planet is so but they're so incapable. They can't find it right. Okay. Well that and then my DMs will be blowing up and And and that was the problem is people will get this to Don Jr I saw that you were a thing were Don juniors get this to Trump gets to and I go no man This is not really what it's about so The only real Way to describe how we ended up in this weird world was it was like it was a gams. It was a ride It wasn't a deliberate Calculated move. How can I become a whatever because I was influenced there before there was a term influencer I was recognized in public for what I wrote on the internet This is before you can make any money doing it Yes, but before there are brand deals This was just people had blogs or people on social media blowing off steam or goofing off or whatever And so I was I was very early to what's now known as an influencer But so you you start I mean you had a completely different life. You're a lawyer Um, you live in California, but you're not from there. You this you're not basically where you decided Where you thought you would be when you used to go but you start succeeding in this new world But I still don't understand How it came to you that you don't want to be as successful as you are Why decide I want to become irrelevant And the reason is because The opposite of what most people want right? I wanted to be I was I have a story about this I won't say who it is, but I was having dinner with a friend of mine and I was working on my next book Which was called audacity how to go from nobody to somebody and it was a discussion of Again influencing before people knew them as influencers. It was about brand building Getting your message out rhetoric and I was having there with my friend and he goes You know what by the time you finish this book You're not gonna publish it and you're gonna call it how to become a nobody and I kind of laughed and said oh Ha ha ha he was he was right and never released a book and You wrote the book but didn't publish it. Yeah. Just fell. It was too ving glorious Thought that was too self celebratory. I felt like my ego was Seeking an external validation too much and then I was losing who I was and losing what I wanted to do and Losing because I my whole philosophy is wait, how did you come to that? Did your wife mention it to you or no? No, I fly at moment You realized you were gonna become a worse person. You just you feel it subtle subtle little things and Little gestures you would Google your name. I don't have a Google. I learned on my name I don't know anything people occasionally will send me this have you seen this no And I'm not trying to act like I'm too cool for school But I don't I don't do that because you'd Google your name you'd name search yourself on Twitter What are people saying? Do I got to respond to this and you become a little you become a brand not a person right or you become an account? That's how they refer to people on x formerly known as Twitter. Oh, that's an account and I say no That's what happens you Lose your humanity and you're no longer humanity you're more like a cyborg Or you're living in an augmented reality of social media where you whoever you are doesn't exist and you're Engaging of some kind of performative dance for a mob of people who are Necessarily don't necessarily have your best interest in mind. Who's that that completely crazed chick who? Has the mental breakdowns on camera? I think she works the Washington Post you schwinkrena. Yeah. Yeah Taylor runs Taylor to the runs. Yeah Who's on one hand is loads some but every time I've ever seen her I just maybe I have too many daughters I feel so sorry for her because she's clearly been destroyed by what you're describing a lot of people do there's a certain look some people have in there in front of a camera and Where they're this is where they want to be right the ham it up for the camera. Yeah, and I'd always be the opposite So for me my biggest if I had an influence on This it was I don't know if you ever watched him doctor Eugene Scott on satellite radio Well, Dr. Jeans got from my childhood in California. Oh, there you go even better the University Cathedral Yeah, the guy the public access guy who would sit in a chair on the telephone and yell at viewers When I would I was in like six or seventh grade my brother and I would Fire up a bowl and watch her walks Dr. Jean and he hated his viewers He would say you're not you're disgusting. I told you to send me money in this phone bank behind him. That's the guy the voice is a faith He was like yeah, yeah, I grew up so we had a bootleg satellite radio transmitter and we picked up Dr. Eugene Scott and He's probably the greatest influence on me and how I do media because He's anyone listening to this watching this just hit pause go into YouTube. Is he on your other tapes of you? He's got to be long ahead. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he died years ago one of my licer grats is I never went to the University Cathedral before he died and that was one of my momentum-mory moments So he because his his effect his way of communicating was like so strange How was he an influence on you using much less strange? Okay, he sits around reading books the most obscure knowledge and would go down these deep rabbit holes That nobody really cared about and then am I boring you am I boring you and he was stream Am I boring you do you want to hear more get all the telephones and then this have these horse videos? Because he's yes, man and you just have see these horses videos and I thought this is the coolest mo mo Foe that I've ever seen in my life. This guy is amazing and he was a PhD is a brilliant guy genius guy He'd know all this trivia and I thought man. That's cool. I kind of want to be that guy when I grow up and Did anyone else on your block want to be dr. Jeans Scott? I don't know the anybody in the world I don't know anyone else but me finding this to be an aspirational character And I would watch him for hours a week especially because it was the only thing That might because we're very strict. How's the what we could watch my dabble let me watch him forever So for me that was one of the few things that I could watch and I could watch it with my dad And I was I was obsessed with his delivery style I thought it was cool. They just sat around and read books because if you think about it people go what do you do for a living And the answer is that I read books and write about what I read and what I find interesting. That's it And there's no More there to it than that But there's a lot of there there if you look at it in that context So he would be framed by piles of books and it would be the most weird stuff At least growing up in a small town book. She never heard over didn't have Amazon dot com back then and I thought that'd be cool. Just sit around read books talk shit Yellow people who are watching you scream go entire eight smokes a Garth Where do I sign up for this? How do I do this for watching it was was almost like a masochistic experience because he hated you But he commanded your attention and then Told you to send him money and a lot of people did well I don't know that he hated you as much as I because I went grew up in roshing pro wrestling to I viewed it more as a bit Because I think that he had a genuine smiley effect to him And I think that he did I think that he was happy and enjoying what he was doing I viewed it much less that he had contempt for his audience But more that he was a Ravel Rauser and he was doing a bit of a Pro wrestling bit. He was a heel. He was an intellectual heel So if you look at Rick Flair was Rick Flair a good guy or bad guy. Rick Flair didn't hate the audience, right? The bad guys would run in the iron she could run in Cussing people out. He didn't hate his audience. That was his bit right So Dr Eugene Scott that was his bit. He was a heel an intellectual heel And he was having fun and I think the audience was Was in on it and if the audience is in on the bit then it becomes fun. No, that's I that's a much deeper reading than I I was capable But I think you're right. So you decide To disappear become less relevant. How do you do that and did it work? Absolutely worked. I don't have people asking me to To find out how to get in touch with anybody and the Trump campaign or anybody who doesn't you just pull back from politics then? Well, unless I pull back from politics. I did this video and I thought one of my piffies was I was reading a book and because it goes both ways So if I don't know if you've ever gone to a modern bookstore anymore It's pretty depressing and then you'll see a book and you'll see the author is some crank on Twitter That is a completely not credible person. So I can't read history books anymore Because I read these historians on on X And I go all they're lying about Trump. I can't listen to Dan Carlin podcast hardcore history I can't listen to any of this because when you read What they're writing about contemporaneous events You realize there's nothing about them that you can trust in any of their story. Tell you that and Then I reached another piffany where I was reading. I like Paul Paulo a quello books a lot And he's famous for the alchemist, but he's written a bunch of other little psych West books. I read hippie recently And I thought I don't know what this guy looks like. I went know if I saw this guy in public I don't really care what he had for dinner But I like his books and then I thought I want to be more of A book as a metaphor. I'm a book. You read my ex account You scroll you read it that's interesting yet mad because I Maybe word things in a way that you don't like But you don't really care that much about me the person Right is more the words whereas when I was doing a lot of live streams a lot of videos There becomes more of an emotional component to it because TV is way more powerful videos way more powerful than audio videos way more powerful than the written word Lesson during mm-hmm. So in my mind I thought while do fewer streams because I would do these very popular live streams Let's quit doing them and I found that that made me significantly less relevant But happier More content that you know, there's a great book on the happiness hypothesis I've studied the philosophers, you know, it's philosophy major in college And I learned that happiness is a dragon really. It's not a destination. It's more about They can only be obtained indirectly So I think less about happiness And I kind of rejected that are you happy And more along the lines of is it meaningful as an impactful as a significant Is it having the desired outcome for the world and the desired outcome for me? And in that regard much less relaxed much less stressed out. I have much less cortisol Policing through my body's as for sure and I can wind out easily so for example I can Broad dog a hike for hours and rod-awing a hike means no Audio book no podcast no radio just me and my thoughts. It's called rod-dogging when you Don't have electronics on you. That's the no meme when you can Rob you want to But that's how it acts like it's an achievement. Well, we're all cyborgs now. Oh no me. Well, I hate that shit. Yeah, it's getting there Yeah, but if you can do that for hours. That's right. I don't wear headphones in the gym I did much less disconnecting from the Augmented reality world or the virtual reality world and spent more time in physical world rod-dogging I thought that was like no condom. It is but you know memes change and language usage change amazing And that's amazing what's gonna happen in this election We don't know what's gonna happen in November. There's no way to know if you're wondering how big tech got powerful enough to avoid the first amendment to the Constitution of the United States. I think it big enough to nullify the founding documents of the most powerful company in the world Well simple they got really rich Money is power. Well, how'd they get rich? From information your information which you keep giving to them. How do you do that? Well every time you use the internet unprotected You're handing all of your online activity all the details about you To Silicon Valley which sells it including to government agencies which use it to spy on you That's why it's probably not a good idea to go online unprotected not just for your own sake But for the sake of the country. How do you fight back? Well with Express VPN Express VPN is an app that encrypts and reroute a hundred percent of your network traffic through secure servers What does that do? Well, it makes everything you do online Unreadable to your internet provider and then to data brokers and to the government agencies that buy that data That means anyone out there trying to profit from you and your personal data can't Well, how do we know it works? Well, we know for a fact it works because this winner when my producers and I were in Russia Conducting interviews including with the president of that country Internet traffic was getting blocked by the government So we got an express VPN account and we're able to get that interview out of the country securely and bring it to the world So it works We know it works Express VPN also keeps you safe from hackers even on unsecured public Wi-Fi networks If you're in a coffee shop or an airport You sign on with Express VPN and all of a sudden you're safe And by the way, it's easy to use even if people who don't know anything about tech like me You just tap one button and you're protected on any device. That's your iPhone Your laptop your tablet. You name it if you've got it Express VPN can protect it and it works enough to eight devices at once Express VPN is rated number one by top tech reviewers like CNET and the Verge Express VPN protected our team for censorship across the world and it can protect you too So if you want to keep your privacy intact and fight back against the big tech surveillance machine Now is the time to get Express VPN use our special link to get three extra months of Express VPN for free Go to express VPN dot com backslash Tucker That's Express exp re s s VPN dot com slash Tucker for three extra months free and we hope you will I mean if that's cracked. That's so dark Almost don't want to dwell on it, but um Then that that's why it would be fine if Biden stayed then well We want Biden to run in November I think it's the weakest candidate That we can have but There's a new enthusiasm happening knowing that if Biden stays in the race they have to save Biden because now there's real peril People took it for granted that Biden is going to win Democrat voters especially and now They're thinking that He might not win and that'll drive more Democrat voter turnout. It's gonna be Hotly contested man. It's gonna be highly contested people saying Trump's up to on this poll Trump's up three in this poll None of that matters. It's gonna be highly contested election and people are getting lax to days ago Well, yeah, I mean there's a huge scramble in Washington just to you know I want to be secretary of this or secretary of that or I mean they're acting like it's it's done Yeah, they're acting like they've won Which I don't like there's a lot of congressional races that are close that people need to watch out for Democrats might take The House they think they're gonna take the House What's been done there and unfortunately not much unfortunately people aren't running on the issues that they want to run on so for example I was talking about this yesterday on X and In Orange County There's a real concern that Orange County could become like the Bolshevik run Los Angeles County So a guy ran Toss bits of ran for which is right next door Ryan ran for district attorney his camp his camp Toss bits of ran for This return so yeah, probably the district attorney election the campaign slogan was no LA and OC he won by two to on margin Orange County. What did he mean by that? He meant no crime no crime webs like to have an LA none of these homeless encampments none of this bail reform So called happening or no just criminals certainly yeah, possibly criminals basic stuff. It's in a way you feel like Mentally stunted that you have these conversations Right, it's true. It's you're you're in a surreal parallel reality where you go Oh, no, you see the way to win Republicans Is you want to enforce the criminal code against people who murder people you want to actually put criminals? And jail and then you have these weird So realist moments in yourself where you think did I say that am I stupid? This is banal. Why are we talking about this? It's right and you go no, but it is banal is utterly stupid and yet That's where we are as Society said you do have to talk about it. You have to talk about it all the time You have to remind people of this all of the time because that is the dumb world that we live in and it does feel sometimes You demoralizing because you feel like you're talking below your intellect right as a writer as a speaker You want to talk about Interests at an interest you an intro and that you find novel right? Oh, I read this book. What's this book? You read? What's that about? I went down that rabbit hole. That's cool and So much of our time unfortunately has to be devoted saying okay Republicans Crime is bad people don't want crime You're running you need to talk about crime and then you see them talking about everything but crime and you think no Okay, I have to grab you by the shirt. Todd Spitzer did talk about crime anyone by two to one in a 50 50 So that why would think that every other Republican? As Michelle Steele asses Orange County Congress members how much they're talking about crime asses and wins the last time they had a press conference about crime Oh, but I'm running for Congress. It's a national issue. No, it's not it's local Right running for Congress is not a national ballot referendum. It is a local election That's right. You need and they don't understand these things and you think how do you not understand these things? And then I think I'm wasting so much of my time with mediocre people who either have no will or they really are this dumb and What am I doing with my life? So that's where you have these existential crisis Like I've been there, but it's Why wouldn't you talk I mean crime there's no defense of it at all So in your Republican you don't have to be for crime. You're not for rape So why wouldn't they talk about it? It can't just be stupidity. They feel pressure not do I? Think that they don't understand The issues and the way they should and that they get too much caught up in the DC think tank realm And I don't think that they're being told you can't really talk about crime I think that in their Gilded world They don't understand what the issues really are concerning people They don't have any kind of concept of how bad it is in certain parts And I do think that they're afraid of the media attacks So when the Orange County District Attorney ran for office the media course attacked him smeared him Refashes him far right this fat, but he over overwhelmingly won and as you know Republicans are controlled by the media in terms of the narrative. They're so afraid Of a hit piece right. They're so afraid of negative press coverage That they allow the media to dictate the agenda. Why would you let your enemies control you? That's the philosophical question right that's the questions why are republicans so pathetic And I've spent a lot of time thinking about that And I think that there is a strain of Christian negativity That people don't like to talk about because then it seems like you're oh you hate Christians now, sooner of it You your anti-Christian And I say no if you read the verses in the Bible, they say you got to be general as a dog But wise as a serpent right everybody everybody skips over That part and you have to ask where's the Serpent type wisdom where you're not understanding these issues where you're not thinking where you're not being shrewd And they aren't they have this naivety And they have this gullibility and they have this weakness that comes from being tonight So the biggest problem one of Nietzsche's great criticisms of Christians that I think Has held up well with the inversion of morality and how Christians became a morality of a slave type morality which is self sacrifice Self-adnegation denial of yourself Well in one way these are good Christian virtues which is If you think your ego is getting out of control, it might be good to become a little bit less relevant It might be good to take us that back from the limelight These might be good things to do for your heart But that doesn't mean you let somebody kick in the door and torture to death right and But there's a rape your wife or people you love or kill people whatever the case is it doesn't you don't let that end up like the Zar We'll line up against the wall with your family while the wolf is it falls for skill you Right there's too much of that strain of Weakness that has infected a lot of the the modern Christian traditions to where they don't have really an understanding of it And they're the net flanders all gone by golly gee can't we all get along Kind of types and then because of that they're more Open to being persuaded by evil forces because they don't have that strong Grounding and that courage to stand up against evil. Well. They certainly lack courage. What's evil? How are we defining evil we define evil as anti-human if you start from I like CS Lewis's Take on this which is whether it's true or not. I think it's a good way to By true. I mean whether it's a metaphor or it's literally true people can debate but if you think of The the fall of the angels and then you think of humanity You would understand that the demons are at war with God's creations humans because humans still have God's love humans are still capable of Experiencing divine grace and experiencing God's love whereas the demons who were belled during the fall are not So what they want to do is implement anti-humanist policies and have human suffering and have human despair and you can feel that force again whether it's a literal one Involving actual Forces or whether that's a metaphor you could say the evil would be anti-human but I mean it almost has to be a supernatural phenomenon because by definition Human beings would not be inclined to be anti-human Gables don't act against their own interests animals don't commit suicide. There's a lot of Strange elements of the human condition a lot of that suggests outside forces that are not human acting on humans Yeah, humans give into despair in a way that animals don't despair would be incomprehensible To other animals that wonderful DH Lawrence poem DH Lawrence has this great poem about watching a bird. It's two lines long Drop dead of cold and fall from the bow dead to the ground and not feel a moment of self-pity Right, I mean that that is kind of the difference right. That's us I remember one time we hit a deer as with a friend and the deer is backbroken And it just kept running to try to live right Whereas a human would immediately think oh my life is over Right, so we have this fatalism and something bad happens to us And we define it in all my life is over No, it isn't your life's in the bath spot right it sucks. It might suck for a while But your life is not over right so then what is that despair? So I think when I think about these terms and I think of what is evil Or what I think is demonic. I think in terms of The worst thing you can do is a person is despair Because one that rejects the Divinity of Christ because you're rejecting that you can be saved because if you're despairing Then you're saying that I reject Christ right that's probably If not the greatest and one of the greatest sins because I'm in despair. Okay. Therefore you don't believe Christ can save you You're completely under control Of the forces right the dark forces and then I think of evil in terms of causing human suffering and being anti-human So that's interesting How do you fight? I mean if you've got your head in the internet all day and the civilization that produced you was collapsing And evil is omnipresent and hurting people before your eyes including people you love How do you keep from despair? Well because the The timelines are different right in our primitive minds We think oh, this is the worst Everything's falling apart. No, no, it isn't we're not even in Bolshevik air We're not even in communist China air under Mao We're not in the Cambodian genocide. So there's a lot of And this goes back to maybe why Republicans are so weak a lot of us have been so psychologically Coddled that we view things as being insurmountable problems that we can't solve I think it was Mao who said that Americans would break if there were ever a war in America Yeah, we've never had World War II everybody was bombed That was real despair. We were the guys over there helping the British bomb people, right? Certainly in America we weren't being bombed we had Women had to go work at factories and other things but it was nothing like a Europe in their wars So in America We're so psychologically coddled that we think oh we're like we're losing our country You're always losing our country Time does not stop the world is not static There's always forces being pushed as always a dialect If there's always good versus evil There's always been lower points in humanity and higher points of humanity So we don't know where we are even on the cosmic timeline on God's timeline on the demons timeline On the angels timeline we don't even know where we are first of all That's mistake number one is that we are in our own mind gods and we understand the moment that we're in And we understand that the moment that we're in is so unique and that there's a narrative arc happening That is either over and we've won because you never went Or we're losing and oh my god we fall into despair So the problem is I call it like the Marvel the Marvel movies capture as well You don't watch TV or movies and I can't even watch them because they're so formulaic But the idea is Here are the people Bad guys come in Destroy things Hero emerges Good guys come in Good guys beat bad guys Good guys kiss the girls The end bad guys come in destroy things Hero emerges good guys come in good guys beat bad guys Good guys kissed the girls the end right and that's what we love in the American mind But if you looked at it and you zoomed out not from that simple Narrative arc that we love as American. She would say well all these buildings were blown up people are dying People have lost sons and daughters people are wailing and agony in ways that we can't begin to comprehend and you haven't even one Because they'll be another bad guy. Let me another bad guy coming down Right so you have what do you mean one the good guys one know the good guys have Resolve the conflict in their favor and now you have to rebuild and then you know how politics and people fighting as they're rebuilt Who's gonna get the contracts who's getting ripped off? You have all these kids now that you have to watch out for where to do with them? Right so when you when you think of it in that way It can either make you despair more because you feel totally helpless. Oh my god These problems are way worse than I thought or you realize how we're going through a thing Right we're going through a thing. Okay. This is a bad thing. We're going through Let's see what we can do about it. So there's a there's a term that I picked up from the the ayahuasca kind of people in that little scene and I think it comes from addiction and they say the only way out of the through right yeah, and It sounds sort of glib the only way out through What does that even mean but it means when you're in the shit? You're in the shit you're in the shit bro. What do you want me to do? You want me to hold your hand you want a milk and cookie you want a little snuggle You want a baby bottle you're in the shit bro. What do you do sit there and cry yourself to sleep? No, you just keep going the only way out through right so when you adopt that as The way you live doesn't mean you don't have bad days, but you realize that I'm in the shit. Okay What am I gonna do call mommy gilloblanky? Maybe have a bottle suck on my thumb a little bit. No, you're not gonna do that right? Just keep pushing through what's the closest you've been to despair? The I mean I've been in despair and The human role over money in hindsight kind of laughably small amounts of money But at the time when you don't have any and you're like I wasn't approved for student loans I got approved for student loans and then I didn't get approved and then I thought I was gonna have to drop out of law school Because I get me couldn't get my student loans and now looking back at it What I was bugging out over that right? But at the time that your whole world. Yeah, so the smaller you define your world the bigger your problem same Right so if you want to have less despair to find your smaller you define your world the bigger your problem I'm seeing yeah, that is wise. Yeah, so that I look back at that now I think oh my god I was borderline suicidal over just a financial problem, you know like I could have just worked for whatever right There's a hundred different ways to solve it and So I had a ton of despair there and then I've I've definitely had despair over despair, maybe it's not the right word but close to it where we get Trump over the finish line 2016 and He's going in and all the sudden the people who got him in there pushed in the side and all the people who opposed them Take over what do they say that the people who start revolutions rarely finish them? Yes And I thought we're living this right now and I was bummed man. I was bummed that we took all these personal risks that we made this happen in impossible feet and all of the people who are never Trump ended up in the Administration ended up staffing things and that made you feel like despair, maybe less of a word than powerless where you're like we did the right thing and sometimes you feel that way With these Republicans like we gave you Congress We we gave you Trump. We gave you the White House. We gave you Congress. We gave you the Senate and we can't do anything We can't do anything not nothing is changing right or we get you know we get Republicans Congress in this last election and They still send all of mind you crane Dear and you're thinking what do you guys doing there? Confirming all these radical judges and the Senate and they go oh well Lindsey Graham is rubber stamping all these Appointments will black them and committee do something right so you're in a way or screaming into the void Like what are we doing? What why are we doing this? Why do I have all these gray hairs over this stuff? Yeah, and if I but again That's that that's me and my own ego defining the problem small Right and then that's what defining the world is small as everything is based on that one issue and then that makes the problem seem bigger Then I just try to zoom out remind myself for all the longer timeline or on the timeline of infinity infinity Do what we can do that doesn't mean give these people a pass But the despair sets in when you think what it would like what more do we need to do? Right we've given you guys everything and even now with Trump world Trump is going against a project 20 up 2025 people and those were his most loyal staffers. These are the adults in the room that he's gonna need if he wins and bunch of never Trumpers are at his ear again and Time to issue statements going against all these people and you realize man. We're gonna relive 2017 but by the so bad that We got of over Trump, but it is the energy is at the way it was like when we voted for Trump between 16 We were not voting the lesser of evils. That was why a lot of people like me who didn't care about politics I didn't really care to vote got involved. Do I really care if it's John McCain? Barack Obama 100% I don't 100% I don't fair do I really care if it's Mitt Romney or Barack Obama 100% I don't right because Mitt would have done more wars So Obama will do things worth some social issues, but Mitt would have had us in war with Russia. I mean it could have so you think okay Do I care not really Clinton versus Trump. We're talking about the fate of human civilization. Yes. I say this to this day And I believe with all my heart that the people who voted for Trump in 2016 Did the greatest act of human charity and maybe human history? Because tens of millions would have died had another Clinton one. They have their whole game plan bro They were gonna go get some kind of war with Syria That would have led to some shoe dot with Russian mercenaries and American special operations troops People like Joe can't explain all that Eric Prince can explain all that the table is set for war through Russia We were able to delay that so we were able to say can I excuse just a dumb question But why would anyone? Wanna war with Russia like what was that so you're saying back even in 2015 16 Ghouls like Hillary Clinton were planning on war with Russia. Why well, they need a big war They it's just big war, but why Russia? Because they're a legitimate power and it would be a real war They were tired of these little tiny land disputes where we're winning they need they need massive destruction and Why? Because they were I mean they worship evil they want more humans to suffer if you look at war from Yeah, it's me If if you look at war and you start with the fundamental definition of evil and what evil is Then you would realize that the demons don't care which side of the war they're on all they care about our humans are killing each other Right that's their own agenda. So they'll that's why when you hear people talk about things like oh, we'll have civil war in the US I go, well, that's demonic and you don't even realize you're into my influence. What do you think of civil war is like? Have you looked at what happened in Yugoslavia? You look at the aftermath of that show me where? Show me you have a civil war and this is a good outcome Well, this is something that you want to never idealize right? It's demonic, but they don't think that they're like we're the good guys and we're being oppressed by the bad guys That that is demonic influence We're the good guys They're the bad guys and I first of all do believe we're the good guys and I do believe that the other side of the bad guys But once that leads you To down that road then your the demons are smiling because they don't care. Oh, yeah, you are the good guys You're the moral you're the righteous They're the evil ones are pressing you they worship demons you're the you're the good Christians You need to go to war with them. You're still in that frame Right so everything about human flourishing is trying to escape that frame the framing of the anti-humanist forces real or metaphorical and then you realize that There are people who are obviously convening with these evil forces consciously or unconsciously. Do you think in some cases consciously? I I'm not I don't believe that because There's not enough wisdom that you would have if you were convening with the with the entities Yeah, yeah, it's not something that you would You would know like I can tell if somebody's been down that route And you're like no, no these people. They don't have that can you tell There's there's an infinite divine wisdom That you access when you pierce the veil between the man's world in the spirit world and when you go over that veil or pierce through that veil you are immediately humbled Because you laugh at how much pride you might have had as a person. Yes, you think oh wow. I thought I was hot shit I'm nothing here. I'm nothing here. Oh my goodness Okay, and that's probably why it's able for me to be come less relevant over the years because The danger is then you become Too egoless and you don't do anything right. See if you're complacent. Yeah, it's tricky right? Am I living in pride? Am I living in bulsarness? Okay, I don't want to do that, but if you don't have a little bit of pride you don't have a little bit of drive You don't have a little Sizzle then maybe a message as you get across to us. You're this concept this constant tension right But the spirit world realm Show me oh, yeah, I mean that's tension. I was always tension. It's always duality Right yet in Yang if you look at the the medical staff Two serpents you look at DNA two strands. There's always tension which is why Despair happens when you think that there's a final outcome and one way or another and then complacency happens when you think nothing matters And then hubris happens when you think that you've won And the game is all over. Yeah, and you know really she's there get stopped in the back by his right Transcendo supporters great the cold war ended but history has not ended exactly yes and that Once the once you just embraced the dualistic struggle within yourself Then you realize okay, I do need to do a little bit of this But I but I can still struggle against the base or elements of myself I didn't mean to Pull the conversations with another direction. So thank you for explaining that 2016 if Hillary had won millions would have died in the wars that she planned I think that's absolutely right um voting for Trump Stop that at least for the time being but you felt despair because you felt That Trump himself was subverted or a lot himself to be subverted by people who hated him And it made you feel powerless demoralized. Yeah It's probably a continuum so despair Would maybe be overstating it But on the continuum it'd be demoralization and yes and What you think man? I can't believe that I really I can't look like if you got your kid a new car in the kid crashed The car right away while drunk driving Yes, you think wow brother. Why right? You know why why and there is but That but I did a magnified intensity. Yeah because it was the country Most of us well actually all of us go through our daily lives using all sorts of quote free technology Without paying attention to why it's quote free Who's paying for this and how? Think about it from it. Think about your free email account the free messenger system used to chat with your friends The free other weather app or game app you open up and never think about it's all free But is it no, it's not free These companies are developing expensive products and is giving them to you because they love you They're doing it because their programs take all your information They who've up your data private personal data and sell it to data brokers and the government And all of those people who are not your friends are very interested in manipulating you and your personal political and financial decisions It's scary as hell and it's happening out in the open without anybody saying anything about it This is a huge problem and we've been talking about this problem to our friend Eric Prince for a year Someone needs to fix this and he and his partners have and now we're partners with them and their company is called Unplugged it's not a software company. It's a hardware company actually make a phone The phone is called unplugged And it's more than that the purpose of the phone is to protect you from having Your life stolen your data stolen its designed from a privacy first Perspective It's got an operating system that they made it's called messenger and other apps that help you take charge of your personal Data and prevent it from getting passed around to data brokers and government agencies that will use it to manipulate you Unplugged game and it's to its customers They will promise you and they mean it that your data are not being sold or monetized or shared with anyone From basics like its custom Libertas operating system, which they wrote Which is designed from the very first day to keep your personal data on your device It also has believe it on a true On off switch that shuts off the power it actually disconnects your battery And ensures that your microphone and your camera are turned off completely when you want them to be So they're not spying on you and say your bedroom, which your iPhone is that's a fact So it is a great way one of the few ways to actually protect yourself from big tech and big government to reclaim your Personal privacy without privacy. There is no freedom The unplug phone you can get a $25 discount when you use the code tucker at the checkout So go to unplug.com slash Tucker to get yours Today highly recommended Have you felt despair in the last couple years? Um, I mean I felt despair and spirit troubles during those Those sessions. Yeah, you feel you get in touch with that human emotion of despair You get in touch with the the darkest side of energy and the More challenging parts of being a human for sure But you're not driven to despair by the news on Twitter. Oh, that's such a small potatoes compared to spirit Well, this is a small potatoes It's so trivial compared to the real War happening and the real forces at work That it's hard to even take seriously to the point that I have to reel myself back in we do have to take it seriously Even if it is small small states compared to the real Compared to the real conquest. So what are the real stakes? The real stakes is one on the individual level. You're a mortal soul. That's the real stake The the greatest challenge that I have Every day is trying to sanctify my own heart in my own soul because what I've learned through various experiences and then Reading a lot of the old orthodox Christian wisdom and learning actually how Christianity was supposed to be it was more and why I never really resonate with Protestantism if you want to go I mean so Protestantism I feel like is very Mind driven here's a scripture. This is what the scripture said I'm a Baptist. I can't drink alcohol and somebody else would say oh well the Jesus turned water into wine And you're fighting solace scripture. Are you fighting By citing different references in a book that is sometimes contradictory Right and then but the real spiritual traditions remember Christianity started out as a mystical tradition We look at now as if it oh here's the Bible and the Bible is the word of God And you realize no the Ethiopian Orthodox Christians have by books of the Bible in there that you haven't even read Right you guys are still fighting over whether the book of Enoch is real or not Right. What do you what are you doing? You think you this you think you have the answer it. Do you think oh for sure? I think it is and What I've learned is that You You can learn from the heart you have to learn how to think from the heart rediscover Beyond your own conscious, but realize that your heart has its own intelligence Which I thought would be woo-woo-woo kind of laughable stuff right. I'd read these books like the four agreements Sandwell Louise. I think his name is down Miguel sin Louise. I would read Paul Kuello and I would think oh what a bunch of to be honest like what a bunch of Pussies right come on. I'm a man. I don't want to read about my heart. I don't want to read about crying one of fucking What a bunch of Pussies, you know who are these people right? Honestly, that was my reaction and assessment a lot of the stuff and then I realized that was my own foolish pride my own hubris That was realizing that I was afraid of the heart. I was not strong. I was weak because of my own mind I convinced myself the high from the heart Because the heart is a source of your pain also the source of your great joy and love right so if you live in mind and you live in ego You constantly paper over heart and you think that's because you're strong. I'm a real man. I don't cry Right where did that come from your real man? You don't cry? Why are you afraid of crying? I'm not afraid of crying That's an interesting reaction. Right. So as you do as you study the more of the mysticism and the real spiritual traditions and how it was practiced Then you realize that the heart is its own intelligence and then you're trying to rediscover The intelligence of the heart and once you rediscover the intelligence of once you rediscover the intelligence of the heart That's the higher morality the higher morality isn't The words we create the rules we draft out the higher morality is in your heart But we've become so disconnected to attach from the heart that that sounds ridiculous or sounds Like pussy shit, you know, we will pussy shit right? It doesn't I in my hearing and Anyway, but it does Raise the vital question, you know what What is good look like you've described evil? But so how do we know that the impulses of our heart are The right impulses. Yeah good is love good is human flourishing Good is flowers blooming Evil is Wheatfield's being cut down in Ukraine as people kill each other people who are brothers Separated by a line in the sand kill each other. There's no flowers. There's no children dancing There's no gardens flourishing right that's evil. That's death Life is love as human flourishing flowers blooming children laughing Right. Yes Lewis once said that it was a great feeling of his that he didn't find The laughter of children satisfying you found a kind of annoying right? Yes, and he never had children right? But he but even not having them. He realized that he was missing Because that's heart. Yes heart is you hear a kid crying on a plane. Oh, I hope the kids are right Me being an asshole shut your fucking kid up. Don't you can control your kid your wheat? You know, yeah? That's the the ego the male and it's That part of me that I was trying to get away from and that I've been still trying to get away from right the male egos worship me I'm so great. I'm so relevant Share my stuff read my stuff. Oh the president read this. I know this guy. This guy's important and That it out it out that's the male ego and that'll just spin you out of control forever and then the heart is Man, I kind of snapped on my kid. I feel about how my kids. Okay. You know, I shouldn't have snapped on my kid. Why this up on my kid? Oh because I was and that moment the kid was marrying something about myself out of life That's that's the truest thing right there. We explain that a little more Well, we then this goes back to even Aristotle why we why we judge and we often judge harshest and others that which we don't like about ourselves but often weren't denial about those aspects of ourselves and so we don't even realize That we're doing it. We're judging them because we don't like that part of our self and you don't realize no is that part of yourself is broken That's what you want to fix right? Yes. That's what you want to think about and unfortunately not enough people talk about it or it sounds woo-woo or you get down a certain tradition or you're well That's just the most obvious and real thing ever for every parent I mean if you like your wife I speak for myself I when I see my wife's good qualities reflected in my children. I love it when I see my bad qualities reflected in my children It drives me crazy right and and then What so what do you take away from that when that happens? That you know, I should be more patient and less judgmental and in fact if a child is displaying one of your ugly qualities You know, you know what it's like to struggle with that quality so you should be more compassionate But of course I was speaking for myself. I'm less. I hate that right so I think that some language that I found that was useful And what you're dealing with and deal with and what will always deal with for us or our lives is a lot of our work as parents is closing those loops of Childhood trauma or closing the loop of whatever your issue is right because the way we perpetuate Mometically our worst parts of ourselves as to raising our children right and what I try to think of as closing the loop and When I see something and am I kid that bothers me or Trigger something in me. I think why is that happening and then I think how can I have that child? Not continue continue this right. How do you how do you break that? How do you break that cycle and How do you how do you close that loop? And I think that becomes a lot more important than getting people elected in office. I think if more of us did that Well, how do you do that? You you see something ugly in your child that you know comes from you you've transmitted something either genetically Or through conditioning to your child whom you love most in the world of course That is like bad. How do you how do you fix that? Well the more you've learned about yourself the more that you can Transmit the knowledge the kids. I'll give you a very basic example. It might my firstborn has first child energy and that's very nice First child energy is leadership Knowledge often giftedness and quizziveness. She's always reading books. She had this little Rubik's Cube And now she's saying dad come up to YouTube via house all the Rubik's Cube all great energy firstborn energy but a lot of firstborn kids because they're put into that role maybe That we as parents have to watch out for of being a caregiver for other children's right We want to ask ourselves one Am I robbing My daughter of the magic of childhood and the wonder of childhood. Hey go watch your brother. I got to do this Right Maybe I'm robbing her of the wonder of childhood. Okay. I need to calibrate that sometimes they do got you know life is life Right sometimes you have to do what you have to do but at least that mindful of that or Am I having her grow up too fast? Okay, why don't I just take a walk with her one on one? Just take a walk and just talk with my daughter just about her What's going on to her my let her ramble on? Let her talk about what she finds interesting. Don't Don't ask questions to try to direct the conversation just kind of like let it flow and then when you're doing that You're closing the loop of a Because in my case I didn't I was sort of robbed in my childhood a lot of ways and Because I wanted to grow up and I want to get out of the situation and you realize no you're letting them be a kid They still have to we all have to live together and It isn't perfect all the time, but you're letting the kid be a kid or Another thing first children do is Because they have to look at the well-being of everyone they'll negotiate against themselves right? My daughter. I don't know if I want to ask for this dad What do you want to ask for? She's like, well, I don't know if I should ask for it because I think my other my sister I think once I scream, but I really want this and I would say well don't negotiate against yourself Ask what you want. I can still tell you know maybe it won't work out But let's close that loop because I noticed that I would negotiate myself against myself sometimes In business dealings and it was something my wife would point out where Especially because I was never really like a greedy money driven person a lot of times. I would be more Compliant that you would expect giving my personality right giving my personality you might think put a dollar on the table and he's gonna fight Me I'm thinking why are we fighting over a dollar? This is stupid real. This is dumb But people will take advantage of that right so I had to learn Much later in life unfortunately into my 30s and even now in my late 40s. I had to learn no no You don't negotiate against yourself. Don't worry about them. They're worried about themselves Their self-interested actors. They're gonna try to get as much as they can out of you let them worry about themselves You worry about yourself and I realize oh, that's first-shot energy because I was always worried about is everybody Okay, is everybody doing all right within the family realm. We'll keep that to your family So with my first born. I do want you to negotiate against yourself with the family Think I want you to think about everybody with the family But I want you to know what you're doing and then have tools to know that when you're going into business So you're doing dealing with other people? Put that energy aside right? How old is this child seven and a half did she understand oh yeah? Yeah, she's a old soul yeah, so a lot of my a lot of my virtue is a lot of my existential dread. I had very a lot of existential dread at a very young age. So one day for example she was I'll maybe five or six She was young. I remember she was young and I was waiting for this and hoping it wouldn't happen. We were hanging out one day. She was dad. I Feel weird. Why do we have bodies I thought oh man. Oh, no The genetic whatever spiritual curse or blessing that has been passed on for all of these Centuries or millennials is with her because that was very much. I felt like a kid. I felt like This body isn't mine. Why am I here? This doesn't make any sense. I've always felt alienated from My animalistic materialistic body. I've always felt like it was weird that we had bodies I was a Gnostic as an early kid. What is this thing that I'm What torture I'm being subjected to by having to live in a body, right? And there was nobody I could talk to about this kind of stuff. They're lucky up like a nut house Right sounds like a nutty thing and I was like I told Shana said well She's asking, you know, she's asking these kind of questions now, but I'm able to Treat them differently. Maybe then it would have been when I was a kid or maybe then I would have been treated when I was a kid What did you say I said it is weird isn't it what are these things? Flop it around right it feels weird to be kind of disconnected and alienated from your body and We're here on a spiritual mission and that's why we're in these bodies where this body is as part of The spiritual mission that we've been sent on For since the beginning of time that we're on a spiritual mission to discover the mystery of the human bodies running and we're on a mission to elevate humanity to elevate the human condition and Do you have these gifts? But along with that comes the responsibility to elevate the human condition and to elevate society But that it is weird and snowing all the filming you told your seven-year-old shit at an obligation to elevate the human condition when she was five four and a half Light times in the certain of it's how did she respond? It's okay. Okay, dad. Yeah, I don't know that she did because I don't want to wear that as a burden of course right But she's like okay, dad How'd you get over you were telling me at dinner last night? I won't betray anything That's up to you, but I think it's fair to see you had a like Stupendously shitty child to like almost never really heard a story like that before You don't seem you wear it very lightly. You don't seem tormented by it. How'd you get over that? Reading a lot of self-help books And yeah, yeah, nothing nothing deeper than that realizing that your past isn't what defines you The lowest thing that happened to you is it hide to find yourself and then that's what brought me into media was The brain is inherently to the great book on this wire for story. We're obsessed with stories right can't fire tell me a story Yes, we're Gail ourselves of stories. That's how we transmit knowledge, but with our own brain that get that gets hijacked because We tell ourselves certain stories and then we often frame them At the most miserable Disempowering way So me I define as the story of my childhood Man that was wild and I got out of there alive What a what a trip and you can define it that way or you can define it as here all these things that happen to me I'm garbage. I don't matter I'm scum. I don't deserve love. I don't deserve good things in life And then you can define that as your story and if you define that as your story that's the Path that despair that's the pathway to the prime so you made a conscious decision to see your childhood as this Kind of maile strum that you escaped and feel grateful for that. This is the thing that happened to me And then if I want to give him to ego, it's a great thing decision to see your childhood is this kind of mailstrom that you escaped and feel grateful for that. This is the thing that happened to me. And then if I want to give in to ego, it's a great thing that overcame. Or if I want to forgive people, love people, I can say my dad will work should you factory jobs, never cheated on my mom, never smoked a cigarette, never hit us other than the traditional spanking culture that existed at the time, never got drunk, never he never did anything. And he did the best that he could with the knowledge that he had and what a sacrifice that he have. And my grateful enough is a son to appreciate that, to understand what it would be like to be broke, to be on welfare a little bit with the shame that a man must feel when he loses a job. My goodness, what am I, dad go through, son, I get on my own, myopia. Remember, you know, we always wanted to find the world larger than ourselves. The more we focus on ourselves, the smaller we define the world, then every problem is so big. That's right. Right. So then I think, oh, man, what how hard was that and how, how generous was it that my grandparents paid off the mortgage of the house? Because that was a $200 a month payment, which was a ton of money back then. And how different or much how it had been and how lucky am I that I got out and how many things could have gone wrong in my life? And completely all through the course of my life. So hey, buddy, you're so proud of yourself. You think you're such a great overcomer. How much luck was there? How much of that was divinely inspired? Maybe a little bit of it was, maybe you need to get over yourself. Maybe you need to get over a little pity party and realize that things could have gone a lot differently. Right. So I'm always consciously reframing the story of myself and the narrative of my life in a way that is that is zooming out wider and looking at what were other people's problems. What were they? You do a friend of mine. You know, you do ayahuasca, he was beat up as a kid. And he was, you know, he had ayahuasca experience and he saw himself getting beat up as a kid. And he saw his dad, but he saw that his dad was beat up as a kid. And he was like, oh, my God, my dad was beat up as a kid. Holy shit. That's why he did it. And it doesn't excuse the child abuse. But when you, when you zoom out and you realize that was what has happened, then you don't blame yourself. And then if you don't blame yourself, you can forgive yourself. Right. Because it's not that you're unworthy. It's not that you don't deserve love. It's that that person felt that way. And they transmitted that knowledge in a really horrific way. And then you're allowed to forgive them. And then you're allowed to move on and you're allowed to to heal yourself because it wasn't really your issue. Right. And often these realizations are, it's very easy to talk about it. Like, it's nothing. But when you're in the shit, when you're in the work, these are not easy conversations to have with yourself. So I get in the shit. And I go into those places and I go into the, the darkest experiences that have happened to me. And then I do feel that torment. I do feel like I'm being attacked. And then the only way else through and you just keep going through it. In a world increasingly defined by deception and the total rejection of human dignity, we decided to found the Tucker Carlson network and we did it with one principle in mind. Tell the truth, you have a God given right to think for yourself. Our work is made possible by our members. So if you want to enjoy an ad pre experience and keep this going, join TCN at Tucker Carlson.com slash podcast, Tucker Carlson.com slash podcast. What's going on with whites? And not just in this country, but in every white majority country, whites are becoming the minority. They're hated, they hate themselves. They're not reproducing. And the amount of energy expended by our leaders sort of openly disparaging them, encouraging them effectively to kill themselves or to want to kill themselves is overwhelming. I'm not saying this is a white man though obviously I am. But it's just it's very striking and it's global. What is that? I had a weird experience when I was in South Africa visiting in South Africa, you have a basically a cell, you lock yourself in a cell when you go to apartments, you get Airbnb, you open the outside cage, you go in and then you open another cage to go into the bedroom and then you lock that cage. You have to have all these layers of protection. And I remember talking to some white South Africans about that and they go, well, it's just payback for apartheid and they shrugged it off. And I said, I can understand maybe a little bit of looting is payback for apartheid. I can understand a little corruption is payback, but horrific violent crimes is not a proportionate response to something that people did before you were even born. And ever since then, I've been struck with the mystery of this collective racial guilt that white people carry around that nobody else does. If you look at any other ethnic or racial group, no one carries around this strange guilt for sins that were committed before you ever born. And I don't understand it. I don't understand where that comes from. I don't understand the biological basis for the spiritual basis for it. Because carrying around collective guilt, racial guilt is actually anti-Christian. It doesn't make any sense at all. And it's a not that I haven't been able to unravel. I mean, it does seem like they're disappearing, just like as a numbers matter. And even saying that is forbidden, which itself is really revealing. I mean, if this were true of, you know, command cheese or Aleutian Islanders or Han Chinese, you know, if they were diminishing in number really strikingly, really quickly over a short period of time, we were like, what the hell is going on with Filipinos? They're not reproducing. Everyone hates them. They're dying. But even to say that about whites is like somehow bad or something. And that tells you that we've all internalized this hate white people thing. You really don't know where that comes from? Well, a great example of that is that if you look at gun deaths, this is how they they bring this down on the desk. They go, oh, there's 50,000 gun deaths a year. When you look at it, it's suicide. It's almost exclusively white male suicide via firearm. And I always said that if you really cared about gun deaths, you would immediately do an intervention into white male suicide. Because that is the primary usage of gun. Do you know as white men have killed themselves personally? Not personally. No, I know a friend who had overdose with opioids. So I guess. I know a lot of them. I probably, I'm several years older than you. But I know a lot. I know like five at least. So yeah, that's that's interesting. Right. So if you cared, if you cared about gun deaths, you would know that the lowest hanging fruit is white male suicide. Right. You would know that you're not going to confiscate people's guns. That would cause social, a lack of social cohesion that none of us even want to think about. All that is fake. The real thing you would go after is gang violence and you would go after white male suicide. If you cared, if you actually cared about gun deaths, you wouldn't point out the occasional tragic school shooting, which is statistically very unlikely. Even though the horrific when they happen, you would say, okay, we have a gun violence problem solved. How are they being used? Okay. Most of the people killing each other with them are gang bears. And then you have white males killing themselves. Let's do an immediate. I mean, it's laughable to imagine this happening in a world that were logical and not driven by hatred. You would see all kinds of interventions, public service announcements happening about white male suicide. It would be one of the biggest issues people talked about. You would say, did you have any idea? Most people don't. Most people think you're lying about the stats when you tell them. Oh, no, half half of the gun deaths that they bring up are suicide and white man at 3.5 times more likely to kill themselves than anyone else. And people with that can't be true. Like, well, you can go. Black women are the most oppressed group in the United States. That is an article of faith for everybody. We hear that literally every day. But the suicide rate among black women is like negligible. Well, nobody, yeah, nobody's ever been able to square the circle of how media imaging suppresses the self esteem of black Americans who have almost no suicide. But it's building up the white self esteem within the whites of the ones killing themselves. Right. There's no, there's no lot. Right. So it's so, I guess that's kind of my point is not to whine about it because I hate whining about anything completely about race. However, it's so illogical. It's so like absurd that it suggests that there's something deeper going on, which is people are kind of happy when whites die. And that's obviously true. Oh, yeah, there's a deep hatred that there's a deep hatred. And it would just be, it would be a lot easier if I weren't white to to note this because you're a white supremacist, if you noted, but even that, it's like stop complaining about people dying because if you complain about it, you're evil or something like that whole formulation is so sick. Yeah. Yeah. You're, they, the framing is not only you can't talk about it, but if you talk about it, then you'll be labeled a white nationalist. You're thinking bro, I'm talking about suicide. I thought you wanted fewer gun deaths. You're telling me that you want fewer gun deaths. And I'm telling you, here's a way to do that. And now you're saying no, that's actually racist to say that that's a way to start. But where does it come from? I guess that's my question is where does that impulse come from? Is it, is it envy? I mean white men have created a lot of overwhelming majority of technological advances, for example, in the 20th century, you know, electricity, the airplane, etc. Is it that that makes people angry? Is it, is there something spiritual going on? Like what is this? And it doesn't even be helpful to us to acknowledge that this is absolutely real. The numbers show it. The mass migration around the world into majority white countries to make the minority white countries clearly driven by hate, obviously. Where's that hate come from? What is that? The ethnics of always hate each other. The Rwandan genocide for me was always a hard thing to wrap my Americanized brain around us. Yes, yes. Because if you're American, your whole world is, there's white people, black people. What you go there? No, no, they know it's so true. The Cambodians hate the Vietnamese and it's high. It's a little right. Hate each other. I remember everyone hates the Chinese. Yeah. And then the Han Chinese hate the other Chinese. Right. Yes. So anywhere you look, there's always been ethnic strife. And I think that that's why the agenda, the anti-human agenda, is to just cram as many different people together as they possibly can, knowing that this will create some kind of strife. So there can't be there can't be order. Right. So if you look at, yes, I'll look at it again, real or metaphorically. Demons are chaos. God is logos. God is order. Yes. Right. So when you look at forces driving chaos, then you can usually say that's the anti-human, that's the demonic element. Because again, the demons don't care who comes up ahead. If the demons could somehow incite a race war, they don't care what side wins. They only care that a lot of people kill each other, that there's a lot of despair, that there's a lot of suffering, that they can harvest a lot of that negative energy. That's all they care about. So then when we talk about these issues, for me, as always challenging because one, you don't want to make people feel persecuted. You don't want to be real depressed. Yes. I totally agree. Can we just pause for a second? I've struggled with this a lot as I've watched the anti-white hate kind of define our country and destroy a lot of people I know. It's hard to talk about not because I care about being called a racist. I'm not a racist. I don't care if they call me that, but because I don't want to inspire self-pity or a sense of persecution people because it's really bad for people. That's exactly right. Right. And then it can add to the tribalism. Totally. Which we don't want. Yeah. You don't want white men thinking, oh boy, they're out to get us and now I agree. So a lot of times you throw a hand up in here and think, how do I even hide in hand these issues? How do you address it? Yes. Because it is an issue, opioid overdose, this aren't issue. And the way that I try to address it in a spiritual way is I try to focus on a general aspirational message. So I get into the weeds on politics. I get into the mud. I'm not claiming to be some great guru or whatever. But if you read me long enough, you know that I generally speaking believe that if you decide to not be a loser, you can live a good life. You're not going to maybe live your dream life. Right. You're not going to be in the Yankees. I was never on the Yankees. I'm not Alex Rodriguez. That's fine. You can you can just accept that you're not going to be that. But if you decide, you know what, I just don't want to be some pathetic loser. Angry all day about politics. Getting fat with my mom who has enabled this behavior. True. And if you read me long enough, you know, like I believe in you. I don't think I'm not going to sell you a lie and tell you that you're going to be anything that you can want to be. because that isn't the way embodiment works. But you can live a good life. And there's a lot to be said for just living a good life. Right. There's a lot to be said for living a nice normal life. Yes. And so for me, instead of focusing on a lot of the tension issues, I do point them out and identify them. But it's always about look, man, it starts with you. The system is great. My dad didn't get a job because of affirmative action. A state police job that was proven when there was a a class action settlement. I can point to real things that have happened. Racialized issues where we were on the receiving end of the oppression. But if that's all you think about is the world is rigged. I can't really do anything now you're given into despair. The world is rigged. It's always been rigged, bro. World where one, you're going to get drafted and thrown into fight in Europe. And the trenches because the French and the English can't get along to the Germans and the Australian hygns are beefing again because the European right. So the timeline is always helpful too at the micro level. The micro level you think, and this is the message I kind of always teaches usually directed towards men is there are a lot of people who are despair monkers and they want you to think that all women are terrible. You're a white man. You're oppressed. Nothing you do matters. Everything is for you're an oppressor. Yeah. Or you're an oppressor. Feel guilty about that. There's a whole different way to spend it. Whereas I just start for the proposition, hey, just decide you don't want to be a loser and take that first stop. So let's let's get specific. I love the way you're seeing this because you're absolutely right. It gets fair to acknowledge what's actually happening. I don't think you should ever lie. It diminishes you to lie. Lying is evil. On the other hand, marinating in it clearly doesn't help. So you're a 19 year old American man. A lot of things are factually speaking stacked against you, but you don't want to be a loser and be mad about politics and fat and living with your mom. It's so nicely described. What do you do and what do you avoid? Yeah, the biggest thing you want to avoid is that enabling pattern of behavior because most of these guys didn't have a dad figure or their dad was kind of some cocked, checked out guy. And so as bad as my childhood wasn't a lot of ways my dad did make me take martial arts when I was getting bullied. He did say, like, well, I mean, you're getting bullied. You got to like do martial arts. And it was just very matter of fact that was because that was the old school kind of masculine thing, which is, I mean, you're a chubby kid, you're getting picked on. You got to learn how to fight and it's going to have to fight people. And that's just the way it's going to be. Yes. Right. That's what I was whereas where's the mom, the feminine wants to nurture, right, which is good, but then that also enables. So everything, if you look at things energetically, the masculine draws boundaries, but then it can become too harsh and unforgiving, right? And that's why God has man and woman, but the woman will enable, oh, baby boy, oh, you're sad. Oh, let me give you some ice cream. Oh, no, you have a bad day, right? And you see, you have to have that duality of energy, that struggle, that creates a complete person or a whole person. So if you're 19, you would just want to have a, you everything starts with you with a piece of paper and a pen and you're just a sessum where your life is, right? And you're and you're asking yourself, I don't know, was I enabled by a overly nurturing mother? Maybe, maybe not. Maybe your problems different. Maybe your dad was a dick and he'd give you love. And so now you struggle with love and you're, you're too harsh, whatever it is. But you just sit down and start assessing where you are in life, realizing that, especially if you're 19, everybody who's old and rich would love to be 19 again. Right? One, you have all the wealth in the world, even if you don't think of it that way. And I was somebody told me that when I was younger, Warren Buffett trace places with you in a second. Here, you can be me as 80 year old billionaire and you can I'll be 19 again with whatever bad position you're in. What would you take to deal every billionaire would you think, well, gays wouldn't take that deal? That's why they're all obsessed with transhumanism. They're trying to figure out a way to get into younger bodies, right? That's what ultimately transhumanism is about is the freedom of mortality, the rejection, God, the rejection, the infinite. So in your own mind, you're thinking, how can I how can I be in a younger body? So one is like, what are you crying about, bro? Right? What do you, what are you crying about? You have time to fix it. It's going to take five years, get on a five year timeline. Everybody's on this short timeline. Right? If you're in a bad position and you've probably seen this with people who when they give him to spare, they're just not thinking of the timeline. So oh, your business failed. Okay, you're probably going to be broke, dude, for a couple of years. You're not going to be like not broke in a day, but you're not going to be broken five years. If you set yourself on the right path or like whatever your problem is, it's just going to take time, bro. It's going to take five years. But start taking immediate action right now in whatever way you can. For me, the easiest thing of the world to do if you're young, you start reading old books. I said, just what books go on the great court, go look up the great books of Western civilization, read up read 100 great books, go to the gym four times a week, call me in a year. You won't call me in a year because you'll be kind of figuring things out, right? So what happens is, and again, I blame movies and I blame narrative. I'm actually a, I learned a lot from the postmodernist even though they're often attacked on the right. The idea of postmodernism and examining narrative structures and how narrative structures control thought. So the narrative structure is you're a man. You find the green hornet ring and you become some kind of superhero, or you're a man and your long lost father is actually half God. And he's going to send you on this hero's journey. And they're going to send you your sword and the shield, right? If you look at mythology and you look at the narrative structure people have, there's even if people don't recognize it, they will not. They listen unconsciously, you believe someone's going to save you, the mentor appears. If you look at the hero with a thousand faces, if you look at the hero journey, you look at all these narrative structures embedded in our unconscious is I'm kind of sitting at home. I'm an a can skywalker on a desert island, orphaned, adopted, whatever the case is, oh, the Jedi is fine me, the Jedi is trained me. And then I go on my journey, the mentor appears, bro, the mentor doesn't appear. That's fake. Okay. So get it out of your mind that the mentor's going to appear and rescue you from your situation. You got to be your own mentor, right? And then once you start from that at a deep level, realizing nobody's coming to save you. And that's fine that should make you afraid. You have to realize that was what's holding you back because you you kept waiting for the great awakening, the great moment to appear. It's not going to happen. You're just going to get older and decay and give an entropy. So you're your own mentor, go read the great books of Western civilization, go to the gym three, four times a week, and then tell me where you are in a year. And by that time, you'll find your path, but you have to believe that you can find the path. Right. And nobody will do that. What are the traps? The stumbling blocks along the way for young men. Thousands, you get somebody pregnant, you lose yourself. You drink. I don't think anyone gets anyone pregnant anymore on one team. Predancies are still happening. I mean, people are still fornicating, even if on our side, the internet, there's more abortions happening. So the and more celibacy and voluntary. But the top guys are having more women. There, there's more involved here, solace, but you want to look at Charles Munger had a good line. Don't race trains or do cocaine, right? The and the message, the sentiment of that was if you're sending a young man on his path, you want to say here are the big things that you don't want to do. You don't want to get a woman, the wrong woman pregnant. You're with her. If she doesn't have an abortion for 20, 25, you are tied now to that person, quantumly, cosmically, and materially and physically for decades now. So you don't want to do that. That's a big problem. You don't want to do that. You don't want to kill yourself. You don't want to drive your car drunk. You don't want to race cars. You don't want to race a train. Can I beat the train? Right? You don't want to jump off cliffs, all 50 feet in the water. You don't know how deep of this. Right? But as glib, and I don't mean to be glib, but that's how much belief I have and young men to know that, hey, there's some guardrails figured out to just start reading books. Go to the gym. Because then what will happen? People are afraid to let things emerge organically. The male brain, and I've seen this with people I know who are incredibly successful, but no kids, because in their brain, they talk about everything that can go wrong. Oh, well, what if I get married? This woman, she divorces me. They're brain spirals. They've created 1,000 new problems that one. You're going to have problems anyway. Right? You're going to have problems anyway. Of course, it's going to happen. What if I started business? I mean, yeah, you're going to have a a payroll problem at some point. You might have to get a line of credit. There are ways to do it. You're going to lose sleep because you might think you might go bankrupt and you might think people are going to make fun of you. And you might feel like, why did I do this? Yes. All of this is going to happen. Who gives a fuck? You know, it's like you wanted to shake these guys. Well, so that you're describing what strikes me as the bigger problem. So the examples that you gave a second ago were all sort of unbridled masculine energy needing, as you said, guardrails, right? Don't drive drunk or off cliffs. I don't see any cliff diving or impregnating going on. I at least in the class of people that I'm around and maybe it, you know, we're from different roles. Maybe that's it. But it seems like young men are afraid. They're too cautious. They have some sort of hormonal imbalance that makes them more female, more, I don't know, less likely to take big risks. Yeah. I can't save them. I tell them to go to church. Their churches, their institutions that help those people. So in terms of my messaging, I always think about who I'm riding for. Yeah. Why am I doing what I'm doing? Why am I wasting my time doing this bullshit? You know, where I get attacked, smeared, called every kind of name, got investigated by Mueller, know that I'm on the regimes like target. What the fuck am I doing? This is stupid. Right. I could just go live a nice, quiet life. Disappear off the face of the earth. Smokes the guards all day. Hang out my kids. Go to Jim. What do I'm doing? Why am I doing this? Right? And the answer is because I'm riding for who I was when I was 19, 2021. Just tell me what to do, bro. Give me the playbook. I'll figure it out. Give me the playbook. I'm not for the guy who I'm so depressed. The world is so rigged. I'm going to go watch an isometric podcast all day because the Jews, the Jews are holding me down. You know, those are not my people. Those are lost souls. And it isn't my spiritual obligation to reach them. That's the obligation of the church. That's the obligations of pastors because I'm not caring enough to reach them. Right. I don't want to hear how you're a sad panda that you're just, right? I'm not the right person for you. There are people who are the right people for you. Go walking to a church. I'm afraid I'll feel awkward. Go to church. It's like, well, what give me a break, dude. At some point with these people, you wonder where how we're enabling them by talking about all the systemic problems, which are real, but realizing, go to a church. That's why pastors exist to nurture you, to kind of put you on the right direction, to deal with your fucking beta cock bullshit. But that's not for me. I'm not here to save your soul. That's the church. The church is out of savor soul. I'm here to take someone who's maybe had kind of fucked up home life, maybe has had a wrong turn in life, but they will do things, but they don't have the knowledge. Right. So I'm thinking, how can I give them knowledge? What do I wish somebody had told me? What's the knowledge you need? What are the pitfalls that you want to avoid? Here you go. Here's a one page piece of paper, file the instructions, and then you're not going to need me because you're the mentor. You're the mentor. Your own mentor has appeared in your own minds. You are your mentor. Right. That's the narrative structure. And then going on your hero's journey. And in your hero's journey, you're going to have peril. Don't tell me what if what if I marry this woman and she divorces me? Well, what if you don't marry her and he ate a car crash and he lose a leg? What are you doing? Worry around like a worry wart? Go join in a knitting circle. Right. Go join a knitting society. Oh, that's called you in the fat. And it used to be kind of an insult. Right. You call somebody a bubble boy or you're like, oh, they're just sitting around chewing the fat like cows with cudd in their mouth. Right. And you're thinking, sure, all these things can happen. And business I've lost sleep, thought we're going to go bankrupt and I ruined my life. Do I have to cash in my retirement account to keep things going? Who gives a shit? Of course you're going to go through that. Right. Of course. But then I know people who had great jobs that just got downsized one day and then they had nothing and now they have to rebuild their life at 50. Right. You think having a business is hard. How about you rebuild your life bankrupt at 50? Right. That's hard. And but like again, it all comes back to like what are you going to do to sit around mop around all day. And there's too much enabling of the moping around behavior. Do you think that but it is a line though. And it's hard to know exactly where it is between sort of ignoring this, you know, the systems that are repressing you, which are real. And then feeling hopeless and whiny and self-pitting because they're like, you need to push back against injustice, but you can't allow the existence of injustice to make you feel, you know, hopeless. People had kids during the Great Depression. Yeah. Right. The Great Depression 20% unemployment rate soup kitchens, men with their dignity, trying to keep their dignity as they can't feed their family. Real problems, man. This shit that we're going through right now isn't good. There are problems that are real. But in the scheme of humanity and the length of humanity, we're not dealing with shit, bro. We're not dealing with anything. Right. Oh, life is so. Are you in line for a soup kitchen? Wondering if your kids are going to starve? Do you have to sell a kid and Cambodia? They can't feed either kids. Right. We can take you other parcel world. And that isn't a way of excusing the excesses of the regime because I fight the regime. I'm a target of the regime. I've been smeared in every kind of publication, right? But that doesn't mean I sit around all day thinking that I can't do anything. You still have to have that. No, that's partly right. Why are you against porn? I was. I think most people who participate porn were molested as kids. So then that puts you downstream of the pedophile cycle of behavior. So for me, I just my heart just breaks that people do it because I went from a somebody, the ego self satisfying, right? This is what the ego wants to do validation and self-satisfication. And you realize that these are broken people and you're participating in the spiritual damage that was done to them and you're spiritually damaging yourself. So it isn't oh, this is saying you're going to go to hell. God's going to strike you down with thunder. It's more your damage. You can sell spiritually when you engage with this material. And that person is even way more damaged. And now you're caught and the cycle of molestation and problems that these people have dealt with. So why in the world would you want to be downstream of that level of trauma, right? That cosmic trauma, get the hell out of that. And you didn't see that before. No, no, because I was just like, I was in culture. We were all groomed. Okay, there was a, you know, grooming is a big term now when everybody blames it on drag queen story or whatever. I watched a documentary on what's stock 99. It was the the redo of what's stock. And there was a a point in there, a subplot. And it was delivered by the documentary filmmaker because I understand propaganda. I know when they're propagandizing, but they're right. It was very much when you were of my era, Gen X. Oh, girl, it's gone wild. Show us your tits. Oh, they're going to mark. propagandizing, but they're right. It was very much when you were of my era, Gen X. Oh, girls gone wild, show us your tits. Oh, they're going to Mardi Gras. Everybody get drunk, show your tits. That's vulgar. And I look at that now as vulgar and disgusting, but that was completely normalized on us. How was thermally do a radio show? Oh, Mary can't actually listen to Olson, they're 14. When do they turn 18? Sexualizing a 14 year old, but it's like with David Foster, Wallis said, does a fish know that it's in water, right? When you're in water, you don't know you're in water. You know, when you're out of the water, right? When you're in water, you don't know, we were all swimming in the sewer, not realizing that we are being groomed to foreign Kate, to sexualize people who are way too young to be sexualized. And that was all being groomed on us. So that just becomes like a normal thing. Oh, yeah, girls go well. Oh, yeah, girl gets shrunk, shows her tits. She probably was just probably the lowest point of her life doing that when the the video is coming and she's sober. But if you don't have a higher awareness, you're just another participant in the back of our carnival of degeneracy, right? But she don't realize it because you're swimming in that filth. And then as I've tried to get out of that sewer and as I work more and more to to sanctify and purify my heart, you realize, Oh, God, how could I watch this? So for me, it didn't even take willpower to not watch it. I just said, how could I, how could I watch that that make my heart says, you can't watch this? And I was like, okay, so so five, six, seven years ago, whatever, I was like, I can't watch this anymore. And that was it. It wasn't a struggle. It was hard. And that's where we talked earlier about the difference between the heart and the mind. And relearning that the heart is its own form of consciousness, its own form of intelligence, the more you live in your heart, the less willpower it takes. It doesn't take willpower to refuse to participate in cycles of trauma when your heart is talking. Because your heart was said, what are we doing? But if it's your mind, you think, Oh, man, I got a few minutes to blow off. I'm kind of bored. Now let's just see what's new. And then of course, it's been proven that the when they watch pornography, you watch worse and worse stuff. You don't start with the national geographic, topless picks of the tribes. And then you end there, you start there and you end it just really sketchy stuff, right? And what so that tells you right there that it's demonic, because if it were satiating, if pornography were satiating, you would say, okay, here's a 70s era, bad movie. Oh, she comes in and she's pretty. And there was a certain at least elegance or art you would be fine ending there. How many people end there? Right? It's a gateway that keeps corrupting the soul. So I'm interested in what you said that you know, it's demonic because it doesn't satisfy you. Right. Explain that. What does that mean? The demons don't want you to have inner peace. The worst problem for the forces of evil for the demons for the negative energy is when you're existing in a state of love and you're existing in a state of flow of light, of being, of lightness. That's the worst thing in the world for the demons because that's how they lose you. They want to, they want to drag you down into the muck as much as they can and take you as low as they can because then you feel like you can't be reached. You can't be helped. You've gone too far. Right. So you once you realize the spiritual component of it too, you think, you motherfucker, I know what you're doing. You know, they give you a wandering eye. So it would it be fair to say according to this principle that if something doesn't satisfy you, that it's bad. If it doesn't say shape, you're probably leaving the realm of the spiritual space that you want to occupy. If it's not satiating. Right. And for other people struggle with different things. For some people, it can be food. For some people, it can be drugs, sex, opioid, yes, sex. Right. So when he kind of sex that doesn't satiate, you doesn't satisfy you, probably not the sex you should be having. Right. It's probably leading you down the bad path. Do you think people were becoming more spiritually aware in the United States? I think that more conversations are being had as more as more people who are friends are not French open these conversations. So I think about it in two ways. One is I know that in my spiritual awakening, such as it is, which I'm still baby in terms of the cosmic timeline is I said, you know, I never believe in God, but you guys showed me the devil is real. Right. I felt the same way. So something's up, bro. I don't know what exactly right. I don't know Jesus Christ is a son of God and he returned. He's a Messiah and that she only path to salvation and that it. Okay, we can have that never that never called to me. That was never where I said, okay, I believe in God and this is a truth by God. Oh, the evil is so over. Obviously, I've been blinded spiritually for some reason. So obviously there's something else going on here that isn't really good. That is so precisely what happened to me that I wonder how many other people that's A and B I wonder if the existence or the overt nature of evil isn't a kind of blessing. Well, I mean, if you go in the spirit, well, they tell you can't have light without dark that this one of the principles I guess of the spirit world is you can't have light without dark and dark and springs people to light. And if you really do believe in God, then and you do really believe in the infinite, you realize that everybody's kind of kind of has a different path to to the light. Well, maybe a better way to put it would be God uses evil to draw people to himself or he lets or it's just what see us Lewis and all the Christian apologetics say, which is that he gave us free will and the table was cast. But on the timeline of God, what might seem like insurmountable suffering to us is completely different. So we don't really know on this world what it means, right? We could say, well, you know, for example, one of the big perplexing problems is the problem of evil, right? The problem of evil, right? And I would say having ventured through the spirit world is that to us as a problem, we should talk about philosophically, but on the spiritual realm, the timeline is so different that the way it would, the way it would even out by God is incomprehensible to our minds. So what we think is why does God allow evil, you know, say, well, because God's on the infinite timeline and what we perceive evil is over in a flash and that there's a sanctification process and people rejoin God. So we're fighting over this only because we don't understand the spirit world and we don't understand the infinite timelines of play. So because of that, what we're kind of fussing over is philosophically distracting us from ourselves. So rather than get into the apologetics, why does God allow evil and this is because free will we're still in mind, right? We're still in mind. And in heart, you say, what am I doing to sanctify my heart? Is my heart full of lost pride, evilness? Did I lose my temper today? Right? Am I getting greedy? Am I trying to take advantage in a business deal? Right? What am I doing to sanctify my heart? So a lot of these intellectual discussions, which are valuable to have. And I've read all the books. It's still a distraction. It's the ego's way of distracting from the heart. So everything about this whole mind fuck world is the ego keeping you away from your heart. So what I try to focus on as much is reawakening the mind, the full consciousness of the human heart in my own human heart. What are the disciplines that you use to achieve that? Well, I say to Jesus prayer a lot because I think it's very humbling. You know, Jesus Christ, Son of God have mercy on me a sinner. And that's the entirety of the prayer. They're called arrow prayers, corporate prayers, because people over think prayers. Right? What do I say in my prayers? What do I say? Well, there's books, you know, can you repeat that? Yeah, as Jesus Christ, Son of God have mercy on me a sinner. And the reason that that has a certain impact on people is because it's a reminder that you do need divine mercy is the reminder of your ego thinking you're such hot shit and you're so important and you're so great. You're such a great man of history. Right? You're so important, right? Because me I struggle with pride. Everybody has a difference in the struggle with I don't struggle floth. I'm ambitious, right? Within the flip side of that as price and I struggle with pride. So then you're reminding yourself I need the divine mercy of I need the divine mercy of God. I need the divine mercy of Christ and having again, seeing it through the veil, you realize how inconsequential our troubles are. So for me, that's just I do that all the time, especially before bad. I'm just reminding myself, okay, I mean, hammer a semi a sinner and not in a judgmental way, but just you know what have I done? And then as you do that, get more reps in, you can catch yourself more because it's all about catching yourself early on. Right? Like your kid gets mad, kids are bickering and they're fighting and you're about to like lose it with the, you know, why are my kids fighting or whatever? It helps grounds you, right? Help somebody you need mercy in this moment because you're weak. Otherwise you wouldn't care. Your kids are like, right, kids are kids. They bicker. Who gives a shit? Right? Well, I care because my ego tells me that there should be more order or they're disturbing my train of thought or whatever, whatever bullshit my ego has got me wrapped up in. So then your mom and stuff not me, I do diversity because what a pathetic creature I have losing my temper because kids are bickering because kids are being kids, right? Like wow, that's how I actually I think I'm so great, but this is pathetic. What a pitiful human being you are, right? But you, but you remind yourself, that's why you need the divine grace and divine love. So we, we each have four kids. My oldest is like 30 years older than your youngest. So I'm done with, uh, with the things that you're doing now. And I often think to myself and say to my wife, man, I'm glad we're not doing that now. We don't have little kids now in this world because it's so hostile to children. I mean, it's like overtly hostile to children. How, how do you, how do you do that? How do you raise children right now thoughtfully to become the kind of people you want them to be? I don't know that I don't know, at least in my own experiences that the world is hostile to kids. I think that that wave is past, but that's still within the media, the media world, the DC world. What I'm seeing now is a resurgence of very involved dads and very involved parents. And there's probably a split where a lot of kids are getting left behind. But I would say I'm seeing way more parents who, who are like way, way more involved and pairing than my parents were probably than yours. I guess no, I'd be more precise pushing weird sex shit on kids, which when I was a kid would have been caused for gunfire. Now it just seems everywhere. Right. Yeah. So the, the resisting the worldly temptations are what we went through to and then realize it Britney Spears on the TV. No, it's right. Right. We, we've had different spiritual fights. We just didn't maybe realize that the, that we are being grown. That's why I say we were groomed. You were groomed. I was groomed. Everybody raised on girls, girls gone while was groomed. Everybody raised on show me your tits. A song, um, you and me, baby ain't nothing, but animals. Let's do it like they do in the Discovery Channel. Very popular song when I was in high school, realizing the music was programming you for fornication, for violence, for drugs. We were groomed as bad or worse when the kids were now. It's just, it finally resonated to us in a way that clicks our constructs on maybe what, what's too far. But we were groomed terribly, which is didn't realize it. Huh. That's a, that's a wise point. And actually there's something kind of comforting about drag time, drag queen story hour. I mean, it's people pissing on each other during Pride March and San Francisco. It's like it's so in your face that you know what it is. Right. So there's, there's a, a new resurgence happening as a result of that. And the the spiritual conflict goes on forever. It does, it doesn't end. So what we do personally is we're very much concerned about the bubble. We could, anybody who tells your kids, anybody who tells you don't show it to your kids, groomer, show it to your kids. Why do you, why, why you tell me not to show it to my kids? I don't like your doors at night. Really? Okay, you're, you're an arb robber. We're, don't show it to my kids. Okay. You know, there's a big shelter, but there's a shelter. Yeah. And your kids should have shelter. It's, it's how you'd have a horse. And everybody's really concerned about peer groups for us, the, the bigger wars are over screen time and how, how much should kids be allowed to watch TV devices, especially handheld devices, which you try to limit, but then you're on a flight and you give the kid eye pad. So though, those are the bigger struggles. What's unfortunate is that the trans mania is primarily hitting the poor people, right? The people who don't have a lot of time who are very tired, who are very stressed and they kind of raise their kids on default. Right? So if you imagine, huh, that it takes a certain amount of leisure time to be politically informed, right? Aristotle even said you shouldn't be involved in politics until you're 35 because you, by that point, maybe you have some leisure time, but before that, you need to live your life and have some kind of achievement, right? So if you're, if you're an intact family, which is becoming more rare, dad and mom both work, they come home tired, processed food diet because we've transitioned away from where when I grew up, we call it people find it offensive. Now I didn't find it offensive, but you call it peasant food or poverty food. We eat beans, ham, hocks and beans, right? Chicken and dumplings, you would eat things that were cooked. You would often cook a home, even if you're poor, you could afford a cook. And now everybody's raised on processed foods and that's having a lot of problems with some people claim seed oils at a problem, but whatever the case is, we know that there's a problem with diet that's happening in health effects. Right? So you eat, are you wake up? You get wound up on a donut coffee. You work a little bit, monster energy drink, a lunch, a process food. By the time you get home, you're exhausted, right? There's your kids and you entrusted your kids to the school. And you don't have all the time in the world to to figure out best parenting practices. Right? You're beat down, man. You're just trying to make it. You're trying to keep your head above water. So the tragedy is that, and it is hitting the rich kids too, because I do have a side point on that. The tragedy is that this really was hitting the poor kids first. So if you go in through the trainee stuff, yeah, if you go through any small town, I saw the gender-bending stuff happening in all these small towns and any kind of small town road trip. And then it percolated up to elite opinion. And then so did the opioids. So remember Susan, the CEO of YouTube who banned conservatives, her kid died of overdose opioids. And her world, because she banned people like me and sensor people like me who were anti that, the people the forces that were working against those compounds. And their mind, oh, it can't happen to me, worthy elite. No, you're not, dude. And she I was wondering if she have self awareness, like what she feels at night in a moment of self awareness, realizing that she created the culture, the killer's son. And for being completely honest, and I don't mind saying that is the truth. She created that culture of the open borders, the drugs coming in, block everybody who's against the open borders, call people who are anti drug cooks, oh, reefer madness, bro. Right. All of that degeneracy has hit the elite now. So they thought this is going to be something to happen to poor white trash to use their terms. Not mine. They're all whatever who cares about them. And now they're realizing they're not immune to their kids are generating now. Their kids are on opioids now. Their kids are doing only fans. Their kids are addicted to pornography. Their their boys are having problems launching and becoming active participants in society. They're they're dealing with the problems too, right? So that so that is the predicament, but that also might be why there is some kind of hope because people are realizing it's their own interest to get things together. Although unfortunately, the ideologues of the left were willing to let communism flourish everywhere and seem to be okay with that. So maybe not. But us on the individual level of the parent level, you want to, we listen to parenting podcast, we're always looking for parenting tips. It's just same like what if you want to get in shape, you listen to jump podcast, right? Because you're called the vein of the habit of the mind on what matters most, which is your kids. So it's always about staying in tune with the trends and being mindful, being mindful of how you're raising them. But fundamentally, you're protecting your children from this horrible secular world. What do you do at school? We do homeschool. We take them to a homeschool cup. So homeschool now is a beautiful, there's a revolution. Thanks to ironically enough COVID. So COVID, the only reason we're having these conversations is because of the COVID lockdowns, which shows that good can emerge from evil. If the COVID lockdowns hadn't happened, nobody would know anything about these schools. Right? People don't think about that. People go all the lockdowns destroy the country. The lockdowns harm the country in many ways, but we would not have known any of these problems were happening in school if people didn't have Zoom school. Right? So Zoom school happens, people start paying attention and then they're pulling their kids out of school. There's more homeschoolers now than there's that because they're finding out what the teachers are actually saying. They're not even learning. You're realizing I'm cinema kids to daycare. Maybe we can find a way to make this work financially for my wife to stay home or maybe we can find some kind of solution. So what became kind of popular as a homeschool co-op, they call them homeschool pod. How does it work? You pull money together and you hire teachers. So let's say your kids run school. There's teachers who want out of the public school system and you have three to five friends and you say, well, why don't we just hire the teacher to teach our kids, right? So it's certainly homeschool. You're making your own school. It sounds good. Yeah, but you do a part time and then you school them at the house too. So the biggest misconception of homeschooling is that you're like little house on the prairie and your kids are in a bench and you're the mom in the front right in the talk. That was never homeschooling. Anyway, homeschooling was always self-directed teaching kids how to teach themselves and then helping them coach them along through the material as a struggle with it. But kids are generally naturally curious and we'll figure things out in their own way. But you're providing them enough structure to make sure that they just don't play outside. I'm embarrassed. I don't know more about the site. Of course, I love the sound of it. But how common is it for friends or neighbors to get together, pool their money and hire a teacher in Austin, Silicon Valley and in certain areas, I wouldn't call it common, but it's not anything that would be way off the beaten path. Are you doing that? We do something similar. Yeah, there was a structure created and we pay, we pay tuition, we pay whatever fees and then there's a nonprofit attached to it. So we donated to the nonprofit. So remember Elon Musk got quote unquote and trouble because they said he gave all this money to a nonprofit but the nonprofit teaches us kids and you're like, well, they teach other kids too, but isn't that where you would want to donate your money? Right? Like if I'm going to donate to a nonprofit, what I want to donate to a homeschool supported charity, right? And so yeah, we are kids do a part time, they do a part time schedule. What are the expenses like as compared to private or Catholic school? It'd be probably, it was certainly cheaper than these hoity-twenty grooming Catholic school or grooming, I mean, private schools. Yeah. It'd be on par with a Catholic school tuition would be working or working. Yeah. Are you satisfied so far with the results? Yeah, we're thrilled. Yeah, we're thrilled. And what we do as, because again, homeschooling isn't what people think, we're still voluntarily tracked by the state. So the state has somebody check in with my wife, they interview the kids and then my kids will take the standardized test to make sure that they're on path with the curriculum, which we're fine with. If school or school, we'd send our kids a public school, if school or hey, here's your course material, here's what you learn, here's how you take, we're still homeschool honestly, but we just, because that's just the way I am, but we don't have a problem with the testing and everything in St. Deology. So we're, we're on track. Our kids take the test that a normal kid would take and then they, they talked to like a liaison who's in teaching and she's a wonderful person and is very helpful. And they just check in with the kids, make sure the kids are okay, which I'm fine with that. Is there any downside to this? I mean, solopside, you know, you never want to say that. So downside, because that means you're hiring your own supply, right? Right. But they, they socialize with other kids, they, there were kids of all age groups. That way, remember, we go to school, you're in a class and you're with people on your own age. And when children talk to people of other ages, they become more advanced with their communication. Yes, that is totally true. So people often think that my oldest daughter is older than she is. No, no, she just spends a lot of time talking to adults and talking to you eighth graders and seventh graders and sixth graders and fifth graders. And it's all a kid appropriate because the model of the co-op or the, they probably don't even call a homeschool club. They call it probably something else. There's probably a different terminology, but as Waldorf face, it's nature based, is based on the wonder and magical childhood. You go in as very much about storytelling and participating with nature. And that's the one that they go to. I have friends who they set up one and it's more tech based. There are a lot of tech guys, you want their kids kind of coding, which I don't think if I really need to learn to code, that plus the coding language, you know, as well, even being, well, with AI, no one needs to learn to know. There's any way, right? But every, but there are people who are trying to find solutions, but the flip side is a lot of parents do want the daycare aspect. So homeschooling, if you don't like your kids, then homeschooling is a very, has, it's a huge downside. Right. Yeah. Because if you don't only kids just send it to public school, I mean, that's not. Yeah. If you don't like your kids, you shall, shall am off. But if you're, they're just sending them to Sidwell and DC or something like that. Right. Exactly. Because you don't like your kids in your ambitious and I'm a world, worldly man. I'm want to be secretary of state like anything. I go be trans. Right. That he's got work to do. Right. And or, you know, overdose or whatever. Right. Yeah. Yeah. The whole point. Yeah. Um, so people becoming more spiritually aware, people looking for alternatives to a dying school system. These are huge positive developments. I think in American society, can you think of any other sense? You believe in optimism and despise despair. Oh, yeah. I mean, more people trying to just do more people are starting their own businesses, more people own guns, more people are awake to the problems, even if the problems are way better than they ever could have imagined. More people are having open dialogue about real, real issues. People have left the grid. Right. 10 years ago, because, you know, my experience with ayahuasca goes way, way, way back at time. But if I talked about that to relatively recently, they'd 5150 me. They say, what a lunatic. Right. And now people like, Oh, I mean, I don't, he's probably delusional or whatever. But it's like, in the conversation, right, which the over 10 window on that has shifted. So there's a lot of good energy being put out to. There's never been a better time. In my opinion, this is why I don't like the despair for men. When I was kid, you couldn't just learn things. You were, you were in a school and then whatever your parents taught you is kind of what you learned. If you're 17, 18 and you want to learn how to start an internet website, e-commerce business, you might not have anything to sell, but you can do that. You can literally learn anything that you would need to know to survive. I didn't know anything about money. I almost went bankrupt at one point because I just didn't understand money. I didn't understand about credit or paying bills on time or how any of this stuff worked. I just didn't know. Right. You didn't have a lot of experience growing up with right. Right. Right. But, but um, you could just learn anything. So if you're actually young man in a hurry or a young woman in a hurry, you can go learn whatever you want. And there's obviously more temptations and other influences, but you can carve out your own path in a way that you couldn't have 40 years ago. 40 years ago, if you're born here born in a town that's probably where you're going to end up, maybe you're the oddball. Right. That didn't happen. We're not getting drafted for the Vietnam War. Right. We, you know, we like to bash the boomers a little bit. I enjoy that too from time to time, but they were drafted in a war in said to Vietnam. I don't know if anybody's ever been caving in Vietnam, but try to walk through a cave as a six foot tall man and imagine that that's what we did. You graduated high school and you were in Vietnam, bro. And that should build crystal as somebody who you're met Romney. Then of course you were fortunate to know crystal not serving Vietnam. The last I checked, you didn't know. Oh, it's not Romney. Yeah. Last I checked, they weren't Vietnam. I mean, those guys loved wars. I would thought they would take that opportunity. Yeah, they they missed their hero's journey. Right. So if you look at if you look at the problems, they're real, but if you look at the problems in a historical context, I would rather live now than the draft air of the Vietnam War. Wouldn't you? Yeah. There were civil rights riots in the 60s. Detroit is burning. Right. That was happening in the 60s. They're crime way to the New York in the 70s. We've we've always kind of have these problems. So it's good to get over our own myopia. And say, oh, it's just this is a human condition, man. This is a human struggle. We're always going to have it. You never win. You never lose because even if you think you're winning, you can have it all taken away. You know, you can drive out. I've made it in life. You can drive out hit a moose. Lose a leg, lose both legs, die. Your kids could get died in a crash. It's never over. Right. But in our in our human brains with the ego, we either go to I'm a winner and I'm in a static place of winning or I'm a loser. Everything is so bad in society. And this is where where I am. So in your own mind, what you want to do is break that narrative arc and realize you're not a winner. You're not loser. You're given point in time and anything could change for the better or the worse. And a moment to do the best you can right now while you're here and keep pushing forward. Amen. So the last thing I'm going to ask you about, and I just want to take a really dark turn if we could, is Epstein done a lot on this. First, give us the overview. What was that? What is the truth of his life and death? And when are the rest of us going to get all the details on this? We will never know the truth about what happened Jeffrey Epstein because it was clearly an intelligence operation. Right. It was clearly a form of blackmail and a form of keeping people confined to the narrative. So the Epstein documents the way they came about was a friend of mine who's a lawyer said I've never seen anything like this. There's this litigation going involved in Jeffrey Epstein and everything is redacted. And this is filed in federal court. And as you know, you don't win was this 2016ish 2017ish. And he said, you won't believe this. You can't do that because if you want a confidential dispute resolution, you can do mediation arbitration. If you're in public court, some litigation, your social security numbers were redacted. But why you're suing and what's alleged is not redacted. Well, yeah, it's a public justice system. Yeah, go do arbitration if you want to private, right, confidential. And he goes, why don't we just file a motion to unseal? And I thought it'd be some like little side project and wouldn't cost so much money being naive because this was so unprecedented that it shouldn't cost a lot of money. It ended up costing 250,000 plus with him giving a break on it. We thought it cost 10 or 20. And the because if you're looking at it through the structure of the way the law is, you would say, this is it. There's no such thing as an easy win and law, but to the extent that there's an easy win, this is low hanging fruit. Let's just go ahead and get these files un-redacted. I won't take that much time or money. Oh, the opposite. The judge ruled against us after sitting on the case for a long time on privacy grounds. There was no, again, that's not how the law works. Law isn't that you have the right to privacy in public litigation. You don't, you give up the right to privacy in public litigation. That shouldn't happen with the go, God, this is more, more than we realized. So let me go, I guess we got to appeal it. So then we file an appeal in the second circuit court of appeals and meanwhile the money is just, and I realized again, and hindsight, I was like, wow, you were naive. You thought there was just going to be some easy win. But I didn't really know what I was getting at it. Right? It's like pulling a tiger by the tail, you're on a little hike and you see something sticking out and you kind of grab it. And next thing, you know, it's a Bengal tiger in a face and you think I didn't, I didn't know that that's what I was grabbing at. And then my own my activity, I didn't realize with the whole Epstein situation was it was going to be a real good. He was still alive at this point. He was still alive. It wasn't an arrested. So this is as last night, you said I told a lot of stories you didn't believe. So this is another important. No, no, I just didn't believe it. You were telling you about your childhood tonight. So this is as last night, you said I told a lot of stores you didn't believe. So this is another important. No, no, I just need to believe it. You were telling about your childhood and I sometimes get self-pitting and I'm like, oh, my life was so hard. And I hear about yours. Okay. Serious. Did that really happen? Right. Right. So this is another unbelievable story. It's like a forest gump thing. How do I get involved with Jeffrey Epstein? Just some random guy on the internet, Twitter. How bizarre. So me and Mark Mendoza was the lawyer. So Rindaza and Mark Rindaza said, Hey, why don't we just get these unsealed? You're always talking about pedophile stuff. This is such an easy one for you. And he goes in the cases interested to me. So I'll cut you a break on fees. We both thought going in that it was going to be something that you could get done for a reasonable amount of money and a reasonable amount of time. And it took years. So we filed a suit and the motion to unseal. And then the judge rules against us. We appealed the second circuit court pills in New York. And then during the during the Trump administration, Epstein is still free, has him arrested a friend of mine, one of the good guys in the intelligence community said, Hey, just so you know, you shouldn't mention Epstein anymore, you're, you're in a real problem. And they go, you got into something really that you didn't know what you were getting into. And I go, okay, what do you want to do? They go, just stand by your in court. That'll work us way through, but you need, you need to not draw attention to this issue or yourself. And I said, okay, that's message received. And this is someone in the bus is credible. Yeah, this is a real in the Intel world. So yeah, this isn't some guy who raised me on Twitter worried about me after a divine vision. Yeah, this is a real, real, real thing. And so I didn't talk about it for about a year. And then what happened is the Miami Herald, Julie Brown filed the same motion to unseal kind of that I had filed and piggybacked on me. And then that's what started break up of the Epstein thing. So then my guy and the intelligence role said, okay, you're green light now. They're not going to kill Julie Brown and the Miami Herald. Everybody's going to talk about it. So let the chips fall where they may. So then I re entered the discourse on it because there you can't kill everybody kind of how they say right. Yeah. You can kill one guy. You can have one guy getting a car crash, but you're not going to go after the Miami Herald or other people. Now, what is very sad to me about the Epstein story is if you look at the timeline and you look at the why Epstein became relevant again. And this isn't Julie Brown, Julie Brown to her credit had the right motives, but Jake Tapper and others didn't. A man by the name of Alexander Acosta was a secretary labor of Donald Trump. So you now have a orange man bad angle because Alexander Acosta was the prosecuting attorney who oversaw the original plea agreement, which F. Re. Epstein, which could only be defined as this we are plea deal defying any kind of logic. And the media now had Trump bad because Acosta's Trump Epstein Trump, the Trump Epstein angle. Right. Now the media suddenly cared or pretended to care about the issue because they could use the Epstein issue to get after Trump. So then every media outlet wanted access to the Epstein files because they were hoping there was a Trump angle too. So then suddenly it became a big deal. So we go up before the second circuit court appeals, Mark Mendoza and Jay woman argue the case. And by now the meter is like turning man. I'm like stressing dude and you're and you're paying for this. They gave me a break on fees, but they would normally charge anybody else that would have been a million dollar legal fee plus the, um, but we had some of us pro bonas, but I was still paying. Oh yeah, I was still sending big checks just because you thought it was interesting. Yeah. And well, and I didn't know it was if I didn't know how big it was going to be. I might have had second thoughts, but the, um, because they did me good on it. I don't want to make it seem like a complaining. This is this is the nature of the American legal system. It's because that's why people go, oh, why don't you see that person? They said something about you. It's like, I don't know why don't I write a check for $3.5 million to litigate a defamation case against somebody because they called me something on the internet. You know, people don't understand that until they're in that world and they realize how much all this stuff costs. My name Harold probably probably spent 2 million on fees. And so they argue the case, the second circuit made it abundantly clear that they were going to unsee the files because there was no way in the world under established law that the file should have been sealed in the first place. And oral argument happens. So clear that they're going to unsee it. I think oral argument happens on Friday and I'm like, all right, this is good. two days later, I've seen his arrested flying back for France. The only reason he was arrested was because the files are going to be unsealed. Because he was told he was not going to be arrested. Right. The mop operation had worked, but for me and more importantly, but for Julie Brown, because I think if it had just been me, they could have just buried the case long enough. They couldn't issue an unpublished opinion that wouldn't have precedent of value because the way it works is a trial court judge is more likely to make up the law against you than an appellate court because an appellate court will have presidential value and apply another cases. So the trial court could have just, they gave me a fake ruling because who cares? It's Mike's son of a bitch. And then the second circuit could have moved it to a shadow docket and ruled against me. But once Julie Brown entered the case, you can't ignore the Miami Herald. Right. I think I'm a big deal, but compared to the Miami Herald, I don't have any legitimacy. at all. Right. And then every other outlet got involved too. So then the regime realized, well, the Epstein stuff is coming out. We better look like we're doing something. And then so Jeffrey Epstein was released a couple of, there was arrested a couple of days after all argument because they realized we have a mess. Now what do we do? So then Epstein gets arrested. And then you want me to keep going as I'm going to. No, I'm actually still bound. to channel Dr. Gene Scott. Get on the telephone. So then they charged Epstein, but a little bit of like legal trivia. I went there for the press conference. I read the indictment. And the indictment was what you would charge someone if you wanted to create a media narrative that you were prosecuting them. But that under the law would be chicken shit stuff. The lowest thing that you could possibly charge him for, but you could say we're going after him. There's a reason they did it this way. They charged him for paying for massages and his New York apartment through, I think, the period of 2014 to 2016 somewhere in the timeline, massages and his apartment. That's all they charged him for, the four cars of the indictment. So why do they only charge him for that? It was a reason. He had a place in New Mexico. He had his island. He had his place in Paris. He had another place I think in West Palm Beach. And if they had charged him for trafficking, the FBI would have had to simultaneously raid every property under a man act. The man act makes it a crime to transport a woman's day lines. Yep. And international too. So he was flying back from Paris and he was flying women models all over the world models, you know, not to diminish what he's doing, but that's with his story. He was flying underage girls and some of age all around the world. But what you would do with the SDNY, which as we know, the SDNY, they go after you got problems because they charged the most aggressive, they're too aggressive. In fact, in how they charge cases, what you would have charged it, if you were concerned with being a prosecutor, you would have charged him under the man act and under the international version of the man act, you would have simultaneously searched and seized every property, taken all the evidence. Instead they arrested him, had a little press conference. It was over massages in New York property. They searched the New York property. What was happening in the island? We don't know. What happened to the island? We don't know because the FBI said we can't search it because nothing that he was charged with concerned. The, because of course the FBI is very concerned now with due process. Yeah. You know, yeah, they're really, you know, we don't want to go over step or lawful authorities. So we can't go raid that island. So they left all these properties undetended. And then that's when the mop operation commenced and they got whatever compromising CDs and DVRs and other information. They got that from the intelligence community got that from all the properties. They asked you to post once like, so this is happening in 2017. No, by the time it came to fruition, yeah, now we're in 1819. Okay. Right. So it would have been Bill Barr, the Republican attorney general his second time as attorney general. He would have been aware of all this, correct? Oh, the, yeah, I'm not sure if Barr was in at the time we'd have to double check him. Whoever his AG would absolutely have been aware of it. And I think it was Bill Barr because Bill Barr is the one who said that he watched footage of Epstein committing suicide. And he knows, but we can't watch the footage of Epstein committing suicide. Bill Barr can, but we can't. That's a little sauce, right? Yeah, right. Bill Barr covered up the murder of Epstein. Well, clearly, right, but I'm just saying like what I like to do, which I found helps me be more persuasive is I will meet you with what you claim, even when I know it's a lie. So I know that Bill Barr is lying, but I would just for the sake of argument, except it is true that Bill Barr saw the video of Epstein killing himself. Well, therefore you would have to explain why you can't release that video or show it to other people. Because if the video exists, the public will clearly have a right to see it or designated trusted intermediaries would. So rather than say, well, Bill Barr is lying, I like to just say, okay, buddy. And by the way, that's the trait of lawyering a lot of police detectives use that too is I'll follow along with your bullshit. And then I'll just start pulling pull on the threads a little bit. So yeah, it would have been Bill Barr. And so Epstein gets charged with the lowest possible conduct that he ever could have been charged with. And all their properties were left unattended. So mop up teams went in there, took whatever they need to take out there. And then Epstein commits suicide. I'm standing in the store. What's to talk about? All gone now. All in nice sight at the ending of the usual suspects. It's like he never existed. What happened to all the evidence? The, I mean, the intelligence apparatus is habit. So we, but we read that, you know, there are hundreds of thousands of hours of video tape from his various properties of that's a fact. That's not a, yeah, that's not something that was in. So where is all that tape? Do you know, vaults, vaults in Washington, D.C. or Fort Knox, wherever Bill Barr had that sent? Yeah, whatever physical location, Bill Barr and whatever five eyes agencies he was working with stored it. They have all that black material on people to this day. And they'll, they'll release it if they need to, but everybody's kind of playing ball. You find out that Bill Gates was there often where the video is where it's the proof. You'll never see that. But Bill Gates will go along with the agenda. Bill Clinton, he'll go along with the agenda. Read Hoffman. He's a very vicious person going after people. and the media gives him a pass even though he was with Epstein. I love, here's what I love about cancel culture, why you know it's not, not sincere. I would support the universal enforcement of cancel culture rules. So if the rule was you did a bad thing in your life and you're kind of beyond the norm, beyond the pale and you're not allowed to acceptable society, if that were universally applied, that would mean Bill Gates is, is not anywhere, right? Bill Clinton would be canceled. Bill Clinton, there's all of this, all this witness testimony about Bill Clinton. Read Hoffman would be canceled. But it's interesting that if you post a bad tweet or a bad video clip out of context or chopped up or even a deep fake or even somebody makes it up. Now you're, you're toxic, you're toxic waste, but everybody get to hang around Epstein and they can still speak of the DNC and their, their holopace and media and propped up. So clearly the media was in on the Epstein stuff because otherwise you would handle Gates to his dying days. Bill Gates would never get on stage without you asking much every Epstein. And we know for a fact that Reid Hoffman who is a totally poised as person, he was a close associate of Epstein's. The Wall Street Journal reported on emails where the Reid Hoffman was trying to introduce people into Epstein's world and read Hoffman's stories. Of course, well, I was trying to raise money for MIT. He's got his own narrative. But yeah, this has all been reported and authenticated by the Wall Street Journal because I would never say anything untrue about Reid Hoffman. That's for sure because they make up stuff to suit people over anyway. Yeah. So you definitely, I think he funded the suit against Trump. He's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's funding all the law fair against people and trying to take people kind of out one by one. And if we had a legitimate media, you would hound him every time. I mean, how many times do people when you were on Fox, your staffers would get hounded for a random post they would make on Twitter. Oh, yeah. Right. Well, they tried to destroy their lives. Yeah. You're trying to go after some staffer over a post that was maybe poorly worded or didn't have sufficient nuance in a on a platform that doesn't allow for it, didn't allow for the time sufficient nuance. But you're like, oh, yeah, we're cool with all these other people though. They're, they're, they're the good guys. And that shows you that we don't have a media. We have propaganda, Alice for the intelligence community and they're been kind of given their marching orders on who's allowed in the discourse and who's allowed to be propped up and who's allowed to get away with things that they got away with. And then all of that seems associates. They're fine. Nobody got damage. How many people's lot reputations were solid? I would give an example of compare what's been done to somebody like Peter Brummalo or Jared Taylor, who I obviously don't agree with a lot of their stuff, but you have to add those qualifiers, unfortunately, but compare them to people who pal the round with Epstein or the Sackler family and how the people billionaire. Yeah. The stock. The people. People. Yeah. And they escape criminal charges are Boeing, which just did a civil fine for all the people they kill because of their cover ups and their crimes. What they get away with. So if you're in a world where you say something offensive, maybe unintentionally, you're you're done at least in terms of how they can't define the discourse and the way they once did, but you're solid forever. You have a scarlet letter on you forever and you have to learn to accept that and overcome it. But you're you're there's a ceiling on you for sure. But you can be a friend with Epstein because the media and the intelligence communities are all working together. So they'll make sure that your life isn't made too difficult for what you did. Are we ever going to know more? Do you think about Epstein? No, by 20 years. I mean, there's that book chaos, which was about MKL, sure on the trolls, man said, someone 50 years when nobody can be damaged and nothing can really be done. We'll learn about the, we'll learn about the truth of it maybe, but there's a great conspiracy theory, which is the government or rather as a meme about conspiracy theories, which they dismiss it as a conspiracy conspiracy theory 20 years ago. Then they admit it, but now they tell you whatever you're accusing them of today as a conspiracy theory and it keeps getting pushed forward. Last question, do you know, the effect of all of this, the evaporation of like recognizable realities made everyone super paranoid. And I have noticed probably to paranoid because it's not helpful to be that paranoid. But do you think that the US government is working aggressively to spread disinformation within opposition media? Do you think there are like lots of feds running around actually? Oh, I think there are all kinds of feds embedded within the right wing movement and the conservative movement. You think that's real. Oh, yeah. People that was the CIA. There was a book, Colintale Pro. You can read the CIA manual on how you disrupt movements, which I read. And what they would do the CIA would do at the time they're doing it to the black Panthers. But now they're doing it to anybody who's deemed Christian or goes to a Catholic church. As they have various tactics. And one tactic they do is they call it stone. What do you call it when you keep talking filibustering? So you'll you have a group and you'll have two different agents put in. One is going to try to fed trap you like they did in Michigan. Oh, we need to do more than just talk. We've talked for too long. It's time to take action. And then that only works on the really desperate people who don't have anything going on, which happened post 9 11 to Muslim kids. If we're being fully honest here, this isn't a new thing happened to us and what was us. It was happening to Muslims and a lot of conservatives didn't really care. Oh, that's true. You guys stopped another terrorist attack. No, they didn't. They found some poor Muslim kid who was lonely, maybe mildly autistic. They planned a whole thing for him where he had non mainstream opinions, but wasn't hurting. And by the way, you're allowed to have non mainstream opinions. In fact, that's the whole point of this country. It's a lot when you'd have non mainstream opinions. Right. So now it's our turn in the barrel. So on the one hand, they'll try to do that with low hang fruit. On the other hand, they'll have people who filibuster and make it so that nothing can really get done. Right. So the more elegant way to disrupt a political movement isn't a fed trap people. It's to run off the clock. So I think, for example, cue the cubed thing, trust the plan. I believe that was intelligence operation done. The reason I think that is because if you go back to 2018, the entire narrative being spread to Maggo world was there's going to be a massive red wave in 2018. We are going to overtake Congress and Trump is going to accomplish all of these things. And millions of people, maybe tens of millions of people believed it. Well, what happened? What happens when you believe that everything is going to be okay and it's being worked on? Well, you don't push. You don't press your guys. You don't register voters. You don't turn out to vote. You don't do all that boring grinding because in your mind, trust the plan. It's all being taken care of. It might look like President Trump is getting rolled by the deep state. But he's really not. This is a faint. And what really is going to happen is all these masks are going to happen. So I believe I have no direct evidence of this, but my personal belief and I think it's a rational one based on the very manuals that the FBI and CIA wrote was I believe that the entire Q and on movement was made by the intelligence community. Do you think that what happened two weeks ago at the debate? Like what was, I mean, there's so many levels. I'm trying to figure out what that was. Everyone is paying attention knew that Biden had some sort of neurological disorder. But the media never admitted it until like four minutes into debate. All of a sudden, the story became this guy's retarded. We got to do something. What was that? I have friends who think that I have friends who believe that the debate was orchestrated by the deep state or Biden's handlers. And that's why it ended up the way it did. I don't believe that. And here's what my belief is that CNN wanted to create a narrative for Trump dodge through the debate with Biden. So they kept imposing more and more onerous terms on Trump. So me and this is why Trump, I have a lot to say about Trump and the way he handled things and I have a lot of problems with Trump. And but I will say that only Trump is Trump. So nobody but Trump would have taken that CNN interview because Trump's magic power, but also his Greek fatal flaw, right? The Greeks would always say a great thing. Yeah. As he subsessed with mainstream media, they help interview these people and talk to them all day, even though they hate him and he gives him ratings. Meanwhile, when he was president, I said, why don't you just talk to the daily caller every day, give them everything? And then everybody has to watch the daily caller, give it to bright barter. Why don't you build the conservative media ecosystem? No, because he's a boomer and he's obsessed with prestige media or what I would call regime media regime propaganda. So anybody else goes, I'm not walking into a CNN ambush. This, the terms of this are stupid. Then the narrative will be Trump want to bait Biden and that's a good narrative they're wrong with. But instead Trump said, oh, you're going to turn off my microphone. Sure. Oh, you're going to make me do this. Okay, sure. Oh, you're going to do this. Sure. Sure. So all of the terms led to the debate having to happen, even though it was a setup. And then Biden shows up. We've known for while he's been sundowning and they had it at night. They should have had it during the day. That was their fault. There was really nothing they could do. They gave him seven days of wrestling and a drug cocktail, but they had to show up. They couldn't have him not show up. And they were hoping maybe he'd have a good night because as you know, people with dementia, sometimes they have a good night. That's right. Sometimes they have a medium night. Biden had a terrible night. But that's the gamble you got to run. So one reason you never despair is the enemy gets a vote. And in this case, Trump was the enemy to the regime. Trump said, okay, sure. I'll show up to your rig thing because I love the media anyway. And Trump already preceded a narrative in Maggo world to explain any failures. The whole thing was rigged anyway. So the narrative was already set that if Trump had a bad night, it was because the debate terms were so unconscionable that he never should have did it, but he did it anyway. So he goes in there, presses the advantage. Biden had a bad night and unusually bad night probably. And I don't think we need to because I don't view the deep state of regime as omniscient. I view them as evil bad faith actors, but they are actually less smart than we are and they're less robust because for people like us, we've been through the crucible so many times and we know we're going to be in the crucible again. We conduct ourselves a little bit differently than they do. You have to remember your speeches from in high school, Julie Caesar and one of the speeches I had to memorize in high school was let me have men about me that are fat, sleek headed men's and one that sleeps at night. Y'on Cassius has a lean and hungry look. You don't want the lean and hungry look people around you, right? We're the lean and hungry people. We're the people that we know that one one misstep, we're in court, dude. We know that the regime will frame us for crimes. So not only are we not doing ethically questionable behavior because boy, then we'd really be giving our neck. That's for sure. We know these motherfuckers are going to frame us anyway. So we're already like, oh my God, I wonder whether we're, we're, we're going to like make up a mommy shit. Whereas all the fat people, the spiritually fat people are so weak and debased because they are the ones cooking everything up that they don't know where their weak sides are, right? So when they're fat world, they're thinking, we'll just put Biden up there. Maybe he has a good night and we luck out if it's a bad night. We'll, we'll be okay, but they didn't realize how bad it could be. Whereas if someone like you were for, because that's also the danger of these people. They're so they don't have any counter narrative. So if they had somebody like you there and me there, we'd have been saying, eh, maybe this isn't a good idea. Because the right, the problem of the right is we're, we, we self-pleased too much. We should self-please maybe a little bit less. The problem of the left is they placed away any kind of opposition view and they allow every crazy in the tent. So for us, we know who the crazies are and we know who the feds are and we know to think in those terms. Whereas if you're on the left, nobody's crazy. Oh, it'll, it'll have no more. She's great. Oh, what was she doing about October 7th? What she's saying? Wait, were she to tell, no, no, no, no, guys, you're not your son. No, no, no, no, no, no, pretend. At least pretend for one day to care. Oh my, oh, now we have a real problem. Whereas with, with us, we're used to having to police ourselves and the people around us. So maybe maybe don't walk into the, the traps or unforced errors that that Biden debate was. So that's a very long way of saying, I don't think the regimes I'm this yet. I don't think that that was a move to take him out. I think that that was pure human group think in action and they thought that they could get Trump to not take the debate because the terms were so rigged. Very smart analysis as, as everything you've said for the past couple hours, but so thank you. My pleasure. My comments. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time, not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it the way that you could actually get information. That's true. It's unintentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. You will have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.