Joe Roman Fung. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. What's going on, Mr. Mayor? I'm so thankful to be here. My pleasure. So first of all, how did this idea even get into your head of running for mayor in LA? To be clear, I never wanted to run for any political office or have anything to do with politicians. What happened was, after spending a year uncovering how my house and my parents' house burned down and my neighbors burned alive. And 7,000 houses burned. And then I realized there's a cover up going on, all the negligence. And I keep posting about it. And I have all the facts. I have all the whistleblowers. I have all the evidence and businesses usual. And I see that nobody is stepping up to run against the mayor who's responsible for this disaster. And so many other disasters. So it became to the point where I got so sick of just being a, as the younger people say in the comments section, a yapper. I felt like I was just yapping. Making these videos, I'm telling the truth. I got a congressional investigation. I went to Washington. I met with everyone possible that I could do as just a citizen. OK, well, game on now. I'm going to go into your headquarters and just take your job and then remove all these toxic entities that are destroying our way of life in Los Angeles. So let's start from the fire. So the narrative was, oh, god, there was a lot of terrible, stupid fake narratives. And one of them was climate change. That was the craziest one. The climate change is causing the fire. Look, I lived in LA for 29, 30 years, whatever it was. And I guess it was, yeah, somewhere around there. Maybe even more, whatever it was. When I lived in LA, fire season happened every year. This is not climate change. This is not some new thing over the last couple of decades. I was evacuated three different times. I used to live in Bel Canyon and my neighbors, three of the homes right across the street from my house, burnt to the ground in 2018. There's always been fires in Los Angeles. But the lack of preparation for the palisades fires was astonishing. The fact that the reservoir was empty was criminal mismanagement. I mean, it was just insanity that everybody knew that we had fires, like massive fires, that it was a dry place. And when the San Ana winds would blow, if something caught fire, it was a real problem. We had known that forever. And when you see all these people that are passing the buck and moving the blame, and then the fund, when they had that big charity thing for the fire. And you found out that hundreds of millions of dollars was raised. You know, if you're looking at it in like a rational person, a rational person would say, oh, this is great. All these people who lost their homes will have some funds from this, and they'll be able to rebuild. And then you find out that the money was given to what was like 108 different NGOs? 200 plus. 200 plus where that money got distributed to these organizations, these supposed nonprofit organizations. And most of that money goes to overhead. And almost nothing goes to the people who lost their homes. sort of rewind to start with what we thought. Right. We were told climate change and with the climate change, because I've spent hours and hours arguing with people that will argue with that. I go, okay, great. The climate changes, right? So we're aware of this dry weather. It hasn't rained. So what should we actually be doing? Should we just say, oh, everybody should burn alive and houses burn down? Or should we clear the dead brush? Should we pre-deploy? Should we make sure that both reservoirs have water in it? So the idea that climate change is the get out of jail, burn everything down. Excuse, it doesn't even add up. So we know that. So let's make a difference. And I want to met with the Chief of the US Forest Service and talk to him for a few hours. This guy, Chief Garcia is one of the most famous fire chiefs from the hot shots. And I quizzed him and he told me this was not a surprise. He said they all have a map. I don't forget the name of this map that it goes to all cities and emergency personnel. They have photos. You look at him. He showed him to me everything is bright red leading up to January 7th. Bright red. They knew this was coming to the point where Chief Garcia had all of his firefighters on the tarmac, kid it up in their helicopters. He said his whole team was standing by their computers because it was so obvious this fire was coming based off of if you want to say climate change because it had not rained. It was record dry. So this idea that they use that it's it's just an excuse. And then the big one that everyone falls forward to this day that is the best propaganda ever is Hurricane wins. We were told, you know, news comes doing the thing and he's saying the winds would come in the hurricane. He lit his hair on fire. There was no hurricane winds in the Pacific Palisades. The max wind speed was 40 miles per hour. And for the first six hours when the helicopter is the initial attack when you put out the the fire, it was max, I think 27 miles per hour. So they got everyone with its unprecedented. And it's hurricane winds. It's climate change. No responsibilities. So now we go to fire aid. This is this was another thing that just woke me up to, you know, we always heard about the homeless NGO scam and the homeless industrial complex, but living as a fire victim and watching all these celebrities go on stage. They actually took fire victims from Alta Dina on stage, whose houses burned down and they raised this hundred million dollars. And as a victim, I'm thinking, okay, you know, we're going to get a few thousand dollars as nice or you know, you break a hundred million up. There should be a grand, you know, even FEMA in these places. When you get that thousand dollar check, it's helpful. You're like, oh, I just lost everything. Every little thousand adds up. So when that happened and nobody I know anywhere got money and sue Pasco from circling the news, a local journalist whose house burned down, she spent months investigating, calling up every single NGO. Who did you give money to which which victim? Nobody got money. And even the law firm that they hired to do the, you know, the cover up for the fire aid, the law firm says in their own little three page document where they're defending fire aid, they say several of the money went directly to fire victims. Why Google just to see because I know the definition of several. I want to see what is Google say several is. It was definitely under 10. You go out of 200 plus NGOs, their own lawyers are saying several gave to fire victims. And then you look at the three that they name like we gave gift cards to victims, which victims, which you were just handing out if you were, but it was that that woke me up to if they stole the money. And if they'll do that to people whose houses just burned down, of course, they're going to do it to our tax money with the homeless industrial zombie complex. So that was a real wake up that put me into, oh, here's where the $25, $30 billion goes. It doesn't go to solving anything or fixing it. It goes to scams. Well, I don't think before doge and before Elon started investigating into a lot of these NGOs, I don't think anybody was really aware. Most people were not aware of how this all works and how there's a whole bureaucracy, like a business that's set up where a bunch of people get paid from this money to essentially make no improvements whatsoever in whatever the problem is, whether it's homelessness. The homelessness is one of the biggest ones in LA because there was $24 plus billion spent on homelessness. And when people, when representatives have tried to do an audit to find out where this money went, Newsom has blocked it. He has vetoed this audit. So it's even worse in the sense that it's not going to just their salaries. There's actual cases now with the DOJ and the fact that they're arresting people who are just stealing $30 million, $20 million, buying bent leaves, mansions in Brentwood. So the idea that it's just going to salaries and people are paying themselves out, that's one, but there's also people just straight up stealing money. And you can't even figure out how they steal it. For instance, this lovely lady came out of my podcast and she created her own charity type thing, the integrity project to expose NGOs because she lives in Westwood. And all of a sudden, one day on her block, and she invested with her husband, I have a nice single family house on this nice, sweet and Westwood. And the old person home, they're kicking all the senior citizens out, what's going on here. And the next thing you know, the buildings on the market for sale, and it's for $11 million, six days later, that building sells to a developer for $27 million. Ends up this NGO wine guard who's one of the top, I think they're at maybe $100 million just this year. They haven't turned in their audit to the feds. It's late right now. But for instance, no one knows why it went from 11 million to 27 million over the weekend in three days. So people pocket that money. Here's the craziest part. Guess who, so the grant, you know, wine guard gets a grant from the city of the state. Guess who owns that building? Not the city or the state, wine guard. So our tax money buys for $20 extra million of property to have it as a homeless housing. Each of these beds, because I think there's maybe only 70 beds in it. It's now six years later, approximately, totally not finished, not done. Construction, this or that, they still get paid as operators. So these NGOs not only get the money for the grants to buy the building, then they get like a million dollars a year to be operators. And here's the best part. There's no mandatory that they have to actually put a body in the beds. So the scam is, like I keep saying, this is a cartel. This is mafia. This is real mafia criminal stuff going on. And the problem is, so one thing I'm so excited to do when I'm mayor and people in the comment section will be like, oh, he's so stupid. You can't do that. I've met with the IRS criminal investigation team three times in LA twice in Washington, DC. And they are so excited for me to be mayor because all they need is one document from each of these NGOs and these grants. And they can open these investigations on fraud. Right now they know the fraud and the crimes are happening. But if the city doesn't hand over the document, an NGO doesn't, they say they can't just open up these cases without that one document. So first week, so first week as mayor, I'm bringing in the criminal investigation team of the IRS. Here's all the NGOs we're working with. I guarantee you 95% of them already just call. And they're like, oh, mayor Pratt, we're good. We're actually going to Seattle. We don't want to work here. because they know someone's coming to stop the cookie jar stealing. And then we'll be like, oh, LA has no money. How you get to do all this stuff. LA has plenty of money that we're just letting our tax money just be stolen and to increase the problem. Homeless since our current mayor, Karen Bass, has joined the city power, she's increased homeless. They referenced numbers. They referenced numbers that it'll be like, oh, we removed 1500 people this year. And she doesn't say, oh, 1500 were removed into the cemetery because they, oh, deed. Not to mention how much tax money we're spending on just keeping zombies alive. I met with firefighters a few days ago at the Hollywood station. And they were telling me the amount of Narcan they go through. So in one night in the, I talked to a MacArthur Park, there fire station, he did 17 overdoses in one night. They're not there. Given the Narcan where the amount of people dying is even more insane right now. Six people are dying a day in the street. And then they say, oh, this is compassionate. These people have rights. No, these people do not have rights for us to just die. We need to protect these people as humans. And again, that's why my whole thing is enforced the law. It is illegal to just be doing fentanyl on the street. So if we come in and we give you mandatory treatment, not jail, if you're not, you know, somebody's we are just straight going to jail for animal abuse. They're torturing animals all day long on Skid Row. The videos that I get sent, once you see them, you can't unsee them. Not to mention now I'm working with all the rescue ones. The ones they text me and they're just like Spencer, we have to stop this in the city knows they call the cops all day long, the cops come and they say, I mean, LAPD's hands are tied. If the mayor and the city attorney, they don't have like enforce a law, they just get away with it. So we're in Mad Max life in Los Angeles. And people like to say, oh, it's not this. I'm from LA. I've grown up and I keep saying, I'm fighting to get LA back to what I grew up. It was beautiful. It's why I wanted to be on a TV show and be famous and be part of Hollywood. It was magical. Not even mentioned Hollywood is now gone. The fact that Hollywood Boulevard should be the greatest tourist attraction in the world. You couldn't pay me right now to go on Hollywood Boulevard. Step on human feces, the smell of pee, inhaling, there's everyone to get a smoke fentanyl on the streets now. It's psycho. So again, why did I once you start digging in and you spend all your life now exposing this because again, they burn my house down. They burn my mom's house down. They put me in the game. And once you the bubbles gone, I just all I have is this energy to stop this. Not to mention now the amount of thousands of messages I get every day from every part of the city sending me photos. There's parents that when they drive to school, all across city, this is not just one unique area. They have to have their kids in the backseat staring at an iPad not to look out the window because methetics will just be having sex on the side of the street. There's just naked people everywhere now. And when I say people naked zombies and the DEA will tell you 90% of these homeless people have a drug problem. We have a drug addict problem. These aren't people that just like missed a paycheck and we need to get them help and get back. This is a drug problem that needs mandatory treatment, not handy people, needles and pipes and saying, oh, here's a million dollar bed. If you're a fentanyl zombie hanging upside down, you don't care about a million dollar or empty bed because you just high, you sober up and you go high again. Over time. I'm pumped up. It's good. It's good to be pumped up. I mean, there's no other explanation of an extensive fraud. There's no way they could be getting that much money from our taxes and have this big of a problem with crime and with homelessness. And it's almost like they want everybody to feel helpless. They want you to feel like there's nothing you do so that it justifies throwing more money at the problem. Pull that article up again. So here it is. This is, this is an LAist. Homelessness deal now under federal investigation. So even in LA's famously overheated real estate market, the profit and quick turnaround on senior housing complex and what's that word? Shev, y'all. Shev, y'all. How do you say that? Shev, y'all, do you know where that is? Neighborhood seems extraordinary. The Senate of the Deal since identified by federal prosecutors as Brentwood landlord and developer Steven Taylor bought the property on Shelby Drive in 2023 for 11.2 million purchase record shows. Okay. So this is exactly what you're talking about. 27.3 million to pay for that acquisition came from taxpayer grant funds authorized by city and state officials according to grant documentations, LA mayor Karen Bass and Governor Newsom touted the purchase as a key tool in the fight against homelessness. The fight against homelessness that they're losing. The deal called for Taylor's involvement to be kept secret according to a confidentiality clause included in the purchase contract obtained through a public records request that changed last month when federal authorities announced criminal charges against Taylor. These accused of submitting fraudulent documents to borrow money for private lender from private lenders when he bought this end or end other properties. So news conference, regions, top federal prosecutor bill, a say, a say, a say, a sayly. Said the investigation is ongoing. Taylor was arrested in August when the case was under seal and pleaded not guilty court record show. It's the first of the two known criminal cases brought so far by the federal task force a sayly assembled in April to investigate fraud and corruption around the use of billions of dollars earmarked to combat homelessness in Southern California. These people are just bucking ears. They're just bucking ears. This is just a gigantic criminal enterprise that exists under this guise of, you know, being kind. Like so that case only exists because of that mom's mantra, spent it 7,500 of her own public records request on that senior citizen home that and then the FBI came. She started posting it. FBI knocked on her door and said, can we meet with you and she gave them all of her files. So it's back to what I was saying. The if Ed's wouldn't even got that story. If this woman Samantha from the integrity project didn't do 7,000 public records or Chris and build this case on her own because she was what's going on in my next door to her neighbor. This episode is brought to you by ketone IQ, the demands on my time, energy and focus arguments. So when I need my brain to lock in for hours and hours and fire at its fastest, most alert state. I'm taking ketone IQ. It's an energy shot powered by this little miracle molecule that your body already naturally makes and your brain especially loves ketones. I've been talking about ketones for over a decade. And this company's finally figured out how to put them in a bottle. When I take ketone IQ, I drop right into a state of laser like focus and sustained mental clarity, whether I'm podcasting, training in the gym or just want to show up locked in when it matters. The difference is night and day with ketone IQ. Visit ketone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order or find ketone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. Plus they have a 60 day money back guarantee. That's how confident they are that you're going to love the increased focus you get from ketone IQ. Well, this has got to be just one piece of the puzzle. That's 30 million. Yeah, 25 plus billion dollars. So this is so this is an extensive coordinated effort to siphon money. And again, there's plenty of money to stop homelessness. Karen Bass will tell you let's use her low number and made up number. They go around and they count. They drive this a real thing. They drive around and they do the homeless count. You can volunteer and you just count. I go wonder. So that's how they do it. Yes. They just had a count recently. So the count supposedly is, let's say 45,000. The Rand Corporation will say that count is 30% low. I'll say that counts 100% low. even so. Let's say there's 100,000 homeless people in Los Angeles. 20 billion dollars. Okay. That's California. Let's bring it down to in the last year to a couple billion dollars. We can't get people off the street with that much money. Just today this DSA City Council member was doing a video. She's bragging about, oh, I just secured $16 million grant. I love it. I use the grant. I just got $16 million more of our tax money. She is putting in little tiny homes next to somebody, just next to a normal street where again, this shouldn't be where that is. And it's housing approximately, I say, 60 people or whatever. It was a quarter million dollars per person that they're bragging about. $250,000 a person can get anybody sober. A nice little condo or apartment for a year, potentially whatever job tools you need. So this idea that takes a quarter million dollars to put a tiny, it's everyone's getting a cut. It's like, again, it's like the mafia. Who's the bunch of things going on? There's a bunch of employees that are getting paid. Getting paid substantial amounts of money. My friend Coli on the war found this out about San Francisco. He went up to San Francisco. He saw this homelessness and he's a lawyer, but he's also, he doesn't know what's going on over there. He's like, wow, what's going on? Do they need more money? He's like, no. No, no, no, no, no. What's going on is they're actually incentivized to have more homeless people. Because the more homeless people, the bigger the bureaucracy grows. The bigger you can have your homeless foundation, your homeless task force, whatever it is. And these people are making quarter million dollars a year plus, which is insane. And he showed the list of the salaries of all these people. Like, how are you getting paid when the problem keeps getting worse? And all you're doing is hiring more people and they're getting paid more money and more projects and more grants and more homelessness. And it's not getting any better, but the money keeps coming in. So you're incentivized to keep the problem and increase it. Yes. More money. It's a business. Right. And people always talk, I grew up and I had it was well where the military industrial complex, but even with that, they tracked the bombs and the fighter jets. It's even crazy because there's no, I think we serve these, the words serve and cared for. They don't track results. They say, oh, we house 1400 people for a night, two nights. You know, it's not like we're getting people have bracelets and we're tracking them and they're getting air tags. We have no idea what's going on. So again, I keep saying as mayor, I'll enforce the loss because you cannot be a crazed drug out of Exambi just running a muck naked on the street. That is why I think God, our amazing Democrats in California made this year. SB 43. And that means if you can't manage your own mental state, you can come in and have a hold the cycle for 72 hours. And if it seems like, oh, this person needs real treatment, it can go to 45 days. And then it can go up to a year conservatorship. And as mayor, what I keep telling people is once you start enforcing a lot, first off, people who just want to do drugs and live on the streets, they will leave LA because they'll see, oh, this mayor is not playing around. We need to go somewhere else or they're so crazy and we're going to help them get medical treatment or they're one of these dog abusing type people. And I'm going to put them under the jail to the point where once they get from under the jail somehow, if they ever get out, they will never come back to LA because now they're been under the jail and they're going to go under two times more till they end up in prison because you abuse animals. Once again, once you see what I've seen, we're talking, they're stapling dogs, eyes closed. I mean, it's insane. The shelters alone where it's the city is doing mass murder because they're not giving these people enough funding. And I'm convinced now they must make money off of euthanizing. So there's the street issue with the zombies abusing dogs. And then the city just mass murdering dogs because they're not getting the proper funding and facilities and they're not spaying and neutering and enforcing all the laws to keep street breeders from just flooding the streets with the dogs. So back to you and for so long, and this isn't impossible. I've met with a lot of people that have real estate in Los Angeles and they have real estate in San Francisco. And Mayor Laurie came in and he started enforcing the law and just saying, you can't do this. And he is cleaned up the city pretty well. You know, there's obviously people that say he's not doing enough. And again, I'm sorry. What's it is? San Francisco. And so he took the call from the feds and he said, I'm going to do this. And he's doing a solid job. Again, I'm going whole next level because I'm not concerned about optics. I'm not concerned about, oh, Spencer's doing this. He's so mean. No, what's mean is letting people live on the street in human poop and dying on the street. And these people I run against, they're all the same. They go, oh, we need more housing. We need more affordable housing. We need more beds. This isn't working. They just keep doubly down. Well, that's a false narrative. Yeah, everybody does. It's not a housing problem. It's not what it is. It's a drug abuse and mental health problem. That's all it is. It's not a housing problem. That's a flat out lie. And anybody who says that should be shamed. When they say, we need more affordable housing. You're fucking lying. And you're part of the problem. If you're saying it's just an affordable housing problem, that means either you are a part of the propaganda narrative and you've been told to say this or you're in on it. 100%. 100%. At this point, it's fucking nuts. Skid Row is 50 blocks. It can't even be called Skid Row anymore. It's called Los Angeles. Where every community, before my house burned down in the palaces, my wife was ready to move because every morning, front of Palisades Elementary, that then burned down and across street at my sons preschool, a Methodist, there was a lady cleaning her private parts in front of kids at 745 in the morning. You call LAPD, they pull up and they go, you don't know more because they can't enforce all. She go around the corner and she go number two in front of Joe's barbershop. I would know because I had to step over the number two because I'd always park right near Joe's barbershop. So it's not Skid Row. It's everywhere. So the police are told not to do anything about it. Is that what it is? If you don't enforce a law, what are they going to do? So this comes down from the mayor. Of course. And the mayor and the city attorney, if the mayor is not telling the city attorney to prosecute all his misdemeanors, put these people in mandatory hold. If you're cleaning your private parts in front of kids and you're a normal citizen, you are going to jail. Right. You're going to get me on the citizens app as a sex offender. The consequences for zombie people, they don't have them. That's crazy. It's not fair for all the normal tax paying people in Los Angeles that we have to abide by laws. And then there's a whole class is like anarchy. It's like a it's psycho. It's so weird to see, you know, because I lived in LA for so long. And when I first moved there in the 90s, there was nothing like this. It was it was nice. You know, I mean, it was a lot of traffic, but that was it. There was some crime, but it wasn't that bad. And everything just keeps getting worse and worse and worse. And it it didn't seem really bad until well, Skid Row was always bad. And Skid Row was bad on purpose. So for people that don't know and we we looked into this because we were, well, I found out about Skid Row, I knew it existed, but I found out about it when we were filming fear factor. So one day, because we filmed a lot of downtown LA and a lot of these abandoned warehouses and buildings. And we were in one of these warehouses and we left the set and I drove home and I took a wrong turn. And I went down near the outskirts of Skid Row. And it's hard to believe that it's real if you haven't seen it. When you're talking just blocks and blocks and blocks where there's nothing but homeless people, just people on the streets, camped out wandering through the streets. No cars driving whatsoever, garbage everywhere. And the idea that that's never been cleaned up is fucking insane. So what we found out is that that was an area a long time ago where they started moving people. I don't know when was this. This is the Jerome Hotel, right? That's what we talked about. That's what it was. So there was a documentary on the Jerome Hotel. And when we looked into it, it turns out that what they would do is they would find vagrants, which is the old school term for it. Rome Hotel and when we looked into it it turns out that what they would do is they would find vagrants which is the old school term for it and they'd find them in Beverly Hills or Hollywood and they would just move them to downtown LA to skid row and leave them there and keep them there. The idea was to keep them there they had food there for them, they had kitchens, they let them camp out on the street just stay here and it ruined all Cecil the Cecil Hotel that's right. So this is where they, so Cecil Hotel was like this beautiful hotel that existed in downtown LA and now it's just like it's in Zombieland and the whole area is filled with fucking just everything around it is homeless like the sheer volume of it is impossible to describe unless you go there and see it and the fact that that's never been addressed that no one does anything about it and it's it's gotten to 50 entire blocks of nothing but homeless people no businesses no nothing nothing's functioning it's all just taken over by zombies. I went to USC and I lived in a loft on skid row at the top of the old bank district so in 2003 that was my street that would pull in and park very good deal that's why I was like this is I got a tire penthouse the way you know I didn't get you know I was 20 wide it was so cheap but so I've seen the progression to the point where it's insane and again this is fixable there's so much money we already paying for it right these people in charge don't want to fix it's clear and they'll continue doubling down they need somebody to come and say oh we're done with this and that's why I'm excited to actually be a mayor that's in these streets and the here's what they keep saying oh you can't do this because the city council they're all in on it you know 90% of them because they have four of these socialist DSA members on the city council that actually want to destroy our way of life and last why do you think they want to do that because they're socialists go on the DSA democratic socialist of America's website and they're not Democrats they hate Democrats they use the word to hide their true agenda of socialism so they want to keep taking as much of our tax money and exact the main lady I was talking about that 60 minutes she's one of these DSA people she's bragging about taking 16 million dollars of our tax money to give 40 plus people or 50 people 250,000 each to live in a tiny home that is not a working solution we need to have a plan to get these people back into society not bankroll an entire existence of Los Angeles where we're like oh you can just be a drug addict and we're going to pay for you because yeah this is the problem with that narrative that the rich people aren't paying enough and this is one of the things that I've seen progressive podcasters talk about the wealth tax and they were talking about imposing a wealth tax on billionaires and they'll like stop being greedy pay your fair share like what is your fair share and where is it going like if you could show me that an increase in taxes would fix all the problems I said this when I live there I wouldn't mind paying more taxes if they fixed everything but it doesn't seem like it fixes anything not one thing gets fixed and they keep asking for more money which is crazy the solution is cut it all off one of the things that Texas has no state taxes there's no state taxes there's you don't pay state taxes in Texas and California you pay 14 percent so they're incentivized to take that money and do with it whatever they want and so the more they can come up with like building tiny homes or whatever the fuck it is it's just incentives for them to siphon money and again as mayor I want to have full accountability and transparency where that's what everybody that's paying if there's a lot of good people that are fine with paying as much tax they want if you're helping people get off the street if the lights are less cruel and safe all this is so clean so we can track every single dollar and make sure that there's no waste and abuse and with that type of live dash for a not track it with these weird data I'm talking anyone can understand this money goes here and it right we're talking real a county they don't want to do this because everyone's eating everyone's getting a cut all these people are living off of the scam so you need to come in a really just said no more of this well so let's talk real world practical application so you get into office now you have all these council members that these democratic socialist people how do you handle that what do you do how do you keep them from blocking all these things you're trying to do so that is what excites me because there's never been a mayor that comes in and literally goes to each of their constituents of these districts for instance this DSA member wants to keep giving the fentanyl needles and the pipes then I go to that district I have a press conference I bring everybody I say this so and so wants to keep these zombies going number two and having sex in front of your kids and put the the heat on the city council members right now they care about their jobs they get 238,000 a year salary they get not even including their entourage then they get you know our grants and our tax money for all their little scams they're running so they actually want those jobs if a mayor comes in and it's like oh we're gonna I'm gonna put the heat on each one of you because right now the mayor care and pass isn't calling out each district in their failures this constituents the taxpayers need somebody to come in and expose each of these districts and go into their communities be like this is what you're voting for so at least at the next election they're out so then once they start feeling the pressure somebody on their neck they're gonna start like oh I don't want I want to keep my job I like this power but there's been a concerted effort to put those people in the government right and you know a lot of people point to George Soros and he's one of them and his open society foundation is one of the people that likes to do that particularly for very progressive prosecutors and d.A.'s but it's there's more than just him there's a there's a whole machine behind it and this is what I don't understand because if you wanted to destroy a city if you wanted to destroy a society you would do it exactly the way they're doing it so like what is their incentive and why are they doing it this way they want to destroy it to then rebuild it in their vision the second my town burned down and it's all dirt who's coming in with the ideas oh we got a hundred million for affordable housing we're gonna do this they have a plan they have a vision that's not gonna work but they have their utopia that they would love to then rebuild how do you say it's not gonna work like what's gonna stop them from doing this socialism is failed everywhere I say it's certainly gonna fail oh but what's to stop them from brewing the palisades well I did I stopped them they can say that s be 79 or whatever you know housing thing was never gonna apply to palisades but after me attacking it all day for weeks they added like 13 notes and made the palisades a fire hazard area where you couldn't build high density because what they do there's a new state law that just got passed and if you're again these aren't exact all the yimby's are gonna go nuts I'm saying it wrong to yimby you're something about your backyard now my who knows I don't you know there I have to block them usually on social media but I they have a vision that everything in California and Los Angeles should be high density how then we need to build these seven nine story structures to have more affordable housing so they want to get rid of single-family homes and put seven story buildings on so the nimby's not in not in my backyard they they fight these people on on x so you know to be honest I'm not either of them they try to I'm fine with more housing but I also want people to have single-family homes and I think the fact that we lost the idea where we can't fight for the the California dream to have a front yard would grass and it's gotten so expensive and possible that should be the problem not that oh we've given up nobody should ever get that we need to build these seven story prison like structures and give anyone who can't afford just a box to live in let's fight to get the California where people had a front yard and grass also insane to try to do that with the pal says because the pal says it's always been a wealthy neighborhood where people the lot of money spent a lot of money and also paid a lot of money in taxes and had these beautiful homes and the idea that you're gonna take that over with low income housing well those people are gonna move out of there and there goes the tax money from those people not only that those people lost their homes their homes were taken from them by the fire and that's not fair it's it's not fair at all that you would just do that it doesn't make any sense I like to use the word stolen the houses were stolen from all these well I'd misconception though because I'm from the palisades and I grew up the palisades just became this wealthy or wealthier you know famous people in the last let's say 10 years but growing up that's it really yeah like 10 years where we're talking big you know 40 million dollar type big houses like when I grew up it was always like that it was nice but you know lawyers and doctor you know not Silicon Valley and we'll be you know hardworking people pass these houses down generation so there were nice houses but you know your great grandfather probably passed the house down and you know my dad's a dentist he came in he was a surfing dentist and was able to get a house in the palisades that's a beautiful area it's it's gorgeous area amazing weather so and the people should know that us an area bigger than the size of Manhattan burnt to the ground so let's go back let's do the fire because that that's a great we have even you know we just touched on it but nobody's really talked about what happened how this fire started you know why we're on the fire so people think about the palisades fire and they go oh January 7th well what happened the fire for January 7th actually started on New Year's Eve so there's a case right now it's kind of falling through the cracks it it may not go forward there's arson cases supposedly allegedly this guy litifier at New Year's Eve with a lighter or cigarette and there was an 8 acre fire now according to witness testament it's about 30 people it saw fireworks go into this site called a lockman school rock so at New Year's Eve 8 acre fire starts LAFD responds but the issue of people don't understand when they respond they can't come up there with heavy dozer so dozer like a bulldozer has a rake types thing on the front and they clear around the fire and they make a fire break even when the fire is ideally you'd want the fire break before which because of California state parks and plant over people policies we don't have fire breaks so dead fuels dead brush has been growing around lots of communities for 50 60 years so right now the palisades burned down but what's next is Brentwood Hollywood Hollywood Hills, Sunland to Hanga what else Belair all these are going I'm sorry people you live here they're all going to burn down if we don't come in here make fire breaks up 300 feet because when I met with chief Bobby Garcia and I asked them about fire breaks the purpose of the fire break is to give firefighters a chance to dig in and when they drop the retardant if there's not a 300 foot break then then all the return just falls through the different levels of the foliage and it doesn't make a moat so when if you have a break it creates a moat type situation and all the firefighters have a chance to get up their response so back to January 1st they couldn't bring their dozers up we now have text messages because again I'm one of the lead plaintiffs suing the city L.A. L.A. D. W.P. and the state of California state parks so I have all the text message public now but we have the text from the park rangers the L.A.F.D. and they're joking about of course I'm not bringing any dozers I know the rule you know protected plants keep in mind I never knew about this plant is called milk vech nobody respectfully cares about milk vech but somebody in the environmental world cares more about milk vech than 12 people burning alive because the plant that was protected is the reason pretty much these people burned alive so they do their best you know L.A.F.D. puts it out but now we know that the fire was still smoldering we have hiking footage of the next day and the day after in the state park to hang a state park hikers tourists we have a guy lived down the street of course he had his own drone that I not only a regular journey a thermal in imaging drone so the whole hillside is just smoking and we now have a firefighter pike on his subpoena video he says that he clearly saw smoldering pockets of coal that he didn't want to touch and he informed his chief hey we can't pull the hoses and the chief said pull the hoses not just pike multiple firefighters have now said that it was all smoking but why would they pull the hoses after meeting with so many fire fighters since I've realized the fire department is so understaffed so underfunded they're operating a fire from the 1960s with 50% more calls now 80% of them are for zombies to overdose 30% of the fires are zombie encampment fires so to me now I'm trying to get in that chief I spoke with that chief on the phone and in my mind it's a budget thing everything's just like oh we don't have you know clocks tick in we don't have the money to stay up here with the hoses because three years earlier the same area in the highlands think they left the hoses up in the palaces for 18 months you leave the hoses up because it stays hot and they have them up they pull them the next case I think it's a funding thing I mean the chief chief Crowley who mayor bass fired in retaliation for telling the truth seven weeks before the palaces fire she wrote a memo to Karen Bass and said I am dangerously underfunded I cannot keep Angelino safe what is mayor bass do cuts another 17 million from the fire department so in my mind the chief's like I can't I don't have the money to leave guys up here we got to go so as anyone asked her what was her justification for the cuts well the city's broke the city has no money but how do they have so much money to buy homes and homeless shelters and spend all that money here's the best part I've now found out since then there was 400 million dollars just in an account that they hadn't even touched for homeless and literally at the time she cut the 17 million there's 400 million that right now is still there that they haven't used allocated 400 million so it's they got over the zombies not for the tax paying citizens public safety not to mention back to the taxpayers the palisades probably is largely at the time of the fire was probably the most money in taxes was going to the city from the palisades right so you don't back to back to lockman so they leave because if you listen there test my the state park rangers say oh we got this we'll keep an eye on this da da da da da in the subpoena depositions they asked one of the state park rangers well did you see the small during hill they say oh yeah what you do oh it took a photo what you do at the photo nothing what do you mean well I'm not a firefighter so the state parks oh manual says they're so so close this park to make sure it's not a dangerous condition obviously and a monitor it to they close the state park no worse yes what the state park rangers asked the firefighters to do and there's photos it's mind boggling they asked the firefighters to take dead brush and fuel and they carry it and they put it over the fire break from a day earlier around where they made the fire break around that january first they take the dead bushes and they cover up the fire break there's photos of it it's the craziest thing you ever want because they didn't want people to go on the wrong trails because they look like hiking trails now so they take if you wanted to be cynical do you think that the having this four hundred million dollars and keeping it in there and keeping funneling money into homelessness and not into the fire department is simply because the fire department is not profitable you can't siphon money off of the fire department the fire department basically just goes to fight fires it goes to equipment people salaries maintaining the fire departments it you can't steal that money you want to know how sick it is right now the fire department LFD their union all the members huh you're like choked up I feel so because I met with these you know keep meeting with these guys and you hear from their heart you're like us so heavy they had to take their own money to get on ballot measure a million dollars they all pulled it together to get a ballot measure this coming election to get a half cent on sales tax in LA so that they could have money to fund actual things they need to keep a half a cent on all that but the point is that they need to go out of their own pocket to get a ballot measure because they know they will never get funded by the city to keep Angelina safe that they got to go out of it and make it only one way to look at it you you would look at it like well we'll be the logical reason why they would allocate so much money towards homelessness and so little towards the fire department when the fire department is you know I've said this before but if you want to talk about like socialism that works the fire department is socialism that works if you really care about socialism and that's the thing you really believe in there's certain aspects of socialism that are applicable in a healthy community one of them is the fire department that your money should go we should pull some of our taxes to go to make sure that we're all protected and the fire department doesn't just protect the rich people protects all people fires break out the fire department comes in regardless whether you have any money or not we all pull our money together for the fire department it makes sense but if it's that you can't steal that money right so there's no way you can fit the homelessness is it's vague it's weird you can hide it it's like you're counting bodies on a street a one two three let's write five thousand like you don't have like real accounting these people because it's okay i think but fire department you know the employees you know the fire department you know where the trucks are you know where everything is you can't steal that money but that homeless budget boy there's a lot of wiggle room in that homeless budget and if you wanted to be cynical you would say that's why they fall they fund the fire department so little and they fund the homeless so much well also these dsa socialist they don't want to fund the fire department they don't want to fund the the police market they want these type of entities to be defunded they don't want them exist it's on what do they expect when fires happen to let it right now they want things just to burn go if you look around the state fuck do these people get an office like who's voting for them they're tricky they have these ground teams and they go around they got a real ground game and they go knock on old people's doors and they say oh we're Democrats we help them they have nice words and they got a strong like in LA I think there's five thousand at least members that can hit the street whereas a normal you know for instance Spencer Pratt right for me i don't have five thousand people on deck to go knock on doors and not to mention they're funded they have a hundred thousand plus members across the us they have outside entities to give them money and again they're sneaky if you go watch on youtube videos they talk so much SHIT about Democrats repug they hate all these people so they don't want either party they want them here's the craziest part this should be legal right right now the one who's running against me their Democrat you know socialist champagne queen she when you sign up with the dsa you sign it like a contract to co-govern with the dsa how is it legal when you are yes wait make explain that so when you become you get like your dsa member so right now she's a city council member on the dsa gives you an endorsement you sign a contract with them to co-govern so right now she's not representing her district as an american citizen of Los Angeles she's representing the democrat socialist of america yes wow that should be co-govern that should be like i mean illegal and so they can just go full ham with all these radical ideas yeah and their idea is to just come in take all of our tax money and keep trying to invent this they have like for instance that lady has had six years in charge of her city council her thousands of her constituents message me photos it looks like again mad max in her area so we're gonna put her in charge the only thing worse actually than the cuban communist karen bas is actually a socialist dsa so i'm running against worse and worse it's it's truly it's karen bas running for reelection yeah that's why i stepped in when i saw her announce i was like oh no you don't get to burn my house down to people like what is what is the general population like what how i think most people have jobs and families and they're busy they're very busy so it's very difficult to be completely informed about all this what is the general perception of karen bas like what is her approval rating in los angeles so she has the record lowest approval rating in the history right now so ucella just said a poll about a week ago i'm number two to karen bas she has approximately 20 something percent i think i have 13 percent with 40 percent undecided those 40 percent i keep saying those are my voters those are people that are fed up they know they're not voting for karen bas they just don't know there's a guy named spencer pratt that's saying when you common sense we need to clean these streets no more fentanyl at the park parents need that fuel comfortable taking their kids to school without seeing met zombies having sex on the side of the street we're talking common sense this is not political what i'm running on not to mention the mayor is a non-partisan race there's no letters on it for a reason the mayor is supposed to represent all of los angeles period it's not up you'll never get me ever doing these performative politics talking about national issues doing the bait and switch stuff where oh talking about over here why i destroy your actual local government that's the problem everyone gets caught up in the media and they follow what's going on on different states and different politics and the in the federal government when the people that really affect your life who are destroying your way of life are your local government your mayor your city council your fire commission your police commission when i'm mayor i'm wiping out this fire commission we're putting actual experts that know what they're talking about not these rando political pointing lunatics same with the police the commission you need to have people that pride themselves and law enforcement and one accountability and what the best from the police department you know the police department is the lowest it's been in 30 years in los angeles and here's my favorite thing terms of staff yeah it's term of police officers 30 years 30 years here's the best part they'll tell you the mayor said crime is down i have truly because i spend all day long it's reading dms read it's down in terms of it's reporting thank you every message i get they say call 911 you'll be on hold for god knows how long if they ever pick up if it's literally not like somebody's getting shot at that moment you know if you're trying to report crime or this they're not coming nobody's filing it they don't have the staff to be doing that so the real crime numbers are so insane not to mention karen bas will brag about homicides or down first off that's a national she taking credit for the whole united states down but i even have another angle on that i'd have to go probably some emergency hospitals but i think los angeles has such good trauma nurses and trauma doctors the amount of stabbings and shootings they probably keep people alive that's the real number you know maybe 30 years ago before we were so good with quick clot and you know and you know god knows we have so much stuff now right that keeps people alive just on the metro alone the stabbings are everything is double last year so these people are living but everyone's getting stabbed ever i keep joking that everyone love that guy in New York mom nami or whatever his name is because he said everything's gonna be free was mayor on on the metro's the los angels mayor pratt will make sure you're gonna be free from stabbings so there you go you're welcome yeah that's a that's a good point it's like just because the actual murders are down it doesn't mean that the actual violence is down new analysis by la city controller says that at least five hundred and thirteen million meant to help homeless went unspent this was just twenty four that's about four hundred plus and twenty five also good lord yeah the four hundred is for sure like and just last where's that money go just last week the federal government paused a four hundred million dollar payment that was coming because they said all these federal audits aren't you're not showing the book so just the money is just coming and that's we're just talking LA which is the epicenter of the whole state of california you know all this fraud that you keep hearing about everything it all comes from LA and then goes out to california it's like LA is the death star you know and that's why i'm coming in Luke Skywalker i'm like well nix surely started doing investigations into all sorts of other fraud that's all around los angeles with hospices and all these different things and they're finding hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of fraud but not that much longer because he could be facing a ten thousand dollar fine isn't that according to the new calvornia bill yesterday so this is a new bill instead of saying wow thank you for uncovering this fraud they passed a bill that if you film things and you go to a place and identify that place and then somehow or another those people what get harassed or something because of it you could get fined yeah so i was already saying on my own podcast my plan is mayor because everyone kept being like oh you need nix surely know what i need is all of los angeles to be a nix surely i as mayor i'm going to offer cash bounties if you film any fraud city workers doing something suspicious any type of scams and you bring it to the mayor's office and we check it out i'm going to pay you so now i got to deal with the state you know if that passes but i was already going to just make the city become these nix sure everybody has an iPhone put it in same response where it is same response instead thanking someone for uncovering criminal fraud you make a new law will you turn them into criminals these people are laundering more money than el chapa yeah this is what i keep trying to say billions billions and billions of his adult real criminals like the gottie always people we used to think were mobsters at the tally's shops back in the day they couldn't even comprehend what's going on right now and then even on the city level like when i went mad in a fire station they were telling me about how if a refrigerator this is mafia stuff if a refrigerator breaks you know fire fighters they know how to take the refrigerator they put it out the city person comes in they go oh no put that back in well you can't have that taken in so they make them put the the broken thing back in before the next person comes and then it costs like fifty thousand dollars and this only this one city contract can fix it it's not for you know up for bid and that is where all this extra money they isn't going to actually getting these firefighters within the fire station i was at they had a fire truck that should have been in retired to Mexico ten years ago and instead they like pay to put a new back bumper on it and they just it's these guys have to pay out of their own pocket for the blinds the pain and they do it because they live here it's so sad where la have to used to be the symbol of great like the go fire fighters that everyone looked to how we've just let it fall apart same with la pd we have just no pride in what's happening is the Olympics are coming and when i keep telling everybody is we're gonna have a terrorist attack is because we're not even safe for our streets right now they're not even protected if we do fires alone all a terrorist cell needs to do is get five of those black e-bikes and they need to go on a windy day leading up to the Olympics go around with road flares tossing them out on all the fifty years of dead brush the entire city will look like a nuclear bomb one off look at the palaces yeah one area all five bad guys bad actors go around and do that it's it's done and by the way there's a lot of evidence Look at the palaces. Yeah. One area. Oh, five bad guys, bad actors. Go around and do that. It's it's done. And by the way, there's a lot of evidence that a lot of the fire in the palaces. Not just the initial fire, but subsequent fires were caused by arson. In fact, my friend Andrew filmed some guys doing it. He filmed guys lighting things on fire. He filmed it in his car. He was watching these vagrants, filming them lighting things on fire. Two days ago, there's photos of vagrant homeless zombie in the palaces trying to light a fire right now. Thankfully, the area has no hasn't grown back yet, but there are two days ago. These peeps zombies, people don't like the word zombie, but they are zombies. But yes, there's different boxes of homelessness. There's there's people that need help down on the look. Yep. There's a lot of job. Quick boom. That is one box is a very small box, but I am aware of those. Then there is a 95% box that are people that are just professionals. Thanks to those zombies. Meth just want to live on the streets and be a drug addict right now. Maybe some of those people get help. They get sober, get proper treatment. Now they get a new chance of life. Then there's another box that are just people that want to do drugs and be a bad person. We have to acknowledge there is actually just bad people that are in a different box. So there's also people that want everything else to fall apart because their life is in the shit. They live in shit. Their life is hell and they don't want to see you drive by in Alexis. They don't want to see you go to your nice house. They don't want to see any of that. They want to light things on fire. Well, that's how also these DSA people get support because they've destroyed the city so much you look around and you think, oh, the American dream is broken. Capitalism is broken, but they're the ones that broke it. So if you're just like a young 20-year-old looking around, you're like, oh my god, there's zombies everywhere. Rent so much. All the restaurants are closing. This system doesn't work. But what they're not looking at is who's breaking the system that did work. The one that I grew up in that was so beautiful. Over 100 restaurants in LA have closed this year. Over 100. And these aren't chains. These are people that put their life into this. These are chefs. And they can't make it in a place. There was a go-to food spot. Well, where I used to do comedy in Los Angeles on Sunset at the Comedy Store. If you drive down Sunset now, everything is for lease. It's fucking nuts. It used to be very difficult to get a property on Sunset because it was so valuable in the 90s and the early 2000s. Like everybody wanted to have a restaurant on Sunset. Everybody wanted to have a bar on Sunset because that's where everybody went. There was always cars and it was nice and you could walk on the street. We would walk down to get food. We would go to the stand after we would, or the standard rather after we would go to the car. I would fucking never walk down that street now. It was normal. And that's you trained up. You know, ready to go with the sidekick. Imagine a lovely lady that just wants to walk her. Little dog. Amount of people that just are just dog walkers. They're like, I am scared to walk my dog. I had, I won't say which newscaster, but I had a newscaster off camera recently and said, everything you're saying is true. She goes every morning. I got to get up at 5 a.m. because it's the safest time for me to do my morning run every day naked zombie. She said, I'm running by a naked zombie, trying to, can you imagine not, you know, you and I don't want to go walk in the street, but just like a woman with their little dog or moms with strollers and it's not, it's across the entire city. I watched news in Spanish where these underpasses in South Central or East LA, these families have been coming to the news and they're like, please, because they're having to take their kids underpasses within chemists to get to the schools. It's not just like a Hollywood thing or a valley that it's everywhere. It's everywhere. And I don't think people understand it. Can we show some videos, let's show some videos of some of the real chaotic homelessness in Los Angeles so people can get a look at it? Because, you know, I've had some friends send me videos like my friend Whitney Cummings, she went through Los Angeles a couple of months ago and she sent me a video. And I was like, this is fucking nuts. Cause I haven't been, I don't go there anymore, man. I fucking avoid that place like the plague. I still love it. I always love it. I never even thought until the pandemic hit, I was like, I'll be probably here forever. And now it's just nuts. The street people of Los Angeles Instagram account they show this stuff all the time. Street people of Los Angeles Instagram account. This is a dad and a son walking by. Yeah. Well, this is a small one. That's an evaluation. Yeah. The point is, yeah, I posted this also in the sense that look at this little kids, they gotta go buy this is, somebody who- Some of you still have our studio in Woodland Hills and we used to have guys that were camping out right in front. Look at that. Even Perez Hilton is on your side. Pratt is the path. What Los Angeles needs. You see that? No, he's, Perez, God bless Perez. Oh. You might be the only person saying that. No, he had a near-death experience and came to Jesus and he's gone for him. He's locked in on. He sticks. Oh, is it somebody dying? No, he died twice pretty much. So what? What happened? He had a, he took antibiotics without food when he, which I didn't know was a thing. That's why I say to take food. And then again, I'm gonna say this wrong. But whatever that creates, some situation boom, now he accepts this and he's next to death for 30 days and then we just got out of the hospital, then he has a blood clot. No, so he's like, Bible all day. He had a, he talked to God when he was like, dad. So I think he's for real for real. Okay. Well, that would be nice. Oh, he's, we, we, he's another nice person in the world. He's a powerful prayer warrior now. So, yeah. Show me some skid row, some skid row footage is the nuttiest. Okay. Skid row footage is the real, that's the real red pill. Where you're like, how? And it's just, there's no better way to describe it than how you describe it earlier. It's literally a criminal cartel. It's a criminal cartel that's siphoning money off of people. Look at that guy. Just needs a job. These, at least people just need a home. Come on, man. This is, this is not that bad. This is, This is very minor. Like if you, there's certain areas of skid row, like how they have tents, which are so crazy. What you paid for that? And you didn't, I didn't. Oh, this, this guy's protecting, oh, against vampires. Yeah. These are nice clips. I mean, I just need a job, dude. Relax. I need a poor dog. Oh, I know. I see dogs with homeless people. I just want, I'm, I'm such a dog lover. I can't go to the dog pound. If I went to the dog pound, I'd have a hundred dogs and my wife would never let that happen. But that, So back right there in the fentanyl, these fentanyl hangs, they don't need beds. Right. That's not a bed issue. It's not a house they cleaned up. And for people that don't know, this was not like this. This is not like this is a decade ago. This is a rapid decline in what this city looks like. Oh, there's some nice people. Oh, it's just crazy. It's a, this is not as radical as it could be. Skid Row is really, if you could find some of them. I mean, there's a number of old videos. I can't click on check them all fast enough. All right, let's try this one. Right there. That's 100 views I was gonna try. I'm gonna put it right there. I'm gonna put it right there. That one. I spent a day on Skid Row. There was a comic in the early 2000s that went undercover and lived on Skid Row for a couple of days to film things. And it was pretty astonishing even back then. But again, this is a created environment that they created because they didn't want to deal with the homeless people. And they're like, you know what we should do? We should just take these people and put them in one spot and don't let them leave. And that's how they created Skid Row. And you know, decades later, you have five zero, 50 blocks of nothing but this kind of shit where it's just fucking chaos. It's just homeless people everywhere. And it's so sad. All lost lives. You know, as a father, you know, your father, these are, this is someone's children. This is someone had a baby. And that baby they loved more than anything. They're like, oh my God, they're so precious. That precious person is now in the middle of an intersection hunched over unfathomable. Well, they're not a few boys. The message means, say, thank you, my so-and-so brother, daughter, son, died a fennel overdose. These people need mandatory treatment. They don't need just, oh, if you want, we have these needles for you. We have street med teams where we can come and, you know, it's crazy. And it's back to being a dad. I'm only running for mayor to one last Hail Mary to try to save the city I love and grew up so God, and we're out. Well, there you burn down my house. That's what the LA Times was. That's the funniest. Did you see this? So they tried to do a hit piece LA Times and say that I was ineligible to run for mayor because my house burned down. This was last week. No, I'm not kidding. This is real. So anyway, like, oh, he's living in Santa Barbara right now. I thought the LA Times had become more reasonable when that guy owned it. That was completely not true. And the funniest part is the LA Times is in El Segundo for the last eight years. So they're the ones that should be wearing. So what happens is they say, oh, it's up in the air because he's in San Luis. I call the city clerk and I say, hey, the LA Times reporting that I know I'm eligible. Everybody knows it's like saying that 7,000 people is houses burned down. Now can't vote. Right. They can't vote. Because you have a house. Because Karen Bass, who you're not supposed to vote for because she burned your house down, you can't vote for her. So of course you can run. I said, anybody can call and ask this guy, yes, it's on our website. So it was a totally LA Times. Who is the person who wrote that story? This guy Noah Goldberg and why is because he's pushing the nithy ram and there's a video of him at the bar with her like, yeah, they won. And she's a Democrat socialist. Yes. And LA Times, once their own clickbaity, Mondami, they try to make their, Mondami is a custom-built man, a Sherian candidate 20 years in the making. He's a star. That's why he's got the smile. You can't take this bootleg want to be and try to cook her into it. So they dropped this fake hippie saw me the day the UCLA poll comes out that has me in the lead and not the one that they had just run some fake DSA, you know, BS poll that nobody believed. It was movie scene. How was this person dealing in the polls, this person that you're running against? They're at 9%, I think. But again, the polls, I'm in number one. Anybody who they know this, she's in charge on the city council. She's the chairperson of the homeless, of the homeless plan. She wants to, what's she gonna change? She's had six years. So we're gonna, we're gonna put, and then she's tweeting her, X, you know what we call it? Like my new plan, homeless is not working. Oh, so you just announced you're running for mayor. The best part is, she's had six years to not say any of these problems that tell she's running for mayor. These politicians are just, it's the problem. Back to the payments. The problem is people have jobs. People aren't paying attention like me. They just hear the little fake, I care. This isn't working. Oh, she's a city council member. Oh, she's a Democrat. No, she's not, she's not a Democrat. I'm the one who's been fighting for Democrats for the last year and a half to expose all of this fraud or literal city letting our town burn to the ground. So that's when I really stepped up. So I watched this movie hotshot, a documentary on, you know, fires and I see in this documentary, a hundred mile per hour, I think it's the oak, the oak fire. I don't know, in the film. And you see, 100 mile per hour wind. And the firefighters are just standing there with like garden hoses and you're seeing that a hundred mile per hour wind does not mean everything burns down because this community have fire breaks. So then I like see who this guy, I live with these these hotshots for six years. So I find him on X and he's live streaming talking about how the policies fire before anybody was not started on January 7th, but a rekindle from that first fire. When the LAFD, this is where it gets so conspiracy, Chinatown movie type shit. They hired a crisis PR firm, the lead company. Here's the best part. Guess where they got the money? The mayor's office where they got the money to hire the crisis from the LAFD foundation. They used charity money to hire a crisis team to alter the after action report that says all these things that went wrong to make the mayor care and pass look good. Oh my God. I find this out because I start, you know, posting about what this director, Gabriel Man is saying about, you know, the policies fire is a posting now. I got info. So now firefighters start coming in my DMs as whistleblower. So I got, hey, just so you know, the after action report that went out, that was the ninth version and the battalion chief that wrote it wouldn't put his name on it because they changed it so much. So I do a post about that three weeks later, the LA Times, everything I post three weeks later, they would steal my thing and I'm like, pull it's a surprise guy. It's like I posted that three weeks ago because the firefighters were coming to me and telling me what was going on behind the scenes. So also as mayor, I'm gonna make sure that the fire department, the fire chief, has civil protections again. So right now the fire chief is like a puppet. They have to do whatever the mayor says, cover up for the mayor. They're just another politician. They need to be responsible for the Angelenos, the public. And they don't have that protection. The mayor can just get rid of them. So you gotta give them these civil protections back like they have. The mayor can't just get rid of the police chief for instance. But that's when I was like, oh, these people are. It's organized crime. Thank you. And he sounds like the mob. Here's where the best part. You know when the mayor was in Ghana as everything was burning down? You know who she left in charge? Her deputy mayor, do you know where the deputy mayor was? The deputy mayor, Mayor Caron Bassa's deputy mayor was on house arrest because he was arrested for calling in a bomb threat to City Hall. This is real life. This is the person who's supposed to take the call because she's an avenue to call in a bomb threat to City Hall. Great question. You know, so that's who you were dealing with. So when they're like, oh Spencer, you don't have the experience for mayor, well, I promise my deputy mayor is that I have on deck. They aren't calling in any bomb threats to City Hall. So we're already starting ahead of the curve. Also, I'm not going into steel taxpayer money. I'm going into stop all this. So again, I really believe there's enough common sense people that see that I'm not doing politics. I don't want to do any of this. Politics are, it's a job. These people are career politicians. I never wanted to be a career politician. Before my house burned down, I was selling my healing crystals. They just to be clear, they have no magical powers. They all burned in my house. So, anybody, you know, you're buying them. You know, I thought that protection energy, they don't. So, you know, feeding hummingbirds, I'm taking my kids to school. That was my dream life. And they burned it down. And now they have their worst nightmare coming to just undo the whole thing. Former Los Angeles deputy mayor, public safety, agrees to plead guilty to threatening to bomb LA City Hall last year. Now, what was the reason Brian K. Williams' 61 of pasting his charged in a single count information with threats regarding fire and explosives? It doesn't have a reason, but it says what he did. Hmm. You know, I don't think there's ever a good reason. I mean, I would like to hear his reason. Bomb threat, I received a call on my city cell phone at 1048 this morning. The mail call stated that he was tired of the city's support of Israel. And he's decided to place a bomb in City Hall. So that's it. It might be in the rotunda. I immediately contacted this. So was about Israel. Wow. I think Stephen he made it up up here. It says that he uses Google voice application on his personal self when the place of call to a city issued cell phone. Wow. He then left the meeting and called Chief of Staff. Yeah. That's a statewide. What a fucking idiot. I will say mayor, but I still employed. Find out that guy's still employed. I would think not. I would imagine what's going on. I mean, thinking 10 years. Giving is gone a federal prison. Oh, he's facing 10 years. Yeah, I think so. But what if he has paid leave? Probably he's got a federal prison. Oh, God. Notice he at least would mayor Bass with her cell phone. The whole week of the policy is fired. She deleted all her text messages. What? Oh, but you know, this is they're like a terrorist cell. Oh, you're breaking burner phones. How the fuck do you, are you in a law to do? Former LA deputy mayor sentence to probation and $5,000 fine. That's it. Just probation. Well, in his defense, his mayor was spending, I think she went to Cuba 30 times to learn how to build bombs and bomb America when she was part of the Vanessa Roma Vinissa route, Vanessa Ramos brigade. So Karen, she, when that's. 19 20 and she never ever said she had any problem with being like a Cuban communist terrorist until Biden was going to pick her as VP. And then they made her say I denounce that I was trying to blow up the Capitol with my, with my terror cell when I was younger. But for all those years, she never said anything. When Fidel Castro died, she said something like, rest in peace, elkama Dante. Like what? Yes, no, you can find him. And then it gets even better. So, hey guys, relax. Williams was just suffering from stress and anxiety when he called the press in a poor guy. Deal poor guy overworked stress and anxiety. And somehow or another, it was about Israel. Not to mention these people would just get away with all of this. They keep getting away with it. That's the problem with the media, what I've learned from being part of the television world. You notice why do they let the mayor and the city councils get away with all of talking about this? At the end of the day, that's their talent. It's like a soap opera. They got to keep filming with the mayor and the city council. If they just air them out, they're not picking up the call. It's like a production. Exactly. They don't have content anymore. Exactly. So the local news needs to like keep it. Right. Right. They don't have access anymore. Yeah. So that's why I'm like, why? Because I talk to these people off camera and they're all like, like, I know we're going to have a crime organization. I'm like, please, you know, I'm like, why aren't you? Yeah. But talk about crime. I mean, it's like they pay people off. They've got little deals. You wash my back. I wash yours. Come on. Yeah. And so thankfully, because people aren't you scared of these people, I'm like, what are they going to burn my house down again? They're going to burn my mom's house down again. So it gives you like a confident, what are they going to do? I mean, the crime in Los Angeles, when you talk to average people, like the people that I know that live there, they're fucking terrified. They say break ins are just commonplace now where they used to be very rare. You've get home invasions constantly. I mean, Ted Sorandos is mother-in-law was killed in home invasion. And they're happening all the time. It's because there's no police response. And they know there's not going to be a police response. So more people are hiring private security. It's very difficult to get a gun or at least you can see a carry permit. It's very difficult. In defense of LA County Sheriff and LAPD, they have gotten better at CCW's now because of the law because of crime. But it's not the sheriff's fault. The sheriff wants it. Yeah, and they don't have the staff even to process it. So it just takes up to a year. But I know they all, that's the thing. I talked to so many sheriff, so many LAPD, so many firefighters. Everybody is just broken. Their spirits are broken. Why are we doing this? Why don't we just go to Newport Beach or honey? Or Florida or anything? Yeah, just leave this door. What am I doing? They keep saying. Well, this is a thing that Newsomow is chimes in about how much money California brings in, how much many venture capitalists are in California, how much money in tech is in California. Right. But that's nothing to do with your government. It has in spite of your government. They're doing that. And they're leaving. Hollywood was the greatest thing. The amount of money Hollywood made for Los Angeles from the grips to the camera operators, to the glam people, to the costume. Sure. People don't understand. People hate like all Hollywood, stupid movie stars are so rich. They forget about the ecosystem that connects to that, say, Tom Cruise, that makes some amount of money is gone. And for instance, just last week, they finally got Baywatch to come back to LA. Baywatch starts shooting for like two days. And then they kick him off the beach. There's all these permit problems. So I write a sub stack calling this out, calling out the mayor. Next to you know, they come back and the mayor makes a deal. What's funniest thing right now is whatever I post and do, the mayor is now doing like I said the other day, I'm getting rid of the whole fire commission. This fire commission has been there for like 10 years, I think, after I do this post or whatever. Boom. Four out of five of the fire commission resigned. So they're trying to just get ahead of all the things of what I'm saying, which is fun because it's already I'm like the mayor. So I'm like, this is great. Well, it's also that they can't possibly do enough without completely undermining their entire organization. They're always going to have so much fraud and waste that your case will always be solid. There's no way. There's no, they would have to literally like tank everything they're doing. They got them into position. And if they talk about how much of a failure, then they're definitely not keeping their job. Which is that's the problem with all of they're all in ready for this. The lady, Janice Quinones that was in charge of the LADWP that drained. So in the super policy, there was the Sanion as reservoir at 117 million gallons of water when it was created. The engineers on the cover L.A. Times back in the day and he's talking about he built this for wildfire protection. Now in their defense, the city and LADWP says that was drinking water. It was, it was drinking this water. I promise you. So there was a tear on this drinking water. They allegedly, the firefighting water. So they drain the entire reservoir because of a little tear that would have cost $120,000 to repair for over a year. This woman was making $750,000 a year as the head of LADWP twice her predecessor that Mayor Bass brought in. Keep in mind, if you make that much money, do you know what the people below her are making 500, 400. See, these people get so much money and they spend over a year to fix a tear and it's back to the mafia thing. Oh, I'm sure it's like, oh, we got to use this contractor because we don't have an open bid. That's too cheap. We know who knows the conspiracy to why that in terror. So while that's trained next door to my house that I watched weekly, the local LADP would do training that hook up to it. I had a five million gallon reservoir for firefighting. So while they're doing that one, they're like, oh, we should fix this one too. They drain that one. And they're like, oh, we drained it. When we refill it, there's some issues. We can't refill it. They leave two reservoirs empty back. Rewind what I told you in a season, that's the driest ever that they've actually had a fire. I think in 2019 where there wasn't water in the reservoir. And they think there was no wind and they had to drive 10 water tenders up onto the hillside for the helicopters to dip because that's the key. What people don't understand is like, oh, this nothing could have stopped this fire. You know, people that defend these people. If the reservoir had the water in it, the helicopters, he's 17 million dollar helicopters and knew some loves to do the photo shoots in front of how fast they are, would have had to fly less than 30 seconds from the origin of the fire again when the winds were fine for six hours in the initial thing. But instead, those helicopters had to fly all the way to Malibu to Pepperdine College and all the way to Encino to get the water for the helicopters to fly all the way back to where the fire was next door to where the empty reservoirs. So they spent 66% of their time not fighting the fire, going to get the water. So it's back to like why I say it's Chinatown, which I can say, we have this LADWP that these people get all this money. They increase everyone's rates. This year everyone's rates went up 70 or 11%. They're going to go up 7% annually for no reason. You're not getting alkaline water out of it. I'm convinced we used to joke like, oh, there's Florida in the water. How much fentanyl is in our damn water right now. I mean, we're not getting better water for that. 7% increase. They're doubling everyone's trash even though the entire city has more trash. I talked to this guy, Juan, from clean L.A., he goes around. He's from Ecuador. He does these Mingas where he moved here from Ecuador and he said, is the dirtiest thing he's ever seen his whole life. So he just started cleaning up trash and posting it. And now people will give him go fumming money. And he cleans more of the city than the city. And I had him on my podcast. I said, what's the problem here, Juan? And he said, people don't care, Spencer. And I said, so I'm, well, I'm there. I hire you. We're going to get the city clean. He's an expensive. They want a billion dollars next year for the trash. He's like, I can do this for easy. 500 million dollars. I said, okay, you're hired, Juan. I said, what we're going to do with them? He said, we got to fire all these people, Spencer. They don't care. He said, it's dirtier than any third world country. has ever been. So they're doubling our trash rates. They're doubling our sewage. So more money, more money. It's back to taxes. Oh, the rich need to give more. If the quality of life just keeps getting worse and worse, why would anybody with money stay in California or Los Angeles when they know the fraud, the waste, the corruption, people that are rich, billionaires, whoever they are, if the city lights all work, right now, the two mayors are running for let. Do you know what about the copper theft? There's no working lights in the city of LA because they got rid of the copper task force because they obviously have camp fund the LAPD. So they let everyone steal all the copper. So there's everything's dark in the whole city. So mayor of Bask goes last week and makes the press conference. I solved it. I'm going to spend 200 million dollars and we're going to do solar power lights. You think these thieves aren't going to then pivot to stealing solar batteries and slinging those? No, we got to stop the criminals. The best video right now, I think, there's a couple of good ones. This Nithi Arman, the Democratic Socialist is running for mayor. She is asked about all the Cadillac converters that are being stolen. She said, well, Toyota is making these two easy to steal. It's like leaving your MacBook on the front seat. This is real talk. They're not getting this Toyota's fault. The Toyota's fault, the people who stealing catalytic. Yes. Here's a hilarious, every fucking car has a catalytic and just sits underneath. You get to solve the exhaust and take it out. If you know anything about cars, stop fucking Toyota. It's every car. Oh, here's another great one of her lines. She's at our city council meeting. She's the city council member. All these moms and parents are saying we don't want these encampments where there's two known gangs selling fentanyl through holes in the tents, the zombies are everywhere. These parents are saying we don't want these encampments, which are illegal. They're asking them the city council member to enforce the law. And she argues with the parents and said there's no difference in the encampments. One foot or 500 feet from the school. All the parents boo her and she goes whatever and rolls her eyes. These are the people that are going to show up and vote for me. These moms are just dads. There's a giant amount of people in California that have been read-filled that just realize like whatever you thought your government was when you thought you were voting for a progressive kind compassionate government, that is a sheep outfit over a wolf. It's not what you have. It's not what you're getting. What you're getting is organized crime. What you're getting is organized crime that is using this filter of compassionate, caring, inclusive government. And it's not real. It's not real. Everything is more homeless, more crime, more murder, more chaos, more, maybe not more murder, maybe it's almost human. Yeah, maybe more shootings and stabings, but better medical care is keeping them alive. But the idea that crime is down. It's like the anecdotally, you ask anybody in LA, they would not agree to that. Most people think crime is up. Better medical care is keeping them alive. But the idea that crime is down. It's like the anecdotally you ask anybody in LA They would not agree to that most people think crime is up home invasions are fucking ubiquitous It's everywhere. So I spoke with these SWAT guys the other day and I said You know you guys having a lot of you know gang stand out He said actually know the gangs business as usual. They know when we show up That you know the hands up they're gonna get out in a week. They're professional They're just for the money. He says our biggest callouts now our mental health You know episodes that the person doesn't know where they are or whatever and I said But what about all these like home invasion crews and that are coming in Robin everyone's house there's nothing we could do He says these people all know they're getting out in two weeks I said what do you mean? Is that a felony? They're coming in with guns. He said no You can go break into house with a gun while people are there families rob them time up and get out Not only that if you shoot those people while they're in your house You'll be prosecuted. Yeah, you got to prove you are fearing for your life You're supposed to leave your house rather than defend your house against people with weapons and into your house I personally would advise to To lock yourself in in a closet and have your firearm and have a strong point Yeah, but even that like what you're gonna just let someone break into your house and steal your childhoods Whatever whatever they're stealing whatever it still your fucking jewelry and you have to heirlooms and whatever you've worked your whole life to earn That's fucking insane It's insane and the fact that you have this no cash bail situation You just letting these people out on the street that are violent criminals repeat offenders It's like if you wanted to destroy LA. That's how you would do it. They're doing it And that's why I get so my hardest thing every day Now is just saying not too pumped up because now that I'm in this fight and I have all the messages all day long Everywhere I go on the street people old ladies hugging me crying like please I'm scared the The pressure I feel to get in here and just undo this unplug this and I met with a lot of business owners And they said the mayor the city count they all know what needs to be done, but they don't want to push the buttons Somebody needs to just come in and push them up There's one thing I know how I will push these buttons and we're gonna get the city under control because it just starts with enforcing A law so I have a deputy mayor that I can't say who he is because of fear of retaliation at this point because of Issues with the city right now is in power but this deputy mayor who will help me enforce a law made it very clear once you start enforcing a law Criminals leave they know oh this is the gigs up. They will go somewhere else you once you start are making arrests People will leave this idea. Oh, there's no room in the jails. Where are you gonna put all these people? Once you start enforcing law they will leave and it's as simple as that he was suggesting for two weeks You go around the city you put up signs no more fentanyl at the park no more open drug use no more in camins You have two week count on you tell every you give him a warning So if you want to leave in advance, you know most of these people which is what I hear the most from law enforcement are not from Los Angeles They have been flown in bust in back to the business There's a body business where they bring homeless people to the city to make the money off them They're from all over the country. They're brought here because this is the epicenter where they're making all the money So you don't think these NGOs when they hear Spencer Pratt's the new mayor He's got the IRS criminal investigation team. They're gonna take this scam. I'm sorry to other states and cities on the shows Gonna go on the road and they're gonna open up shop where there's a mayor that lets this go down And it will stop in LA and this trickle-down effect when restaurants don't have zombies in front of them You can go back to having outdoor seating because it doesn't smell like human poop the whole town smells like those city smells like human poop MP it's crazy so when you get rid of that not to mention you're in my best plan Yeah, I'm bringing in the CDC Los Angeles love the white suits and during COVID They love they love CDC. I'm bringing in the CDC because you know how much typhoid and medieval diseases are in these encampments And nobody's swabbing mayor Pratt is bringing the CDC and we're gonna swab all of them and once we get those test results back I promise you the federal government will be shutting down streets will white tents and Hosing things down with chlorine god knows what because people are living in the sewers I don't know if you saw last week that lady pops out of the sewer that wound from clean LA to the video it went viral She's living in like in those who are yeah, a whole full thing What is what's with poop and pee you know what type of diseases are going on in there? CDC will clean these streets again be like all Spencer is not gonna have the resources What the Olympics coming we have homeland security. We got DEA Another thing we're just letting I talked to the dog rescue people. They say you stand on skid row or any street in LA You can watch the drug dealers just pull it up and escalates Tesla's all the nicest cars just slang and no problem Mayor Pratt DEA's coming in a tip we have so much Funding when you bring the feds in to enforce the law to get the streets ready for the Olympics The current administration they want to play pretend get that money to launder. Oh, we need that billion dollars We'll we'll clean the streets. No, no, no, you come do it help me out So it's not like I won't be able to do this and people when they hear me say like sorry guy so let's Let's we've talked to you. Did you Not geez or what Let's talk about day one So day one Realistically what can you do and how do you implement all these ideas that you have? So right now what I've learned is all the smartest brightest people would never want to come work in LA because they know Any of their ideas are not going to be used the system is in play the amount of private industry Like for instance a CEO's house burned down who sold his company to Warren Buffett. We're talking big legit CEO He said I'll come in I'll work for a dollar a year You know, there's people like this that want to get LA back that I'm gonna surround myself people like recruit So he wants to get building you lean on these people that they talk about it They just don't want to go into this toxic environment that you can't it's a cartel They know there's only so much they can do unless there's a mayor like me that's gonna let them do it I've already got a phone with Steve Moscow He was the president of multiple studio Sony We're gonna bring him in within like a Avengers team for Hollywood how we clean up all these Permit issues and get Hollywood back and make the incentives make it my ideas literally not charge you want to shoot in LA There's no we need We're gonna charge you no work we need work and then we get six years We could come back and worry about that but bring the business back so meeting with the Ted Sarandos putting these actual commissions not to mention already met with the there's the community budget advocates there like LA budget Experts they presented seven budget initiatives to mayor about shouldn't do one. I'm gonna do all seven these type of budget things where You don't just increase all these payments to city unions or whatever with if the budget doesn't have the money There's gonna be a commission that looks everything publicly for 30 days right now It's just her CAO it's like having your accountant and and check your taxes like from the IRS It's all we need to have outside Independent people checking all this stuff so it's more of again I'm talking with Chief Garcia who's retiring who's the go firefighter to be one of my deputy To be one of my deputy mayors of fire and public safety not a deputy mayor that calls bomb threats into the city So it's just using experience people that want to get LA and surrounding myself one thing I know I have is common sense now all the things that I need the professionals You bring them in and they'll want to work with me because they know they hear my message Oh, he's gonna undo all this you're telling me for $750,000 I couldn't find a better la dwp CEO to make sure there's waters in the reservoir figure out how to get rates down We have plenty of money. We're paying these jobs. We're clearly not getting the proper talent Obviously look at the city so getting talent that's ideologically aligned That's yeah exactly it's a part of this whole cartel exactly so and they know what they're doing They know the game They play the game They listen to whatever the top dogs say and they follow businesses usual and the money keeps getting moved around To the point where I could poach talent from other major cities that are successful At these jobs I can pay them more clearly than other believe like wow you did this here come out to LA Don't worry the zombies will be gone by the time you get here, but there are These people there's tons of cities around America that don't look like LA. This is not some Rocket science. I have to figure out you're in one of them right now There we go. Yeah, driver on Austin. There's a homeless problem, but it's minor It's very small in comparison to Los Angeles again There will be homeless problems everywhere always but the drug addiction crime where they run the streets That's a problem that can be an impingence can be fixed Look what they did in San Francisco when Xi Jinping was visiting San Francisco and Gavin Newsom literally said when someone comes to your house to visit you clean up your house How about just keep your fucking house clean like what are you saying if you have the resources to clean it up when a foreign Dignity comes into town. Why don't you just keep your town clean and were the ones that own the house the taxpayers? Yeah, we already paid to keep the house clean. No back to Newsom and fires My one of the thing we need to touch upon back to climate change and him going to Munich He talks about the fires is 365 days a year. It's climate That's interesting for somebody who's fire service the Cal Fire he only pays them seasonal when the palaces fire hit All of most of Cal Fire was down for the season if it's a 364 and that's why the only reason Brent would exist and didn't burn all the way Just like the palaces is that chief Garcia He was ready with the US Forest Service because he fought the feds to make sure he has a real fire service It's 365 because he understands It can pop off whenever so he had all his tankers and helicopters They came to palaces and save the day. So this idea They just talk talk oh, I spend all this money on all these things But then you don't and then he cut their salaries. I mean we don't we could do a whole episode on Newsom I got to stay focused and it's back to it's amazing that that guy thinks he could be president Not when I'm mayor of LA because I'm gonna cook I just don't understand how anybody could think that he was He would do a good job. He ruined San Francisco Then he ruined California and now he wants to ruin the country like what how the fuck do they think? Because he talks well and he doesn't even talk well He just talks well for people that are in that position There's just a lot of people that talk way better than him that aren't interested in the job Well, that's what we need to get past and the audience the taxpayers audience whatever you look up We need to stop falling for performative politics. Yes, the mayor of LA. She's so good at it That's she gets everyone riled up like she's Chegavara fighting for freedom just what she can do nothing She literally as mayor cannot stop anything with the federal government. It's all just act and same with Newsom There's they're like in like social media influencers Do your job we're paying our tax money for you to make sure our houses don't burn down Zombies aren't attacking our families on the way to school everything. That's the basic quality of life You're failing out, but what you're good at is just yelling on social media And that was back to why I ran because I didn't want to be one of these just they're just yappers Is yeah, you don't do anything. Yeah, well, it's It's refreshing refreshing seeing something, but I think this is how it has to be done I think it has to be someone from the outside that All these people that have a career in politics They know what feathers they can't ruffle. They know If you want to make it you have to be aligned with whatever the party's doing and if you go against them you get in trouble and Everyone knows this so they all just sort of stay the course and hope that their time comes Hope that they'll look the right way and say the right things and somehow another It'll allow them to elevate their career and become a mayor somewhere or become a governor somewhere Well, if you look smart people come up to me and they'll be like you're doing what the founders of America wanted real people part of the communities Getting into politics not this job where I'm gonna do this for three. It was supposed to be Your neighbor you're somebody who understood whatever was going through Exactly and and and I feel that and again I'm going in there to stop these people not not I don't have a new utopia of what L. H. B. I want to lay back I want the LA I grew up in I want my two sons to be able to once we win all our lawsuits against Gavin Newsom and his state park To rebuild in the palaces and grow up in the city of LA that I grew up in that It was you could dream have you thought about a timeline of how all these ideas that you have like how long it'll take to actually implement them Once you start enforcing the law things are gonna move quick It's it's a simple as okay. I'm mayor of LA I got my new my dude deputy mayor's we have my new police commissions We're going around and we're just Arresting people and the people that aren't getting arrested We're getting to mandatory medical treatment and we're just gonna start clearing the streets clearing the campman's and then from that It's just everything's gonna come to first off. Imagine the communities Like how pumped people are gonna be in these neighborhoods when I come in and I'm like this is done People this other person this democratic socialist lady what what is her solution to all these problems crime homelessness All these things what is she saying? She is she admitting that their issues and does she have a solution that she's proposing She just goes to the yesterday. I didn't read it somebody just tagged it was so funny One of the quotes was we're gonna have a street medical team Street medical team. We already have that it's called the LAFD and they're spending 80% of their calls Responding to these overdoses and we're also paying for that market. No They think because they're so deep in it. They can't say mandatory treatment Because these people have rights to die on the sidewalk. They have rights to attack So we need more housing. This is on these beds aren't working. We need to get more beds So yes, she needs more affordable beds more it's not working as she's running As she's running it. Yeah, so she just wants to keep business as usual just with more funds No, she wasn't even running until three hours before the last three have to fill it out But whenever we saw I was gonna win and be the mayor They so the real conspiracy is is my conspiracy. I don't know this real That Karen Bass and they're working together just to block me To make sure because it's a jungle runoff So June 2nd the top two numbers go to November I was one billion percent going to November until one hour before she just pops up after she Artie and Doris mayor bass. They were doing photo ops together a week before their close mayor bass endorsed This nithia lady. They're like a team So two hours before that last minute We have to sign to where they announced the final candidates Just out of year to run for mayor plus you could have announced it's just to block me from going to November But what they don't understand is People that will vote for me would never vote for her or Karen Bass. They're actually picking off their own Stats if anything what they're doing is making me the mayor on June 2nd because if you have 51% of the vote I just become the mayor on June 2nd And I think they're in for a big surprise and they're underestimating how angry everybody is In the city of LA and I think I become mayor of June 2nd and it won't even go to November I think they really are underestimating how angry everybody is because There's people that I talked to that used to be just hardcore Democrats hardcore leftist progressives that are really saying Like in the hush tones. We really need a Republican. We really need like some no nonsense Rudy Giuliani person. I hate to say that. I hate to say it But that's what we need. We need someone who's gonna be really tough on crime and clean everything up and stop all these people from having tents on the street There's so many people like that. They're just quiet about it. They don't want to talk about it openly and publicly because they're afraid of being shamed I grew up in palaces. I went to crossroads high school. I don't think I've ever met a Republican Not me for real like all the people I know all my family and for everybody I know is a Democrat and all the people that are supporting me all of people I talk to their Democrats We are this is not the Democrat party this running LA the other day. I posted The like the commandment list of I think it was 1996 Bill Clinton's Democratic Party It looks like what I would say right now. Yeah, that's the devil. No, this is socialism. This is communism This is cartel. This is mafia. This is not Democrats love me. They they want all the same things. They want to feel safe It's really amazing how they can hide it But just pretend to be compassionate They can hide all this money that they're just siphoning off because it really is just organized crime Well, they say to people there's nothing we can do That's not to say people will be my comment section be like There's nothing you can do. It's like they are so good at Just keeping this These people have rights first off. It is illegal. Just this is below people's mind. It's illegal to live on the sidewalk Right. It's a that's a Democrat law All the laws I want to enforce are Democrat laws. I am the Democrat law enforcer mayor I should be every day It's I'm actually excited because I Finally feel like there's like hope because when your house burns down Your mom's crying because her house burnout every single day everyone you know is house burnout you go through a dark Just all my tax money. I should be a millionaire They met you know because I got some big checks people always say oh, he burned all of his money They don't understand living in LA in entertainment business with a manager and agent of business manager your taxes in LA Your state taxes is very hard to keep all that money. So they're like oh, we burned them. No, I Regardless the amount of money I put in to the city of LA and the state My house should still be here. So it's very sad Moment and then it then you start uncovering. Oh, no, this is almost strategic This is this you know a lot of people reached out after with the lina And they're like oh, they lina'd you this is a land grab and I was like no no And then you start going down like I'm not even arguing with these people anymore because of how The writing was so on the wall It's so on the wall the entire insurance industry dropped everyone in the palaces leading up to the fire It was that flagrant there was 70 year old people 70 year old plus I talked to 80 year olds that got it dropped by their insurance January 1st Been paying 40 plus years didn't even get to re-up lost everything no insurance If all the insurance companies are dropping an area It's very clear that they know what's about to happen. So your city leaders your mayor Everybody your state they should be getting ready or saying oh wow everyone's dropping this What can we do? Oh, we need to clear the dead brush we need to make the water and the reservoirs there Just obvious things So I don't even argue with the land grab things because here's a crazy thing that I never did the math for This hurts so your house burns down You lost everything now you got to buy stuff over again now you're paying the city sales tax So the people who just let your house burn down now you're giving them tax to rebuy underwear Re-buy shoes rebuy so they're making money now off of your house burning down Not to mention you got to start buying things to actually maybe if you're lucky Not only 14 people in 15 months have built the house So it's only 14 people have built in this house max out at 16 just to be like Oh, no, it's 16 misinformation Less than 20 yeah less than 20 which is crazy and how many houses burnt down 7,000 So now you got the sales tax God that's so crazy. That's what you crazy number 7,000 houses is so crazy What's even crazier's most of these houses burned down on January 8th When now there's no wind and they just didn't figure out Let's drive water in from all again when you're on lahina. You're on island I'll start arguing. Oh, it's hard to get resources When everything's burning down on January 7th and you already realize you have to up and now you're hearing the fire department saying All the fire hygens are empty. There's no water It's red alert get enough water tankers from the whole state every city drive in water I have videos from January of moms walking in front of my son's elementary school. It's totally there My son's preschool total got to there by the afternoon all this is gone Because there's no that didn't bring water in it's crazy So back to the the land grab thing So for instance all these properties that burned down like I said, it's years of passed down Family property so when you pass that you pay that old tax rate Now these 7,000 dirt lots in the next couple years Guess what the new tax rate is? They're gonna have it when somebody buys that and they're now paying 2027 2028 three palisades tax rates not 1970, you know your grandfather's tax rate because you know you still lived in the house So there's like a hundred plus billion they're gonna make just in taxes So the idea that oh why would they ever let that happen? You start thinking oh Well, they don't care because not only do they make a lot of money they can rebuild it They can try to put you know affordable housing and do this This is complex. It just gets it gets fishy It does get weird like you don't want to accuse people of land grabs But at the very least they're capitalizing on a tragedy well, you know the number one buyer right now of palisades dirt lots China no way yeah Really? Yeah Well, they do it through New Zealand or It's a New Zealand business from by the Chinese You know, it's it's all movie stuff. I keep saying to people watch the movie Chinatown I watch it once a week just till I stay locked in you know, but it's It's exciting because I feel this window of change where The stars are aligning where an outsider comes in and just blows up their whole spot Not the way the deputy mayor calls him bomb threats, but energetically and so it gives me hope and then again If it goes It's not God's plan my wife is very on the you know prayer warrior Bible Jesus So you know I check in with her and my God was Jesus saying honey And you know I talk about he she's a better Path and her thing is if his God's will It's gonna go down and if not then I'll probably end up with some of my former palisades and moved to Bentonville Arkansas and It is what it is, but I will there could be no doubt that Los Angeles needs a radical shift They need a radical change and it sounds like that's exactly what you're proposing Big time and it's exciting, you know because most people are scared they have fear of the system They're fear being attacked The I get why a normal Person that's just has a good heart the smart doesn't want to go into politics They will you have the LA Times writing hit pieces. They got machines to keep the system You got the comments sections You got people making videos and trying to expose Bots of you feel that but thankfully I have experience from being hated and television for many years that You know now what the flip is I have so much love energy I was able to maintain with negativity for so many years and just stay in the game Because it was business as usual and I knew they wanted a villain on all these shows I will you know shout out David Foster took put me on this path Many years ago. He said you got to be like Simon Cowell and I leaned into that and it worked for many years But the point is Being hated for so many years now having so much love Obviously, I'm much rather be loved. Let's be good anybody who wants to Be loved is a lot more fun for sure for sure. Listen man. I'm voting for you. I can't vote for you But I'm rooting for you. I mean if I lived in Los Angeles. No question whatsoever. I would vote for you I think time to get one of these affordable beds. I can put you I can't connect you with these beds You know, I think that's legal. I think Texas resident Okay, yeah, I'm a Texas resident. I think I can only vote. Did you see what they're doing right now with the cigarettes and the ballots in LA what what they call these people signing ballots trading the zombies for cigarettes So I need the DOJ if you're watching the fence we need no we need Come to LA for my lecture when it makes sure we get a real election. I can't believe we didn't do our own duties That really is gross what they're doing with giving people cigarettes to sign up for things Do you know how many people are like in the jujitsu game? If you don't shout me out Like I need to just like end with like a list of people No, not as kidding, but guys you talked to jujitsu. So Yeah, well, I thought you jujitsu so much I just have something like flavored nicotine is illegal in Los Angeles Just think about how many people are camped out on the streets How many people are intense open fentanyl use? You can't buy flavored zins. Well even the cleanest ones that like my health biohacker friends allegedly May not access it, but I have those like fitness people can even like athletic peptides are technically You know, yeah, well they're working on that Nation wide and hopefully that'll get passed soon, but there's so many regulations in California that make fucking no sense Like no sense particularly in Los Angeles. They make no sense And it's just they just want to keep you like a child and they are the people that are supposed to be the overseers of everybody And they're looking out for you and it's gross and they it's just businesses usual They want to keep moving in a direction of more regulation more rules less rights more restrictions One last thing that's speaking is this is so crazy Do you know right now in LA if you're just a mom and pop landlord? You know not they always like to say landlords are like cruel at the bill level Like you know he's back just like a mom and pop Maybe you want one apartment building with units if you have like a drug addict crazy person living in there Most of them now also with their section 8 scammer and Range Rovers have two cars If you want to get them out they can go a whole year with not paying These landlords and then they have to pay a hundred grand of legal fees to try to get them out So then they settle with this criminal that's just abusing this loophole in this system They'll give them 50 40k to just leave that person's not put on any list And then they go do it to another apartment building. So a lot of these apartment buildings They don't even want to rent out to people because they can't afford to then have one of these people So again with this housing and then ready for this the city council If it was not a hundred and seventy million It's two hundred million just gave a hundred and seventy million to the lawyers that sue the tenants for these people But there's no fun for the tenants to then defend themselves Jesus Christ It's so crazy So again, it's about these people coming around me that that are living this nightmare And like how do I help you stop these things and putting these people that know the game Because they're living it. Yeah, and undo it. We got to stop this Well, I'm glad we could help you get your message out and I really really hope it helps and I really really hope you win It will be fun. It'd be fun to watch you shake it up And boy if you could really change Los Angeles and turn it around I mean I mean that would be absolutely fantastic. It would be a great story It would be really amazing and it would give hope to a lot of the cities that are experiencing similar situations Worthing a lot of the people would follow your path I'm I'm doing it. That's all right. Just give me in the game. Vote for mayor Brad Similar situations where I think a lot of the people would follow your path. I'm doing it. That's all right. Just give me in the game. Voperman here, Brad, Doc. Voperman here, Pratt. Thanks. Thank you so much. I appreciate it. All right, bye, Blake.