The general gonna experience how much difference is it perspective wise when you're in space and you're looking down on the earth Like that has got to be the ultimate mindful It's amazing so that this is what I'm trying to do in life like a couple books. I've written some films. I've done Seeing the earth. I remember early in my first flight. It was like, okay, I'm an outer space and my there's my planet over there You know, it was this profound Thought that wow I'm not on the planet anymore and over Over seven months in space it never got old like it was always like man earth is beautiful. It is this incredible planet And so there's so we could talk for hours about this, but I think for me the biggest perspective change was Unless of a black and white person now like before I went into space I knew right wrong and a lot of when you're young you kind of you're black and white as you get older You get wiser and seeing the planet seeing the planet. It's like yeah This thing's been around for a long time and it's gonna be around for a long time So you probably don't need to get as uptight about you know the day-to-day stress of life and It's a It just kind of put things in perspective like don't get too excited about the Kardashians or whatever the latest political tweet was or whatever Like you know things are gonna go on for a long time and so that it helps put that in perspective in a big way It's interesting that an actual physical perspective change just being just being in a different place where you're looking down on it from a different vantage point Yeah, all the astronauts seem to say that yeah, it has this profound shift in how you think of earth and how you think of humanity in general Yeah, you know one of the interesting things. I've been traveling since I was a kid. I did some exchange Programs in Finland and France and in the Air Force. I lived all around the world and whenever I would go to France or Korea or wherever it was like all right I'm in Korea and then I get back to the States. I'm like all right I'm back back home in America or whatever and now when I travel and I've been traveling a lot last couple years I don't ever I always feel like I'm home like it was weird one time I landed in the Middle East and I remember thinking I didn't think anything and that really struck me because it used to always be such a big deal wherever I landed I kind of feel like I'm home no matter where I'm at which is wow interesting and that's from the space travel I it is yeah Wow. Yeah It wasn't conscious. I didn't like expected or whatever. I just realized that hey, I don't ever I don't ever feel like I'm not at home And my crewmate Samantha said something really profound. She said um Like you see earth and you could tell it's going around the sun Like you can actually see the motion sometimes if you're watching stars and stuff and It's like we're on this spaceship together. So we ought to be crew mates and not just passengers. Yeah Like we all at it's kind of take care of The planet and our sell each other and stuff do you find that most of the or many of the astronauts share this similar perspective shift that once you go up you do realize the How weird it is that there are these tribal differences between us. Yeah, you're like what the hell are we doing? I got a story about that but to be honest. We're probably not the best Communicators of emotion, you know like you know, we're not necessarily all touchy-feely people But some of my close friends that we talk about this there's a very there's a very similar Perspective of you know, we're all here on the on the planet together I was on my first flight on the shuttle and it was the fifth I remember it was the fifth night there and when I looked out We were going on the Mediterranean at night and you could see there's this like U shape where there's Egypt in the Nile There's Israel and Syria and Lebanon are right there and there's Turkey and Greece and it's just little area in Israel Is this little thing that's surrounded by Jordan and leaven? You know they're all like right there and I remember thinking like guys What's the problem? And you're you're you're literally living together on a postage stamp on this big planet? Yeah, and it wasn't anything about Israel or the Middle East specifically It was more like what why can't we not get along? Because you know down here. Yeah, and the crazy thing is if you ask most people Their their position is all the they'll never be peace in the Middle East so one of the things after my flight so I We would they'd send us to Congress when we talked to congressman and senators and I got the talk at the White House a couple years ago at the National Space Council And my message to them is always the same. It's always You know to for a space program. It's not about the rocket science. It's about the political science Like we got to figure out politics to get things working well and whenever I go to the American Congress They're always like you're right. It's exactly right if it wasn't for those other fuckers any other side We could get this right Republic gets the Democrats all said that they all totally agreed with me and it was always the other guys fault There's a there's a there's definitely a problem that is gonna be tough to overcome how much benefit would there be in getting those people in space? Yeah, you know people talk about that if only that leaders could go on a space and I think for some of them It would make an impact and some of them they wouldn't care. I mean there's a thick there well the goal of Politics and power is just to keep yourself in power and get more stuff for yourself and you know throughout human history It's not normally, you know altruistic democracies that the way we run ourselves So which that we need to move in that direction because that's the way life gets better But I think Sam it would benefit in some it wouldn't I think is like nobody really wants the job is balanced and healthy and Intelligent has a good perspective for perspective for humanity. Yeah, the people that want the job They want to be the king pubon. I mean Yeah, it's just a weird kind of person that wants that job in the first place. It's People are like why don't you run for office and And I always say well do you have to give me a fork You have a fork because I want to stick that in my cuz that would be more fun than you know You try and do something nice and you're just getting non-stop hate mail and yeah, it's a rough Conference for my school. It's just to find before Congress this thing that happened 30 years ago. Yeah exactly It's um, it's fascinating to me how many of the astronauts do have this incredibly profound experience again just from the physical Act of being above earth looking down on it where this perspective shift just kind of changes You're overall thoughts about being in space then being a part of Humanity on this organic spaceship in The universe rather than being like locked down in Chicago Right clouds above you so didn't even think about space You know dude stuck in traffic on your way to work every day same grind every you get stuck in this narrow-minded Perspective almost every astronaut who discusses this says that it was a profound life-changing moment to look at earth from above Yeah, it was and you know I can just like close my if I'm in one of those like shitty situations You just close your eyes and it's like right now the sun is rising somewhere that's the most beautiful thing You can't imagine it. You know, I try to took a lot of pictures. I did movies But unless you see it with your eyes, you know, you can't imagine how awesome it is so that takes the edge off the traffic you're having to wait on and It does help but the the thing is like taking that experience and sharing it with as many people as possible Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify Including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free Spotify is absolutely free You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience