The Joe Rogan experience Stupid world we're living in a cat week for mine reading bring it on bring it on Let's go Joe we cannot mine reading plus legal acid. We can fix this mine Re is bad mine reading is gonna result in your woman is in a women are gonna be segregated What why you brought dude? Well, it happens you meet your? Your best friends wife right in your head like yeah, like you fuck her from behind What happened this would be this would be there'll be like many layers of what a thought is there's a thought Yeah, I forgot to categorize but the early days when it's like mark comes in just nice chavin. I'm like oh What but it's you are the gay one? Why knew you're nasty gay What's me with Tom Holland and Daisy Ridley who is in Star Wars? The sci-fi thing is explaining what you guys talk about men's thoughts are Out loud and women's are not in this movie. I thought it was very interesting What you're saying is what is happening well? When he was forced out like a little bit There's a words he's like I'd like to hold her down and fuck it no Part of my Talk you fucking animal she's probably when he's 14 about how super heroes. He's like, you know What if black or Batman went to a black neighborhood? Where's the car Robin whatever, but he had a great bit about? Wonder woman has a lasso of truth, so if she scooped you up you'd be like nice tits But it's true that's what we would think yeah, if you could do mine reading would be First in the problem is that we can't be minds like shouldn't people adjust the way they think about things no No, I bet you can if technology arises. Here's the thing You will jump Google on your phone Joe are you willing to give up Joe are your phone or not Google is fine Yeah, you're gonna get to your next Google the next who goes mine reading Joe what There's no way if in your head get in there, bro I really a pretty consistent Here's another hallop annual steak a really into reverse here, but How lady a majorly look lady directly in your mind. You're not going nice No, no, it was like Well, if we do with it if we get mine reading right One lady walks up to you and goes I think I don't have to work anymore Yeah I Imagine you're a married woman on a treadmill and then you look over and you're like oh, there's Jerry sunfeld I can suck his dick into a full future It's so easy. We're so vulnerable cuz we're all like like women are so like a hot woman like a really hot woman is so Take you What you like when you see larynx and Sanchez and Jeff Bezos you like I get it. Yeah About Transformers Megan Fox. Oh, yeah, it's like you could do whatever you want with anybody. Yeah Yeah, the staff rose was talking about her the other day. Oh, it's like yeah like a angular Superior genetics like Soft Come on Take these head my dog Sorry boys who just did the Transformer voice But yeah, we can't have too much room a little ignorance is bliss you need a little bit of Yeah, but that's not gonna happen man. I'm telling you that's the bottleneck the bottom end and of society You'll need some We think so to me is bad. We think social media is bad where like everybody shouldn't be talking The last thing I want is to bring my girlfriend Around my friends and listen to my friends thought of like I fuck her. Oh, I'd fuck her I got a course. Oh, how about this? I wouldn't fuck her Yeah Harry That's I mean that's that's the worst. Yeah, you bring a hot you think My girl wait, why does that guy not and then a guy you bring your girl around the guy goes man, you Well, I mean I have to kill him