So how long did you marinate in Carmilla Harris and how do you pronounce her name? Well, as she she issued a ad when she ran for Senate featuring children to remind everybody exactly how she expected her name to be pronounced. And obviously, you know, that if she if you diverge from that, then you are automatically accused of all sorts of things. But most of all, it's a very racist thing to do. You saw the same accusation go when Donald Trump did his Al Smith dinner speech said Kamala and that made a lot of people very angry. Who are so good? How can you be racist if you don't know what race she is? Well, she said I'm not even sure who I'm discriminated against when I'm discriminated Carmilla Harris or whatever her name is. Right. I imagine that if somebody mispronounced your first name, then perhaps you could say that. Well, if I pronounce my own first name at least two different ways that she has we have it on tape. Then I think it would be a lot to attack other people for for pronouncing it differently. Right. It's something that if you're that insecure about how people pronounce your name, you know, it shouldn't be you should just be able to either quietly correct them or be completely just go with it. Yeah, but she's made it very clear and spent money to make it clear. This is how I pronounce my name. So how long did you spend like staring at Kamala Harris? Like how long did you work on this book? Right. So I started in January 2023 just doing the research and pulling everything together. So about a year I spent we're working on researching writing the book and wrapped it up the first draft by the summer of 23. So just to skip to the end and unpack it of course, but did by the end of your research, did you like her more or less? Yeah, probably less. But I learned so much about her that it just seemed, you know, she frequently talks about, you know, never let anyone else tell your story. You tell your story. She cites this all the time. She cited it last night during the Al Smith dinner video that she did. Never did anyone else. Never let anyone else tell your story. You tell the story. And that statement strikes me as very fundamentally un-American, right? It seems like if you run for office then if you tell your story, it's probably not real. There's probably a lot more to the story than your first version. And so that was a huge part of it just finding out more about her. But also just the endless talking about herself. She and everyone in her social class and political party, all they do is talk about themselves. Right. But only in very scripted ways, right? Well, how about at all? Like talking about yourself is like, and I would say the main thing I mourn as I look back in the world I grew up and that's now gone. The thing I miss most is the directive that came very clearly from my family. And I think in most families, like, shut up about yourself already. Stop talking about yourself. It's not about you, you freakin' narcissist. That's why so much of her campaign depends on her identity. No, but if you notice this, I mean, maybe it's just the culture, the angle culture I grew up in. Like you were not welcome to talk about yourself all the time. That was considered just not acceptable at all. Not extraordinary rude and pompous, right? You don't want to be that person. Yes. Even politicians are kind of encouraged to talk about other people instead. Of course. Do what I think of her to part of it is just crafting her identity from the very beginning. Yeah. When she first started running for national office, she was very focused on creating this image of her as a person, really baking in to her identity. First of all, that she was the product of that she always cared about politics. She always cared about justice. She grew up marching and shouting with her activist parents who pushed her in a stroller through these protests. And then, you know, skip a few decades. And then suddenly she's sort of the product of the overarching progressive movement that somehow she's always been this progressive liberal who has always been very focused on justice and truth and has made it part of her life and part of her biography when that's not really true. Well, it's demonstrably not really true. I'm not sure what is true about a couple of episodes in her life that I've heard really nothing about. And one is her high school years in Canada. And I think any adult looking back will concede that high school is the period that forms you more than any other. And that period in her life was spent, unless I'm misremembering in Montreal, Canada. Right. A huge part of her life was spent in Montreal. And so you're kind of alienated from any sort of your upbringing. So she was definitely alienated from San Francisco and the Berkeley environment where she was raised kind of brought to a similar location, academic neighborhood, high middle class, I believe, you know, is not a not a working or middle class neighborhood in Montreal in Montreal. And she was the product. She went to a school with, you know, a lot of elites in the country and was certainly aware of what was going on. But it was sort of she was sort of alienated from the overall American experience, right? Well, yeah, so she did spend her high school years in Canada. And she might have gone home to California for some of the summers. I think there's evidence that she did so to visit her dad on a couple occasions. But I don't think she spent much time there. Did she graduate high school in Canada? I think so. And then she's Canadian. I mean, why are we playing? I'm serious. Like, why are we it's like Obama grew up in Indonesia. I don't and Hawaii. I don't understand why we're ignoring everyone seems to be ignoring the obvious. You know, you are formed by your years in high school. And so she's basically very inspired by people in her life. People who were in California to go to Howard. This is definitely a product of Kamala Harris seeking to sort of seize on an on identity by going to Howard in DC as you know, this historically black university and really sort of embracing that identity and using that as she moved back to California and into the you know, into law school in California and sort of jumped into the legal world. Yeah, I mean, the the peril Obama is a much smarter and more talented. I think that Kamala Harris, but there is a similarity in that both of them have these rootless childhoods, not their fault. Of course, broken families, pretty tragic family situation for both of them and both of them. And neither one of them has anything to do with American black culture at all, either genetically or culturally. They've just nothing to do with it. And both of them decide to become American black people. Right. That's why she brings up who she calls her second mother-in-law. She was raised in a by her single mom who was always at work. And then in the same building, there was a person who ran take care center miss Shelton. And this is the woman who is actually from the black South to has that black. She referred to this is the race woman. She refers to as her second mother and was a small business owner. Okay. So this is the woman she was talking about nurse, I was totally confused. Who is this woman? This is Regina Shelton. She ran a daycare business in the same building as their apartment. And she helps raise the children while moms at work. And so she describes this woman as her second mother. And this is the mother who was connected with the black South that took Kamala to, you know, Kamala talks about her taking them to a Christian black church where and even she says they sang in the choir at this church. And so whenever she's in a place where she's speaking to the black church, she refers to this experience. Whereas when she was running for office in California, she's either into a black church once all the time apparently according to Kamala. But at the same time when they were doing magazine articles with Kamala Harris's real mother, she taught said that and they were speaking to certain audiences. Her real mother said that she grew up in the Hindu temple in practice, all of the traditions and and who lived in all the Hindu religious practices. So she was actually a polytheist in childhood. Right. And when she first starts running for office, there's a couple incidents where she starts referring to this Hindu goddess. And we're using her, she uses this Hindu goddess at I think it's Pravari who is both she's both a vengeful warrior and also someone who's very loving. And so she refers to this goddess as someone who inspired her current decision to get into law enforcement and justice. So that's what yeah. So is she a goddess? Yes. Um, Hindu goddess inspired her to get into justice. Someone who can be both a vengeful goddess, but also a caring and loving goddess. Was she suggesting that this goddess was real? Right. This this character in her in the mythology of the Hindu religion. I don't think it's considered mythology. I think it's considered real. Oh, from if you truly believe in how fury, I don't think it's fake. I think you think it's real. It's unclear. And it may be entirely real, by the way, right. But from a Christian perspective, that's demonic. So no, I'm not right. Kind of taking sides though. I have an opinion, but obviously, but as a as a theological matter, those couldn't be more incompatible with each other like you can. Unless you're running for political office, right? Then you can take those to the office. It's that's like saying, you know, it's like, you know, going to a Pita conference in the morning and you know, cattle rancher conference in the afternoon and saying, I love you both. Like that's just not possible. But those are the best politicians. Okay, you covered the White House role. You're more cynical than I am. Okay. Interesting. So she said she was inspired by a goddess. Right. A Hindu goddess to again, from a Christian perspective, a demon. Mm-hmm. That's what Christian think. Right. I guess in the end of the day, she also sang a black choir about justice and learned about justice and loving my name. Was she a cantor and her synagogue too? Do you know? I don't know. Maybe that's Doug's role. I don't know if he goes to synagogue very much. I don't think so. Okay, amazing. Has she ever talked about the Ken Indian part of her childhood? No, not much. Oh. Yeah. That definitely came from her mother in some of her earliest profiles, back when they were just running for her first office's district attorney. Yeah. I'm trying to make the case that she was a real genuine person who really wanted the job and had an cultural identity that was close with San Francisco and really made the best case for her and she was sort of running for office. And she mentioned Canada then. No. No, Canada was not in the, uh, okay, but, but the goddess stuff was. Yeah, a little bit. Yeah, for sure. Amazing. Um, so the Howard University years did she participate at all politically at Howard that we know of? Well, she has a photo right of her protesting at some March on Washington, but that's pretty much the extent of it. She also interned in, uh, an on Capitol Hill with the senator. Um, but other than that, there doesn't seem to be much very much political activity. So on. She's, yeah, a democratic senator. Um, and it's very clear that she's really just enjoying being at college as most of us were when we were in college, just enjoying being at college. And I don't think the activist streak was very strong. Um, so I think the, the first time that most Americans who are not from California, notice Kamala Harris is during the Kavanaugh hearings. Right. But even before that, um, when she won in 2016, she was sort of the one of the small victories for women at a time when their greatest champion Hillary Clinton was vanquished by at the time Donald Trump. Right. And so when she declares victory in 2016, her, her race for Senate, she tears up her speech and delivers something entirely different. Um, really trying to inspire and encourage everybody who's watching and vowed to be the next great fighter who's going to go to Washington, DC and sort of stop Donald Trump. That's kind of her, her first message. And one of the very first things she does was that election night? Yeah. Wow. And November, 2016. Did she add lib that speech? No. I think she had her staff went behind the scenes and rewrote it. Yeah. Yeah. Very quickly. Cause they saw the things were not going well for the Democratic Party. Hmm. And one of her first things she did when she got to Washington was deliver a big speech at the Wounds March and basically saying we are here to fight. And so would that was the pink cap march? Yeah. I got caught in that by accident. Oh, most of us who were in the capital were, right? Yeah. Well, I was driving to the gym to play squash actually. All of a sudden it was over. Yeah. My car was surrounded by all these fat ladies and pink hats. But thinking, I don't know what, you know, I'm from DC. I've been there most of my life. And I never seen all these people on 17 streets. One of those days that was very big. Like some protests, you have to really try to sell it as a big protest. No, no, that was a big march. Yeah. And as someone who's really from the bottom of my heart, pro women, I just have always really liked women. I started to rethink my position on women just watching the people with that speech. They were the most physically unattractive, unhappy people I think I'd ever seen in my life. I mean, they were just really a gruesome bunch. There was also a lot of like really like intelligent feminists from Washington, liberal intelligent feminists who were out in this street. They're so unhappy. It was like every unhappy chick from Bethesda was there. You know what I mean? Like the moms you see at the grocery store are just like hate their weak husbands. And I just didn't realize that there were half a million of those people in the area, but they're a word. Yeah, I was very, so she spoke at that. What did she say? Right. She was very interesting because part of her was still kind of clinging to this idea that a regular agenda was a female agenda. She talks about how you want to talk about women's issues. I will talk to you about finance. I will talk to you about education. I'm really trying to separate women and have something special to add to those areas. Right. It was like she was just trying to say that during the speech, she makes the case that, you know, all issues are women's issues. There's no feminist economics look like. Yeah. That was kind of the point, right? It's just like, uh-huh. Okay. Eventually, I think because of the woman's march, it kind of does sort of slip into this agenda and certainly with the issue of abortion, she really couldn't embrace that. But yeah, her first idea is that women should not have kids. Women should have the freedom to kill their children. It makes them more powerful. Right. Does she mention the goddess when she said that? No. This is the new Kamala Harris. This is why I somehow feel like the goddess may be inspiring that position, but I can prove it. Right. Okay. So she gave a talk at the women's march was, I'm jogged by memory. Was that a big deal? Was she a major speaker? She was one of many. Yeah. Yeah. You know, they get all the senators up on the stage at the same time. Right. They each get a couple minutes. So yeah, as soon as she got to the Senate, she spent a lot of time just, you know, clashing with trumpet pointies, right? Because that's what you do when you first get to the Senate. Right. Yeah, for sure. They pick their cabinet and they go through that. The hearings and grandstand. If you can, if you can make a splash, yeah, you can make a name for yourself. And so one of her first things, she torments General Kelly, who was widely respected by partisan majority of senators who viewed General Kelly as a true public servant. And she was one of the ones that clapped with him and prosecuted him and basically made a name for herself on all the different appointees. And then yes, then after that, it was the whole Jeff Sessions Russia thing. She made a big name of herself then, you know, grilling Jeff Sessions and getting him to admit that if he's rushed, then he gets nervous. And there was a whole big viral moment, you know, with the dawn of C-SPAN, every senator, every congressman is looking for these sort of viral moments. Yeah. Just, you know, springboard them in the future. And so she really got this reputation as being a fighter, someone who could take on the Trump people and make them look foolish. Hmm. What happened with Kavanaugh? Right. With Kavanaugh, it was a time of desperation for the left. And for many senators who were thinking about running for president in was your chance. I call it like the Kavanaugh primary. Whoever does the best dance caught against, against Kavanaugh is going to earn the respect from the left as you prepare your run for president. Yeah. So this is creepy, but it's true. And it's worth knowing every time you use the internet, you are being watched. You were not alone. Private businesses do it. Government actors are country and others. All of it internet traffic, including yours is mindlica precious commodity. It's bought and sold. And it's used to manipulate what you think, what you buy and yes, even how you vote. It's a big deal and it's a huge market. Your internet provider can see every single website you visit all of them in the United States, throw out to sell your data, even your browsing history to the highest bidder. Did you know that? And that includes everything you do inside a so-called incognito or private browser window. Don't fool yourself. They're watching you always. So if you think that should be illegal, obviously, we agree with you should be put out of business these companies immediately. But in the meantime, you should protect yourself. The way that we do it is with Express VPN. That's an easy to use app that encrypts and reroute all your internet traffic through secure servers. So they can't see it because we use Express VPN, our internet providers cannot see our browsing history. Simply put, we've got nothing to sell because they don't have anything on us. That's important to us. It's probably important to you too. So if you think internet privacy only matters to drug traffickers, people are doing shady things, think again, privacy is a prerequisite for freedom. No privacy, no freedom. And the truth is we have all seen how activists and power-hungry government actors have tried and succeeded in getting people fired or even thrown in jail for saying the wrong thing or having the wrong opinions. Protecting your personal data is essential. It's the beginning of reclaiming your freedom. Express VPN hides your IP address. That's a number that reveals your actual identity on the internet. It's unique because we hide our IP address with Express VPN, data brokers can't use it to build a profile on us to sell off to marketers or other governments or our own government. That happens too. By the way, hiding your IP address is really useful when you want to appear to be somewhere. You're not and that's your prerogative, by the way. We used it in Moscow to get our reporting out of the country, if you hit around the world. We always use it. You could also use it to access geo-restricted content from anywhere. So if you're in a country that doesn't allow you to use an app, you can with Express VPN. Express VPN has several locations and over 100 countries around the world. That's like having 100 different passports right on your phone. So I'm not a tech expert, obviously. And if I can use it, you can too. It's really easy. You just tap one button and you're connected. They have apps for every device you own or even potentially own iPhone, any kind of phone, laptop, tablet, even your smart TV. Anything that uses the internet can use Express VPN. Express VPN has been rated number one by CNET, the Verge and a lot of other tech reviewers. We have it. You should too. Right now, Tuckercrossing.com listeners can get three extra months free at Express VPN.com slash Tucker. That's ex PR ESS VPN.com slash Tucker for three extra months or free. And so she spent a lot of time interrupting, forcing angrily aggressively pursuing Kavanaugh and trying to get him to trip up. If you remember the famous moment when she kind made up this story when she's asking about whether or not he ever discussed the rush a case with any lawyer from this castle, which firm in Washington and Kavanaugh is being very careful because he doesn't want to be pushed into a perjury trap. But he says, you know, I can't think of any is there a moment that you're thinking about? And she's indicating that yes, there is a moment she's thinking about. And she's like, but you're not going to tell me, are you? And Kavanaugh is still being very careful. And it turns out like she never had any evidence of this ever happening, but she wanted to get him wanted to catch him in this moment. And ultimately reporters were kind of surprised by the end of this great exercise that oh wow, she has no evidence that he ever met or spoke about the case with the lawyer from this firm. But yeah, it was back in the days when anything Russia, Russia, Russia related was hot political news, right? You could just smear anybody with the very whiff of Russia. It was always like a considerate of great victory, which kind of pales in the bears and now. Yeah, looking back like this stupidity of that was just awe inspiring because one of the no of the Russia stuff, there was it was the idea that the Trump campaign was colluding with anybody, you know, to actually believe that you would have to know nothing about what the Trump campaign was really like where they were, you know, as a little disorganized, they were not including with each other. And there was never, I mean, that was the concern. It was evidence free. Russia was not a threat to the United States. There were a couple of other countries that were playing in a huge way in our elections and still are normal, ever mentioned them. It's not Russia to put it mildly. Everyone in DC knows that. Russia had no role whatsoever in our domestic politics. And they had no sort of agenda. It would affect our core interests. So like the whole thing was just nuts. And everybody went along with it. Everybody went along with it. Right. Like everybody just like for the force of repetition, just because, you know, every channel, every newspaper every day was talking about Russia, people were like, you know, I really think or something there. What? It just showed a dumb everybody was sort of all just herd animals, including friends of mine, for whom I lost a lot of respect. I was okay. I'm open minded. I'm kind of agnostic on Russia and I'm willing to believe anything. So where's the evidence? Yeah. Do you remember this? Yeah, I do. And I do as always is very puzzling because it started from this dossier, right, that they always had in their back pocket, but didn't use it during 2016 because they didn't think they had to. Right. But once Trump won, it was the first thing that they pulled out of their pocket. So like, wow, we can actually use this. Was Harris big on the Russia thing? Not too much. She prosecuted different Trump officials. She did get Bill Barr one time, you know, asking him if Trump had ever asked him to sort of stop the investigation. And he found himself sort of fumbling for words. And yeah, couldn't really answer the question. So she did have some good moments there. But yeah, I think a lot of it was just she was seen as somebody who was fighting. She had this opposing, you know, she was fighting something else, right? And then people placed that excitement because she was the one doing fighting against this force that they were very unhappy about. So how did, if you were to summarize how she behaved during the Kavanaugh hearings, I mean, I think I remember her going all in on the rape stuff for sexual assault stuff. Right. Right. She was very, very adamant about supporting Christine Blasey Ford. And it was also around the me too movement, right? She was very, she very, she honed in on that as a political force that would help her. So when it came to that, she was just very intent on pushing her Christine for Blasey Ford as this, as this hero as this patriot, you know, she repeatedly claimed that she believed her when she first spoke before she even met her. She repeatedly said that, you know, she was a patriot and a hero for coming forward. And she really thought that this was the moment that she could really push through and stop Kavanaugh. You know, Democrats didn't have much to go on. But when they found out that Diane Feinstein had this letter from Christine Ford who wished to remain anonymous, um, different, you know, she confided Feinstein about the letter, like you better address this once reports started leaking out about the existence of this letter. She confronted Feinstein and said, you better address this or it's going to look real ugly for you. So Feinstein was eventually forced out to make this letter public to bring them and to bring her into the conversation, even though she went into remain anonymous. And so this one was ultimately pulled into the fight. And Senator, senators and Senate staff who were went through that. It was a very tough time for a lot of people in the Senate. Whatever happened, so Christine Blasey Ford was all coming back to me. It was, there was a high school party in Bethesda who starts in Bethesda, doesn't it? And, um, which is a suburb of DC, right? Of course in Maryland, Montgomery County and, and cap not supposedly at this high school party, 40, 35 years before had acted badly and sexually assaulted Christine Blasey Ford. Is that that was for all the question? That was her. So then Blasey Ford basically destroyed her life, correct? Right. I, you know, maybe she's still a progressive hero among some, but you certainly, we've seen this story before when Democrats will pull on unsuspecting character to weaponize against the Republican party and just sort of cast them aside when it's all over. Well, exactly. Nicely put that's exactly right. Like whatever happened, Christine Blasey Ford is no longer a hero. Right. Like George Floyd, it's like she was useful for a news cycle. They upended her life. And then I don't, I don't think they've like, yeah, it makes me think of all the moms who lost their sons and Iraq, how they were weaponized and they talked about this paragons of, you know, this is why the Bush administration is evil because we have this poor woman who's suffering the loss of her son. They would hoist them up and bring them to all the speeches and then yeah, and now all those moms are against the moms who have hostages and, you know, Israel. No, it's too. They brought them on stage and then it turns out, oh, we can't help your child who's being held hostage. So, so aren't able to help them either, but we were able to use them politically to. It's funny. All those Iraq moms who are marching against Trump, I mean, rather against Bush, they all had my sympathy speaking for myself, but they, you know, now the democratic party that once, you know, promoted them and called them heroes is aligned with Dick Cheney and his repulsive little daughter. Right. You still have, you know, like, whatever happened to have remnants of the code pink out there. Exactly. They certainly aren't the champions that they know I'm on their side. Media didn't get no longer healing them as the champions. Sorry, truth and just sorry to the grass. It's just interesting. It's a funny thing. It is an interesting time to read the secretary. So, but Kamala Harris becomes more national figure after falsely accusing right. Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault four hours ago. Is that that timing? I believe the believe all women believe the victims. Right. mostly accusing. Right. Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault for hours ago. Is that that timing? I believe the believe all women believe the victims. Right. This whole Me Too movement that was kind of around 2018, I believe, to the 1780 right around the time of Kavanaugh was sort of brought up in right. Like the entire movement was kind of leveraged in this whole thing where it's like believe all women. And that's our new platform for the Democratic Party. So women don't lie ever? No, especially about this because they're Hindu goddesses or something. I don't know. I don't know about that. It's funny to find out that 51% of the population just doesn't lie. Everything they say is just gospel is just true. Well, you're supposed to because, you know, that's the those are the new marching orders. Only it turns out that it didn't go so well. Does that apply to Candace Owens or just just Christine Blasey Ford? Right. Just it's just funny to look back. I'm sorry. Keep it up to you, but it's just funny to look back. It's like a time capsule. It's you remember these moments and in retrospect, they're so completely absurd. It's hard to believe that Martha Raditz and Joe Scarborough and all these other supposedly educated people are saying this stuff with a straight face on television. Well, especially the Me Too movement. I mean, women are you joking? No. Come on. No. And Colin Harris was one of the first to see this as like a politically advantageous position to take the Me Too movement. So there's video of her marching in San Francisco at a parade with championing the Me Too movement and who's who's along with her noted celebrity, Jesse Smollett. Not really. He is also right beside her in a Me Too Juicish Smollett was a Me Too or a Me Tooer back in 2018 and they're both chanting, you know, up up with education, down, down, with deportation. So they're also protesting. They're making this up. They're also protesting immigration, wearing Me Too movement gear. But what's interesting about that and if you look at the Me Too movement as a political force, look at what they did to Al Franken. Oh, yeah. He was one of the first democratic victims of Me Too. I defended him. Right. He wouldn't defend himself. He's such a cuck. He wouldn't even defend himself. He's nothing wrong. Oh, right. So he was he was a rising political star. Yeah. People were actively he just published a book. People were actively talking about him as maybe he's the answer to Donald Trump. He found this populist movement in Minnesota that pretty much vanquished the Republican Party in the state. Yeah. And was this like awkward, weird anti-Trump, right? And so people were actively talking about him as a possible presidential candidate. But then when, you know, these allegations start coming out about his behavior, who are the first ones to seize on it, all the democratic women centers who were also interested in running a presidential campaign. I think it was I think it was Christian Gillibrand that fired the first, the worst. I'll leave it. Not her real name, but I can't really name. No, I was fake. Um, I wish I could remember her real name, but it's not even close to Kirsten Gillibrand. But um, anyway, any Klobuchar, Kamala Harris, they're all Klobuchar did that. They all band together and marched to Schumer's office and say he's got to go. And he actually obeyed them. Right. Well, him and all his colleagues were, you know, when Schumer pulls it into the office and says, I can't defend you. I can't fight for you. What are you going to do? Are you going to fight for yourself and go be rigged over the cold for the rest of your life? Or do you just go away quietly? It seems in Frankenstein, he didn't want to fight. I know Frank and well and have known for 25 years. Yeah. There's pretty clever guy um, has good quality. People in the Senate always had good things to see. Yeah. I mean, I never hated L Frank and, but he was ultimately all he really cared about was left wing ideology and just such a sad and being liked and broken guy. Yeah. But again, you know, charming guy, talented guy, more talented than most U.S. Senators for sure. But so weak inside sure, I think Boston by his wife, that was always my impression, framing from Portland, man. But um, but the point is he didn't do anything wrong. And if he had just written it out for a week and just let it pat just hunker down, you know, go to Barbados for a week, come back, you'd be fine. He was elected United States. And he gave up his seat voluntarily because four ambitious girls didn't like him. I mean, wow, what a loser. Right. You would certainly expect and more people started fighting back ultimately. But at the time they were very afraid of the movement. But it was very much if you were outfranking and you just dishonor yourself and your family, your kids are ashamed. You go down in history as some sort of sexual assault or some sort of crypto rapist. You give up your own Senate seat that you really fought hard for just because cursed in jillibrand or whatever her real name is. Right. Once what you have, can you imagine the regret you must feel right. I'd then I'd think a lot of Democratic donors were not happy with that. Certainly with jillibrand, a lot of Democratic donors were not happy. She ran for president in Iowa. Kind of ended very shortly afterwards because Democratic donors were still furious at her. She's taking ranking off the tweet. Lee falls person. I take Carmella Harris any day over Kristen, jillibrand. Oh, really? I fear something about jillibrand. That's just really, um, she's just New Yorker. So ruthless. Right. Ash, you have to be that's fasting. So, yeah. So Harris joined the chorus against against, uh, al Franken, right? At the same time, she has somebody in her office that is also under investigation for his own me too stuff when he was back in California. So someone in her close circle, uh, I don't want to get his name wrong, but it was somebody very close who was being investigated by, you know, justice system in California. They ultimately had, she was, he was sued by a woman for inappropriate behavior and they eventually had to award this woman, a big payout because of things that he had done to her in her in his office in his previous job. Yeah. Um, when Colin Harris has informed about it, she has no idea. She shocked. I had no idea that this was even happening. Well, if he was currently having this case being taken that was already underway by all the rules of the me too movement, you're still to get rid of this person as soon as you hear about it. Executed me. Right. Of course. But to have someone on his staff on her staff who was involved in this whole situation and then suddenly claim ignorance when the ruling is issued really doesn't pass a smell test. Well, so I mean, Kamal Harris got her job because she was having sex with a married older man, Willie Brown. And then she was Montel Williams's side piece. So it's like, I'd love to know her actual perspective on sexual politics is a little bit different from maybe what she said. Um, you know what I mean? Right. Right. I mean, if there's one anti-feminist in the state of California, it's Willie Brown. Right. Although he very much loved to see himself as a feminist. No, but it would bring real life, but he would bring, he would host these events that featured only women. And he would talk about how these were great woman empowerment summons. I think they're known as ladies and sexual like, look, I like Willie Brown. I'm not attacking Brown. I think he's hilarious because I I think he's a little bit more honest, but like, very honest, if there's anybody whose life violates the principles of second wave feminism, it's Willie Brown. I mean, honest, I really really ran. Yeah. Right. I think that even though Clinton described him as the real slick will. Did he really say that? Yeah. Oh, that's so good. Now you're making me like them both because you know, you just like flashes of honesty wherever you find them. Right. Willie Brown was this character in California politics that couldn't be brought down by corruption, but he always, he was always teasing joking about corruption. Yeah. It was very, if you're having sex with Willie Brown in order to get a job, you know, whatever you can deal with your own conscience and with your own Hindu goddess on that, you know, but you definitely can't lecture me on feminism if you've done that. I think it's fair to say, right? I think so. I think when you talk to women, they would, they would agree with that statement. You know, you give up your, you gain a lot. You get to do attorney generalist, state of California and the US Senator and vice president, but you do give up your right to lecture me about feminism. Right. Is that fair? A lot of women would agree with that. I think that's right. I'm just being, I'm not judging. I'm sure, but she she's not allowed to judge either. I guess that's what I'm saying. It's certainly not without evidence. Right. Yeah. That was the whole story. You would sexually brand to get a job. So why you're calling it a cool on the feminism stuff. As you discussed with a previous guests, like, yeah, kicked off her entire career and was worth it. Well, just that is he, you know, Willie Brown gave her positions of power on state boards, gave that paid handsomely. You know, she made up to $400,000 back in the 90s from the city. Can you be a big about which positions? And then she just keeps it in trouble again. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then she made so, she made about $400,000 over a couple of years just from these once a month state board positions. And that's like you adjust that for today's $1,000. It's like almost a million dollars. Oh, yeah. And then bought her at the key, you know, bought her a BMW, helped pay for her wardrobe, really turned her in to Kamala Harris. So there are two ways to look at this. And as a charitable man who instinctively likes women and likes kind of plucky up from the bootstrap stories, I think you could tell that story in an honest way that might make you admire Kamala Harris. Here's this woman. It doesn't know anybody. She's from Canada. You know, she doesn't, she's not from the area really. She's thinking from she was working at the Alameda County. Yeah, exactly right. And in the East Bay, right. And she winds up becoming a turning general, the biggest state. And she's willing to do whatever it takes to get that, including have sex with Willie Brown and Montau Williams. If you told the story that way, I'd say, well, you know, morally, it's obviously malodorous, but on the other hand, this woman has a lot of a lot of energy. She's focused. She does what it takes to get what she wants exactly right. And she's totally self made. And I think Willie Brown really opened her up to this world of the possibility for sure. If you're a young prosecutor at the age of 29, you see what's possible, but being on the arm, a Willie Brown, you have sex with Willie Brown. Why wouldn't you look at that and say, I can seize this for myself as long as I show up and demand it. And Willie Brown taught her how to do that. He talks about in his book, like in order to get into wealthy white worlds, you force your way into these positions of influence, like on museum boards and the arts and you know, the charities and you represent yourself as this figure. Then they'll welcome you into these worlds and they'll hoist you up onto these political platforms. Okay, that's all fine. I get it. I mean, it's a form of prostitution, but I try not to judge. All I'm saying is, why would you be self righteous and scolding? She is no right to be self righteous about anything or scold anyone. And she doesn't need to. By the way, she could just, I don't know, tell her story honestly. And people might say, I would say, I kind of get it. She made something out of not much. And I admire that. Why does she have to lecture the rest of us about the civil rights movement? Right. It's because it's politically advantageous at this point. We kind of see that. But it's disgusting. Right. We've told you before about how low it is a great app that I am proud to say I use my whole family uses. It's for daily prayer and Christian meditation. And it's transformative. As we head into the starter school in the height of election season, you need it. Trust me, we all do things you're going to get crazier and crazier and crazier. Sometimes it's our to imagine even what is coming next. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's prayer ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road, headed to kit sports, there was always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family, but it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity, obviously, is attacked under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Did you see the opening of the parasol Olympics? There's a reason because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle. Obviously. So try, hello, get three months completely free at hallow. That's hallow.com slash Tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually and tuning ground yourself in prayer, it's now. Hallow will help personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended. Hallow.com slash Tucker. But that's democratic politics. Shut up, honey. You're from Canada. Stop telling me that the Edmund Pettus bridge like you had nothing to do with that. Right. No, right. But she's not from Alabama. No, no, no, she definitely embraced this agenda as her own. Yeah, and breast embraced her identity. Anybody questions her identity. She's like, I'm not even going to take the time to discuss this with you. If you have a problem with me being black, that's your problem. Oh, so black. It's hilarious. Right. And when you talk to black women in politics, like they know, but they also see her as someone who could do the job. It's just so fake. So she did, uh, Brett Beers show the other night. Right. It's the first interview I've ever seen where after the interview, everyone tells you ignore all the substance of everything she said and focus only on the style. All of her defenders are like focusing on the styling. Wow, just the fact that she did this interview. She won. Whereas doing an area that Brett Beers, so it's also stupid. But what I didn't read any of the coverage of it because, you know, the lesson was obvious for me. I didn't need to be told with the lessons, but I was really struck by how angry and touchy she was defensive. She was nasty. She was skillless. She was, seen a million of her interviews. She always is at a theme that you've noticed in the past. And this is something that was very much a product that sort of booster on the public stage, which is why she's trying to repeat it. You know, she had a better than expected to bathe against Donald Trump because she was able to tangle with him and demonstrate that she did a toe to toe. Pretty good job. Right. Not bad. Right. She needed that the opposition force to campaign against like, you need strum. If she doesn't have Trump, what does she have? And so I think that that was part of the calculus of doing the Fox News interview. It's like, if I can just go against something and if I can just stand tall and get in a fight with Brett there, then I look better by comparison. It's just like a total hassle. I mean, that was just my view. I mean, I don't know. Maybe I'm completely out of it. I, you know, it's nothing new. Their gender. She just was like screechy and defensive and mad. It's right. I see another interviews like that with her. No, she always is. It's very interesting because, and I talk about this in the book a lot, is when she was sort of this like democratic champion in the Senate, where she was known for repeatedly fighting and getting angry and doing her utmost to crush Kavanaugh. I think she realized at some point that if I'm going to run for president, I need to like be sort of a little more than just this opposing force. I need to have an idea, an identity that attracts Americans to vote for me for president. And so that's when she introduces this concept of a joyful warrior. She makes a hard pivot away from the fighter and goes on Ellen and delivers this elegant soliloquy about the importance of being a joyful warrior about loving your country and fighting for your country and not being angry all the time. She had multiple interviews where she's like, I'm tired of being mad all the time. And I want to be a joyful warrior. Did she use the phrase joyful warrior repeatedly, repeatedly on Ellen in magazine profiles. She completely. And this is this is actually before Kavanaugh because she has this reputation of being a fighter in the Senate. Then she pivots to be a joyful warrior around 2018. Then she pivots back to the vegetable warrior when she's fighting Kavanaugh. And then by the time she's ready to announce her campaign for president in 2019 early 2019, she sort of pivots back to this idea that I'm a joyful warrior and all I care about is speaking joyful. So you've looked pretty closely to her life. You just sort of book about her. How many instances did you stumble across of joy? True genuine joy. Very hard to find. Very hard to find. She's very guarded. She's a very private person and she's uncomfortable talking about herself. She talks about it all the time. She's just like I'm just not comfortable talking about myself, but she never stops talking about herself. Except in the specific ways, like big raise at a middle class family, being the product of her community, being what community is she talking about? Right. The San Francisco community, but she's from Canada. Right. But what the hell is she talking about? All the attention when she's talking about the community. She's talking about her childhood community that she grew up in, leaving the Canada part out entirely. And then just pretending she's always been from Oakland, which she's actually from Berkeley, but she doesn't like to talk about it. Yeah. I mean, what yeah, I am from that area. So I know it well. And there are like no black people there. I don't even know what she's talking about. In San Francisco. No, there's like one and a half black neighborhoods, tiny percentage of population. I think she is the daughter of an academic elite. Right. Her mother and mother guide to right. Right. Her father and mother were sort of hard left academics. They were not necessarily the marching showers. I mean, I'm sure they went to a few protests, but they were very much intellectual activists. They were very. Can I ask is her father or a attacker at one point, didn't he? Right. And this is for using her Jamaican identity to sort of defend the idea of smoking weed, legalizing weed. Yeah. He was horrified by that. It's the rare occasion where he just without permission went out and wrote an angry essay. Expleasantly saying, I wish to categorically disassociate myself from this brand that she's selling of her Jamaican heritage being the reason why she supports legal marijuana. Yeah. Because I mean, if you actually are Jamaican, the idea that everyone in Jamaica's you know, Peter Tosh is offensive. Right. He was very angry by so she doesn't get along with them then clearly. No. No. And he is here to take that. Actually, he lives in Washington, DC. What? Yeah. Harris's father lives in Washington, DC, the father who denounced her. Right. What does he do? What's this? Tell me that story. Why haven't I heard that? Yeah. We had some reporters from the Daily Mail, which is where I work and they sort of tracked him down and he does actually live in a house not too far away from Kamala Harris. And it does not look like they spend a lot of time together. If at all, I think the last time he posted photos of an adult Kamala Harris and him together were from many years ago before she came to Washington. And he does a lot of work with economics and Jamaica and the World Bank. I don't, but he's also semi retired at this point. So yeah, he's just kind of this figure that exists in DC, but has no close connection with his daughter. Has he ever talked about her other than to write an op at attacking her? He wrote in a brief piece about his Jamaican heritage and how Kamala Harris was connected to that. He wrote that for a Jamaican newspaper where he talks about his life and you know, having Kamala at a young age and then you know, becoming distanced and it eventually estranged entirely from her. Yeah, it's a very sad story. He talks that he writes in his book, his book about you know, Marxist economics. He talks about this book is dedicated to my daughter's call in Maya and I, from whatever relationship we have, like it's a little bit of a sad story because it seems like he was kind of pushed out of the family's life entirely after, after quite some time. Yeah. I mean, he wasn't at any of her victory parties for her political races. He did not attend her inauguration. Kamala never personally invited him to an inauguration. I think the times of the story a couple of weeks ago, it said somehow he got an invitation through an intimate mutiary, but he was never asked personally to come by his daughter. Ouch. Yeah, women who are are mad at their dads, you know, tend to not all but a lot of them end up wearing pink hats at women's marches. And in general, if you're a father and your daughter grows up to the a man hater, it's probably kind of your fault. Right. Yeah. Fair. You sort of take on that responsibility. You know, yeah. You know that it's your fault. Right. They don't have a relationship with your daughter. And that's kind of your yeah, if she's running around promoting abortion, right, she's occasion some soul searching on your part, I would say, but as a father of daughters, I can say that. But so anyway, so she comes to DC speaking of relationships, how and she's chosen by Joe Biden, who is promised America to give us what we really want, which was a female black vice president. Well, they totally rejected it during the campaign when her failed presidential campaign, when she thought she was launching this historic future forward looking campaign in 2019 in January of 2019, when she announces her run for president, it doesn't go well. And it goes really badly. And I'm sorry to a lie right over that. So she announces how long does she run for president? She's one of the first out of the gate. She has all the support from many of the donors, many of the major media elites. You know, she has this moment with people like Rachel Maddow says, you know, I do think that you are one of our strongest candidates. And I do think that you're going to make it to the final finishing line. It's really an impressive effort by the elite in the entire party. They want to see Kamala Harris succeed. And they're very bullish about her chances when she gets into the right. It's such a funny, funny race. So the the the candidate that Democrats really want is the socialist, but he criticizes the banks so he cannot be allowed to be the nominee because you can't criticize banks. Right. That's immoral. Right. And we're a little squeamish about universal health care, right? But Kamala Harris actually want to give Democratic voters anything they really want. Right. So have she runs as this, you know, she moves herself so far to the left, right before she runs for president. She's become this like radical leftist candidate, even more radical than Bernie Sanders himself. She adores his Medicare for all, but when she's up on the debate stage and they're like, but if you have Medicare for all, and this means getting rid of private health care. And she's like, that's right. I agree. And then when she gets enormous pushback media coverage, the health insurance industry, then she walks it back and says, well, actually, I don't mean that. I'm sure private insurance will still be around. And I want it to be around even though there is socialized health care. Well, it's not really how it works. But if you, if you, you know, can pivot quickly to say that and then she makes the same mistake again. And this is when, you know, you obviously have a core Democratic party that wants to see you as like the leftist champion like Bernie Sanders is, right? Kamala Harris really wants to be that figure is doing her most desperate attempt to win sort of the Bernie Sanders mantle. But the Bernie Sanders supporters are very angry with her for even pretending to be a socialist Democratic socialist, right? Because she's not. And so I think that there was a very, well, she's a tool of the banks, right? And then neo-cons and every other sort of evil institution and Democratic party land. Well, she's willing to do the bidding of anybody who can get her in power. She's not, she was never known in California as someone who is, you know, she talks about this, we keep going back. I'm sorry, but she talks how much about how she fought the big banks to win this massive mortgage settlement after the disastrous 2008 crash. Yeah. Um, but yeah, what she didn't lead the charge. It was led by Eric Schneiderman from New York who sort of rallied any progressive attorney general of a state, many who have gone on to have successful political careers. And like this is our moment. If we fight the big banks and earn a bigger settlement, then we are automatically seen as champions. And so she fought the big banks and got a bigger settlement. But she's still settled. And well, she's a tool of the rich. Right. Has been always the, the banking industry, the abortion industry, the war industry, she's, she's a little foot soldier for industry. I mean, that's right. Yeah, we've been right. Right. An activist have all been very frustrated with her unwillingness to take risks until she's running for president. And then she's suddenly for everything. Uh, she's for reducing red meat consumption. She's for banning plastic straws. She's for decriminalizing prostitution, despite her mixed record on that. She's for legalizing marijuana. Um, she just totally pivots and becomes this, this figure who supports every single radical agenda item during the Democratic primary. And yet, like, well, that makes sense as a feminist, because if obviously for women, you want to encourage some to sell their bodies like slaves, right. Right. Yeah. And apparently this is that you go on, you know, black needed to sell this as, uh, as some leverage you want. Yeah. Something about freedom. We need what you need is decriminalization of prostitution and abortion to make more. We kill your chendrods and smoke more weed. And that's about freedom. That's about success. That's the, that's the, that's the opportunity economy that we want to sell. Yeah. That's the agenda of the goddess. Um, so her, her presidential campaign, despite vigorous endorsement from white ladies like Rachel Maddow crashes and burns like the dog's only at the dog food. Correct. Right. How she goes to Iowa. Once she hits Iowa, to her whole life, she's lived in a, in a one party state, California. And the idea there is to get the backing of the elites, the donors, and then raise enough money to work to just plaster the air with advertising. Right. Then you win. And as long as you have the blasting of the elites, then you can pretty much win in California. You don't have to necessarily go on the ground and convince voters. Um, you just need those three things. And so she goes into this primary in Iowa was sort of the, the same focus, right? When the blessing of the elites raise a bunch of money, run all the advertisements. And then when she hits the ground in Iowa, she suddenly finds that Democrats are not there. They're willing to listen. But when they listen to her, they're not satisfied with what they're hearing. They see her on the debate stages, making the case for all of these progressive policies. But then when she's asked to defend them, she's either walking back changing her mind on these issues on top of it all in the beginning, very beginning of her campaigns when the Jesse, the Jesse small, it stuff breaks. And that's when she sort of rushes to his defense and is, is the first candidate sort of leading the march for justice for Jesse. So she sends out a tweet. It's like, wait, hold that stop stop. Here you And is is the first candidate sort of leading the march for justice for Jesse? So she sends out a tweet. It's like we hold that stop stop. Here you are making fun of her. She's totally fake. But in one sense, she is a legitimate pioneer. She was the first across the not the Edmund Pettus bridge, but the jussie small ad bridge like she was there facing off the guard dogs and fire hoses on behalf of jussie small ad. Right. Right. She was leads. She led the entire democratic primary field to defend jussie small ad. And then she still hasn't apologized for that, by the way. She still hasn't taken down the tree. Some sense is civil rights hero. If you define civil rights is like fake hate crimes. Right. Right. So and she's never a politician for that. No, she's never a politician for that. No, she's never a politician for it. She expressed regret that it happened, but she never apologized for was it passive constructive construction? Like that it happened. Yeah. This is not spontaneous. This is not good for people who have real hate crimes. So but she still has the tweet defending him as one of the smartest. That's still up. It's still up. Just like her, you know, the famous Minnesota bailout of the protesters, Minneapolis, yeah, yeah, that's still live too. So she's not she's not one to apologize very much. That happens with a lot of politicians. Certainly Joe Biden doesn't like to apologize for anything. Yeah, it's it's so telling. Whereas, you know, if you want to be strong, apology is the only way. Right. And people saw her as like the anti Biden. So when she first goes out on the debate stage and basically calls him a racist, when they ask him about the accusations of women of unwanted touching and groping, she says, I believe all women and they have the right to say that. So she's one of the first ones to sort of tackle Biden as this out of touch dinosaur, who no longer belongs on a national stage. She said as much during the debate, you know, trying to be nice. I'm not calling you a racist, but let me call you a racist. That's if essentially what she said wasn't enthusiastic enough about busing. Yeah, they she pulled that from Biden's past, but at the same time he's out there talking about the good old days when he worked with segregationists and everybody got along and certainly the modern laps is like, well, you can't do that. I don't want that. I don't want Joe Biden. Bussing was a disaster. I didn't help anybody. Crushed white kids, crushed black kids, it destroyed public schools in the United States. I'd love to hear someone explain why busing was a good idea. Right. What sense was it a good idea? Like how where did that work exactly? And giving the numbers to show that it worked. It didn't work. It was horrible. And the people who promoted it sent their own children to private school. So like, I don't know. The fact that she got up there on stage and yelled at Biden, who's a pig. I'm not defending Biden, but like the one place he's been right in his career was to oppose busing. Bussing was immoral as hell. And nobody called her on it. It was weird. Well, it was weird is that she was projecting herself as somehow this victim of segregation and and suffrage growing up in Berkeley, California growing up in Montreal. I mean, that's where for him to high school was when she went to high school was a lot of segregation. That famous moment that little girl was me. You know, talking about writing the bus from one wealthy California enclave to another. Right. And trying to embrace this idea that she was somehow this great civil rights figure is rather offensive to a lot of black people who were just like, well, just insane. What about white people? I mean, the whole thing is nuts. The idea that whatever without even getting into busing, but I would just love to hear someone defend busing on its own terms, like where was busing and success? Who benefited from it exactly? Right. And when they asked her, well, what's your position on busing? She found herself unable to explain. Yeah. And they really like, well, why are we talking about busing anyway? Right. It was just it was it was an attempt to just find any cudgelid all to hit Joe. And now it's totally right. It made a big splash. Did you really say that? Why are we talking about it in the first place? No, that's why I'm saying, but when they asked her for her position on busing, she's like, well, I don't know. Like, she didn't have a good answer. Whether or not she would support federal busing. Gosh, this is right. You don't have to station obvious political attack. Well, but you don't even need to try that hard to expose her. She exposes herself. It's also fake. What a bad thing is going on in the world that honestly, not many of us can have an effect on rising crime, failing schools, a tanking economy. What can you do about that? Well, not a lot, but you can get your own house in order. And above all, you can spend money with merchants, with companies that support your values, that are making this a better country and not a worse country. But how do you find those companies? Well, that's Republic Square. Comes in. Public Square actually curates the best products for America's small businesses to help families lead happier, healthier, more productive, connected lives. That means fewer errands to big box stores. Let's searching to find wholesome alternatives to the garbage being offered in our culture and more quality times by what people you love most. If you want to fix your country, you've got to strengthen yourself and your home and you need to spend your dollars where they do good and not bad. Rebuilding America takes place one small change at a time with wise spending, supporting people who support your family, not funding people who hate you. If you want to do that, publicsquare.com is the answer, publicsquare.com. Was she ever popular in California? Did you ever find evidence that she was like had majority? So that's why Leixe accepted. She won her elections pretty handily. Except for the one race Chad problems with was running through the district attorney general's race. There was a formidable Republican still in the state, Steve Cooley who posed a pretty big threat. But did she when I've often heard people say, but I've never checked it myself, that when she ran for president, she did not have anywhere near majority support in her own state. Right. That was the big problem is that she thought she could use California as a springboard. Like obviously they will rally around me in California and push me forward as the next great leader of the Democratic Party, but people in California did not. She was so low in the polls in California. She had to quit before she got to the California primary because they obviously favored Bernie. Yeah. Well, Bernie's not allowed because the donors didn't like Bernie. Right. There was although there was that. Well, and then the biggest, I think the moment that was critical for her campaign, she was still kind of limping along, even after they buy an attack. Some people liked it. Some people didn't and most, you know, more importantly, the people who really in charge of the party and who was going to win were not happy with it. And I think that's kind of why she pulled back like with Biden's record. And if you're a Democrat, a young rising Democrat, and if you really want to take out Joe Biden, if you go at him hard for about four or five months on his record, you can pretty much turn the entire, I think you could have turned the entire party against him. But because he was sort of seen as maybe the only one who could defeat Donald Trump, I think that there was a lot of force from the establishment Democratic Party. This is like, look, just leave him alone. He might be what we need. It just crazy that the anti white party in the end nominated an old straight white guy, right? Blowing patterns of the position of fear, right? The fake black lady, the gay guy who may not even really be gay. I don't know, but guys claim she's getting away. And they pick, you know, a 76 year old straight white guy with all this baggage and history of Democrats past, right? It's like, yeah, it's just interesting. So other moment that effectively ends her campaign, as I was saying, is the moment that Tulsi Gabbard had the courage to get on stage and call her out as a fake progressive. Yeah, as a warm auger, right? And I think that really deep sixter campaign crushed her. She was never able to recover from that. There was several attempts at reboots. You know, at one point standing for censorship of president Trump on Twitter. That somehow she's got the leverage her entire political reboot on this idea of censoring president Donald Trump or even progressive like Elizabeth Warren like, what are you doing? How is that even legal? This doesn't even make any sense. Aren't she the attorney general? You're supposed to support free speech as part of the constitution. Yeah. But at the same time, she delivered a speech at the NAACP that said, I will increase the number of attorneys at the Department of Justice to go after hate speech misinformation on social media and these social media companies better be very afraid for what I want to do. Yeah, don't give up. We need to hold them responsible for everything that's posted on there. Yeah, for criticized like this, it shouldn't be allowed. How do people like that? It weren't even meaningfully attached to this country in any way or understand what it is. How do they get positions of power? I don't understand like how could someone like Kamala Harris who obviously is like the United States, but doesn't even really understand it? Like she gets to administer our laws. There's something wrong you think. Right. I think it's very much focused on how can we find a willing participant to do everything we say and be willing to be flexible on a number of different issues. Someone who doesn't have any core values is easier to manipulate and I think that they saw her as somebody, which is part of the reason why they chose her as vice president. This is someone who obviously has the support of the biggest donors who also has been out in the streets during the George Floyd protests, backing the idea of these protests. What better person to be president Biden's running mate than the person who accused him of being racist than the lady from the HR department, which is what she really bring her into. That's sort of what she, that was sort of how she leveraged her way into the front of the pack. Right. It was during the entire Black Lives Matter, George Floyd protests of 2020 that tore up the entire country. And I think that many in the Democratic Party thought that she was necessary to tack on to Biden who clearly had his problems during the debates on Black issues, suggesting to Black families that if they didn't play the record player at night, they were raising their children wrong and telling all these bizarre stories of, you know, relationships with Black people and would just totally out of touch. So I do think they felt that they needed to put the Obama coalition back together and if he was going to have a chance of winning in order to do that, you need a person with color on the ticket. Yeah. I think that's like the, um, rich weight liberal way of understanding Black people. Right. And I bet you money that Biden in the end will wind up doing better with Black voters than Kamala Harris. I bet you, I bet you money. I mean, I'm off. It clearly was in South Carolina, right? When he won all the Black vote in South Carolina. Well, yeah, because it's in the club, he became the nominee after the South Carolina and they found out that, you know, Black people actually like him in rule of form. Then it was like kind of clear the field. All right. And I get that right. And I bet he was the vice president for the first Black president and yeah, but he's just also he's a little bit slightly more authentic than her. Like she's so obviously fake. Right. But what do I know? Um, I do know that she's racial madhouse version of a Black candidate. So okay. So she gets chosen by Biden. Was there any jug, my memory real contest where there are other people in her consideration? Right. Because he famously came out when he's trying to seal the deal with Bernie, he comes out during a debate in the spring saying, I will choose woman vice president and got a little splash. No one didn't remember as the substance of the debate just that headline, right? Yeah. And then it became, you know, as he's exploring the idea, like, that there's a number of women he really liked, but certainly on the top of the list where some of these sort of, um, these figures like Cretchen Whitmer of Michigan, who he felt was kind of this, this fun rising power in Michigan who was kind of populist when she ran for office and kind of this idea of fixing the damn roads. You know, that's just music to the ears of this, this future president that just wants to fix infrastructure. That's one of his biggest issues. So he's certainly attracted by her. Amy Klobuchar was also someone else that he was interested in bringing on board. Someone who he thought would be good. But it became very clear that and in certainly his campaign advisors as well, um, believe that no, it's not just enough to have a woman on the ticket. We need a woman of color on the ticket because if you look back at Hillary Clinton, she lost a lot of the black vote because she chose color by the way. Right. It's, uh, dependent on the people that vote for Democrats, right. A big part of their, so I feel like he really wanted to pick a Gretchen Whitmer or an Amy Klobuchar. And certainly the Biden family was not happy with with the idea of Kamala Harris as vice president. He's the, she's the one that actually came out attacking for being a racist. So when it became clear, if you remember Hillary Clinton, she chose Tim Cain, who one of the most vanilla people in the Senate as her running me and she also lost a lot of the black vote. So the smart people consultants in Washington are saying the times demand that we choose a woman of color, a black woman, they are the dumbest people I've ever met. Um, so Biden looks at this, these options and he has on his top of the list as he's heading into it. It's Kamala Harris, Susan Rice, who he has a good relationship with from him with his time in the Biden administration or in the Obama administration. And, um, so those are sort of his top two picks. And the fact that Susan Rice is being considered seriously shows that she was that, you know, they do not want Kamala. Susan Rice was Jill's favorite, but ultimately between his conversations with his donors, with his advisors and certainly with Obama himself, he was urged to sort of put the past behind him and choose Kamala Harris. And so it's interesting. I know Susan Rice pretty well. And I think she's a scary person who's motivated basically by hate, but she's capable. She's a real person. Right. Kamala Harris is not a real person. It's totally fraudulent. Just DEI pick, but Susan Rice is not. Susan Rice is a pretty serious person. And like if you had mine had been difficult to run a campaign with Susan Rice, right? I don't feel like she may have always been kind of impressed by Susan Rice, even though I fear Susan Rice. And I think, right. I think she's a particularly good person, but I definitely have some respect for Susan Rice. She was my neighbor for years. Oh, really? Yeah. You know, for any conservative, they would see Susan Rice as the face of Benghazi. And why would you ever want? Well, the whole Benghazi story was bullshit in the first place. Right. And the amount of lying by conservative media about Benghazi in in rages me. The point of Benghazi was they were moving weapons from Gaddafi's weapon stockpiles to Syria to fight an undeclared war that only hurt the United States. And those lot of those weapons are going to Islamic extremist groups. And that was the actual story. And that was suppressed because the neo-cons didn't want to talk about that. Wow. I just sat in in rage for years watching this been got. I mean, the Benghazi story was real. Right. People died. The reason for tragedy, but no one was allowed to ask like, what were all those CIA officers during Benghazi in the first place? I think it was Rand Paul. I was sort of the only one. Did you ever hear anyone ask like, what was that? Wait a second. Why? Yeah. I fascinating. Just this one from DC. I'm right. Wait a second. Why were that that many CIA personnel in this one town? And I remember asking that myself in television and having a producer say to me, that's not really this story. And I was like, well, actually, they get is the story. It's part of the story anyway. It's the text of the story. Sorry. I've been mad about this for a decade. No, I'm only saying that I'm not. I'm not. I'm not endorsing anything that Susan Rice has ever done. I think Susan Rice is one of the reasons that the country's so screwed up right now. All I'm saying is if your job is to run the government, you don't want to pick someone who's like, pathetic like Kamala Harris who's not done a single thing in her entire life. Right. And it's just clearly not a capable person can't make a decision. Doesn't have a clear doesn't have much experience had never done anything. Like even Obama delivered a great speech that everybody thought was the. You know, how much you'll be nation. He was a figure right Kamala Harris was never a figure. Exactly. And I mean, Susan, they wanted her to be they started by calling her. It's just your classic rich white liberal view of the world. It only all that matters is your skin color. Right. It's not so different from the segregationist view of the world, which they also supported, you know, their parents supported in the Democratic Party. It's just like all it matters is what color you are. Anyway, whatever. Don't get me going. But okay, so they pick her. What's the relation you say, Jill Biden was actually for Susan Rice. Right. What is the relationship between Kamala and the Biden's when she gets chosen? So I really think that Joe Biden felt that he could that Kamala would be his buddy. He really wanted a buddy vice president and he really thought Kamala could rise the occasion and learn how to be a good vice president because he had been a vice president. He doesn't do what it took for a year. Everything you can say about Joe Biden, he was very deferential to the president. And he was very loyal to him and worked very hard. Obama's not sort of a warm, glowing figure that wants to be friends with everybody. But Biden sort of warmed his way into a buddy type relationship with Obama. And they actually got along pretty well when they were in office, despite, you know, obvious frictions between the two camps. That always happens. But I think that he thought that Kamala Harris would sort of drop everything and become wholly united to his vision and his campaign. But they found out very soon after they took office that no, Kamala Harris had no interest in being Joe Biden's buddy, had no interest in taking hard issues off his plate or defending him. I think it was very clear from the moment she got into office. She was here for the next step in her career. And she was going to do everything possible to sort of preserve her political future and not waste it on this aging Joe Biden who is clearly on his way out. It's a lovely push. Wait, so you're saying that Joe Biden picked a ruthless careerist loyal to no one but herself and was shocked to discover that she was a ruthless careerist, the lawyer is the no one but herself. And someone who was not competent to you. And she's dumb. Wow. Do you think they were really surprised by that? I think so. I think Biden really thought that she would rise the occasion and realize the nature of the job. Well, he was, you know, then I guess so. But yeah, it became very clear that she was not there to help him. She was there to the next step in her career. And she kind of has this kind of has this this kind of aspect goes back throughout her entire career, right? She rises with Willie Brown. And then when Willie Brown leaves office, she kicks him under the bus. Basically saying if he commits any crimes, I'm going to throw him in jail. And you're sort of kicks him under the bus as someone that's no longer politically relevant. Right? He said that. Yeah. When she's running for district attorney, everyone, that's all people wanted to talk about. This is this is the woman who dated Willie Brown. She's obviously corrupt and she's like, no, Willie Brown, I'm done with him. He has no influence on me, even though he's behind the scenes raising money for her. She essentially throws Willie Brown under the bus. I don't think it's a good idea to date Kamala Harris. I'm that's that's the picture that's emerging. Right. Right. Did you agree with that? Certainly not in her early career. No. And she didn't eventually want people listening this. Remember, do not date Kamala Harris. Unless you're Doug M. Hoff and then perhaps you can get remarried to a 50 year old woman and who's has a career path into national politics. But he's pretty tough on the ladies though. I mean, he runs a tight ship. He'll smack you in the valet line if you get married. There's been some great reporting at the Daily Mail about that. I'm sorry. So Joe Biden, right. Thanks that Kamala Harris is going to be his little friend. Right. His little black friend actually. His cool black friend. Certainly a supportive supportive supportive force to sort of ease up all the tension he's getting from women and black people. Maybe he'll help. Makes a lot of sense. Yeah. Yeah. So he really, because Obama did this to Biden, right. He anytime you had a thorny issue, you'd be like, I'm going to put Sheriff Joe and charge this and he's going to take care of it. And Biden realized what Obama was doing, but he just sort of grand and be like, yeah, on the vice president. This is what we do. So right away, the first thing for Kamala Harris, it's like, we need you to take a thorny issue off our plate. We're going to put you in charge of immigration. And we all saw how that went. Right. She was very adamant about I'm not in charge of immigration. I'm not the immigration czar. I'm only in charge of root causes in the Northern Triangle. Maybe it's just a very adamant about that. Even correcting Joe Biden behind the scenes when he's in Congress, he's like, and Kamala is going to take care of the immigration problem. And she would like actually know, Mr. President, I am only handling the root causes of immigration. Maybe it's my orcus or somebody else that's actually going to handle the immigration problem for you because that's not my job. But you know, now we have this whole thing like she was never the borders are. But she was in charge of the messaging on immigration when she made her trip to Guatemala and told migrants, do not come. If you come, I believe you'll be sent away. Well, we all saw how effective that messaging was. So it's very clear that the administration really wanted to take her to take the issue off the plate to be the messenger in immigration. And she sort of wriggle out of that assignment. Ultimately, you know, did she succeed any aspect of the root causes? I think they might have some metrics to say she did, but did she fix Mexico? She certainly didn't fix any root causes as we know. It's also absurd. And root causes is always a dodge, not that there aren't root causes. There are. But whenever you see a politician pivot front, let's get to the problem. Right. It's root causes. You realize that politician is just punting. Right. Yeah. So what was in the end, Joe and Jill Biden's view of Kamala Harris? Disappointment. I think I think they really hope she would rise to the occasion when there's reporting done that, you know, Joe Biden said that she was working progress just two months ago. Mm hmm. He still believes that she was making her way, but probably hadn't risen and sees the imaginations in the American public as well as they had hoped as being the sort of transformational figure historic figure. Right. Like how can you not just instantly become an American icon? Yeah. But with Kamala Harris, it was a very big struggle. I never said I'd go on. Certainly Obama was an American icon. Right? Yeah. But I just remember the master race. So we have to worship her. But no, that's not how it really works. In the end, if I can just restate the obvious Obama, who I think was evil and bad for America, but he was really talented. Mm hmm. And I don't think it was because he was black. He was just talented. No, it was he was very talented and very, but it was people like Joe Biden. He was like, wow, you know, he was the one on the record. But it's just crazy for being an articulate black guy. Exactly. I just show racist. The rich way liberal is because all they see in Obama is black. They're like, Oh, we just get some black person in here or someone we can call black. That personal become an American icon. And it's like, no, that's right. You kind of have to earn it. Right. And imagine if you're Kamala Harris, right? You're brought into the Democratic Party as this as this this transformational figure as this icon. They view you as the female Obama. It's very insulting, right? Because it's so insulting, right? But this and this happened with Tulsi Cameron too, because if you remember, and I she's done a number of great interviews with you, where she talks about how when she first got and when she was first selected to Congress, the Democratic Party immediately brings her into the higher echelons of power. Not the important ones, right? But the vice chair of the Dns. Yeah. Bring her into these positions because she's seen as this obvious person that we need to center our agenda on to show how diverse and how open we are to new personalities and new people and how fresh and young and interesting we are. And the minute she diverts from the, you know, she talked about this how she was celebrated by all of Democrats. And the minute she diverts from the agenda to warn about war in Syria, which is something she profoundly believes in war. She's been to war. She does not like war. But the minute she diverts from the agenda, everyone's like, Oh, I'm so sorry. Your political career is over. And no, they never listened to what she said. I mean, her views didn't change. No, she believed that when she got elected from Hawaii. But all they saw was the way she looked, right? Because they're racist. And they judge people on the basis of their race. That's the definition of racist. And they saw her and they're like, oh, she's not white. Therefore, she's great. And they never heard a word she uttered, even when she ran for president. They just ignored her. Well, by that point, they hated her because they finally picked up on the fact that she was against their whole agenda. Right. But and she took out one of their star, their star people. Well, she's tough. Yeah. And she's great. She's genuine. She believes in things. That face tough. But he's an awful and heres where I was like on the verge of tears when Brett Bear asked her a question. That's like, oh my gosh. So Joe Biden is very famous in DC. This is probably to my reporting from living down the street from her as like a real bitch as someone who's, you know, tough and nasty. And I always have a girl from Philly. And she's on the record saying, I am willing to forget the attacks I will never forgive. Yeah. I mean, she's that, I mean, that certainly, you know, her reputation in DC over the 35 years I lived in the same city as her. She was definitely regarded as a bitch. So I always wondered how did she get along with Kamala Harris? Now, I don't think they ever got along. I think and it was very clear in events that they say the things like we're so proud of you. Thank you, Kamala. Yeah. Yeah. And she was selected, you know, Joe Biden was there to offer cookies and pretend that everything's normal. But yeah, you don't forget those kinds of attacks against your husband. And good for her, by the way, I'm on, I'm on Dr. Jill's side on that. Right. You know, like, you're obviously part of have been in politics for a very long time. So you're used to people attacking your husband and certainly Joe Biden, he was attacked for, he always wanted to be president and he was always pushed aside by the elite. So she did have a chip on our shoulder. Yeah. Fair. Yeah. And even Joe Biden in a song, I mean, when they finally reached this position, they are people who were repeatedly thrust out of the conversation and pushed aside and mocked and belittled until they needed him. And so oh, but wait, you get four years and then it's time for you to go. We're done with you. So what happened? I mean, this just happened this summer. Yeah. But it's maybe because it did just happen. It's hard to understand exactly what that was. Like, what do you think that was and did Kamala Harris have a role as soon as she had a role in pushing by now? Of course. Right. The official narrative is that, you know, she woke up one morning and had pancakes and bacon with her nieces and was working on a puzzle. And Joe Biden called her out of the blue and said, I'm getting out of the race. And I'm going to endorse you for president. And then she jumped and got on the phone. And within 12 hours on the phone, she wrapped up the entire nomination. That's the story. for president and then she jumped and got on the phone and within 12 hours on the phone, she wrapped up the entire nomination. That's the story. That's the official story. He's it actually. Yeah. So this is the single handedly got on the phone eating anchovy pizza and sweats, wearing her sweats and made it enough phone calls to where she could wrap up the entire nomination in a day. So this is the soviet. That's the issue. They just tell lies that are so absurd. They know we're not going to believe them, but they don't care. Ray of actually, I missed all this. They, that was the story. That's sort of the official story. Well, that's just so Vietnam. I mean, that's just absolutely crazy. Yeah. So, but we know for three weeks, maybe four from after the debate in June to the day that Joe Biden announced that he was stepping there was a furious amount of activity behind the scenes. Pelosi, Schumer. And you know that Kamala Harris has to publicly backing Joe the whole way. But what are her people doing behind the scenes? Is there no effort to sort of make sure that you're being considered? Come on to be the his air, which is your rightful position. These are politicians. Politics is what they do. Right. I mean, that's where they got into this. That's how their brains work. There's people behind you who are working. Of course, like, of course, you can claim to an eye bill. I was doing nothing. Yeah, there's people who support you who will get power from you. If you were elected that are working on your behalf, that just happens organically out of our political system. Right. It's been going on for generations. So you have to imagine that there was always going to be this, this idea that there might be an actual convention where we go and choose the candidate that we want. Do you might be a democratic process? It's like, uh, yeah, like a democratic process. What do they call it? A brokered convention? Yeah. Or democracy. I think that. Oh, yeah, something like that. Because it's so fragile. So very fragile, but so very strong. Well, obviously, doesn't it? If your presidential candidate gets the job without anyone voting on it, then that you don't have democracy. Right. So I think that Pelosi and people did want to see a choice. Because they had hoped that the strongest candidate would emerge. I think a lot of the reason why Biden ran for reelection in the first place is because he and many in the Democratic Party. And certainly in 2023, nobody thought that Kamala Harris could win a race for president against Donald Trump. Not even win a primary. They just didn't think of this ready. Right. And that's what's so fascinating. Like when I published the book, a lot of what I was reporting and researching was 23 in DC when they and when Washington, Washington DC had thoroughly rejected her. We're even having conversations of why not get rid of her entirely on the ticket. We need somebody else if Joe Biden's going to wait again. So that we went from there. I mean, Washington's cruel, right? You, you show up and you are not ready and you make mistakes. As she clearly did during her first three, three years. And that's pretty well chronicle. Then they turn on you. They don't see you as valuable. And they had officially most of Washington thought she was a complete joke. She didn't have, you know, there's not like these, these defenders or people who actually want to see you succeed in Washington. They're all rooting for your failure. And they only respect you if you prove them wrong. And Kamala Harris clearly wasn't proving them wrong at this point in 23. So when she's ultimately kept on the ticket, it's for obvious reasons. Like we can't just kick her aside and bring Gretchen Whitmer in to save the day to run with Joe Biden. Right. This tough stuff. You're you're beheld by the same identity politics that you embrace to get her to this position. Oh, yes. hung by your own guitar. Yes, that is, um, I mean, it was, it was obvious this was going to happen. I wasn't surprised at all. I was a little surprised that she picked Tim Walls. If you want to gay guy want to just go with Pete Buttigieg. What was the thinking there? Um, I don't know too much other than what's been reported, right? It's just that ultimately she selected Tim Wall. She had a prior relationship. In fact, Tim Walls first appeared on the campaign trail when she went to Minnesota to visit a Planned Parenthood clinic for being historic first vice president to actually campaign at a Planned Parenthood. That an abortion. Tim Walls was right there cheering her on. Kind of wholesome uplifting deal. Right. Like this is what we're, we're totally normal people. Right. And so I think that she met him there. And at various points in her career and found him to be an entertaining figure like a wolf figure. Right. You know, we met in an abortion clinic and he got along real well. He's kind of fussy and bubbly. And so I thought I would pick him. Yeah. They actually met at an abortion clinic. I don't know if that's the first time, but that was definitely a pivotal moment. Right. So hey, this is so good. Okay. Um, wow, I didn't know that. That's one of the first times you see Tim Walls on camera, which I didn't recognize him at the time, but going back and looking at her speeches there, he's right behind her, clapping. So I, you know, you assess people by what they do, but also by their relationships who are they close to? And in her case, I'm looking at the men in her life. And I see, well, obviously, Montel Williams and Willie Brown. All right. By no both of them, um, I like them both better than the men currently in her life, but the men now in her life would be her dad who was not in her life. Not in her life. Writing an op at attacking her, not invited to her own inaugural. You see Tim Walls, who is, you know, like a serial gay friend or whatever, but creepy guy hanging out at a abortion clinics together. And then you see her husband, the nanny and prognader who smack to woman in the face. Um, what is that? Right. When I did the reporting from the book, and I certainly did not pick up on this, but in Washington at the time, he was widely celebrated widely they really do. People in Washington, DC really liked Doug M. Hough, they thought he was this gregarious fun. She looks like it. I loved being in power and was just like, go for doing the best he could to back up Kamala Harris and he would go do all these panels about how his number one job was to, you know, defend this idea of having a strong woman in office. Well, they love the beta. And it's always the beta male was punching women in the face, but whatever. Yeah. But where did she meet him? Fortunately, what is that? They met, but right. I think it was right as she ran right after she won her second term. I don't know, it would have been in 2014, but right as she's getting ready to go national. And she talks about in her book how it wasn't easy to be a political figure being a single woman. Talks about how she was treated differently and how it was a struggle. So I do think ultimately she, you know, I'm sure they had a great dating relationship and that they they found nothing common to where they felt that, you know, it was worth pursuing. Do you think she let him smack her around? I don't see that. No. Yeah. I think Doug's been sufficiently tamed, kept in his place. Yeah. He's been tamed by the despite all the reporting of who Doug was before. Like he has definitely been put in his place and yeah, and realizes his job and he's enjoying the benefits of being a man who supports strong women. And I think that's why a lot of people, I think that was a step too far for a lot of the people that spoke to the Daily Mail. It's like, no, you are not this. But they all are any male feminists is probably hit a woman. I mean, that's the whole point of being a male feminist is to hide the fact that you treat women, hide the fact that you're a monster, right? 100% obviously. Every woman knows that by the way, if you just ask a woman who are the men to be afraid of is the one who's always telling you how is that right? Oh, yeah, any man who describes himself as a feminist is probably a physical danger to you. Yeah. I'm sure. I mean, I'm from California. I've seen this. I lived in Washington. Yes, he works there a lot of time. But M. Hoff did they publicly date, I missed all this, was it well-known that they were dating? Was he a big political figure in California? Who is he? No, he's an entertainment lawyer. Yep. And so he was connected by one of Connell's friends. And I think that they ended up together because obviously it's very good in this time of your life to not be a single person. I think yeah, especially if you're pursuing higher office, you don't be a single person. And you shouldn't be. It's right. And I'm not saying this in a meanwhile, just honestly, that kind of job is so hard. If you're not somebody in your corner. Oh, I agree. Yeah, I'm not. I'm sympathetic to Kamala Harrison that way. Sure. And they very much talk about dog as being this figure. Someone she can come home and venture and talk to. And even though she made the decision to go basically be the president when he's at SoulCycle exercising with friends and he doesn't find out until he gets back to his car. Now he admitted it. He admitted it. It's SoulCycle with his gay friends. Yeah. That's what he said. And he said he didn't feel surreal. I mean, how could it not? I was like, where else would you be? How can you, you like there has to be obvious evidence of that? You wouldn't make up that story. It's just so unbelievable. Imagine yourself saying that when my wife got the nod that she was going to run for president, I was at SoulCycle with my gay friends. And I think he said that. And then he said, when I got back to my car, I picked up my phone and called her and she said, where the F of you been? I mean, if one of my college roommates did something like that, I would call him up and say, what are you thinking? I'm sure. What are you? Yeah. I would say what you made it that and certainly, yeah, I mean, it seems like she very much made the decision on her own without, you know, time to think about it with friends and family. And maybe they had had this discussion beforehand that if she ever got the call, she could just go for it. But it doesn't. So it doesn't. So it's like, well, I got to think about it with friends and family before I mean, no, you got to talk to your husband. Right. Your spouse. Yeah. Right. Right. Not friends and family. Your spouse, the person who's married to us. Right. And then your kids, they don't have kids. She's an F kids, but, but yeah, then I guess your friends and family, but your spouse is the first person you talk to. At least have a phone call before you accept it, but we both should be on the same page or you're not really married. Right. Well, obviously this, these are obvious things to non political people. It's not just common hair. She's not the only one with a fake marriage and politics. Like most of them seem to have those, but I just want to say that out loud because it is really sick. It's not a and we should just acknowledge that. So if you remember what normal is normal is when you have a marriage, it's a partnership, a full partnership where if you're going to make a major life decision, you talk it over with your spouse. That's my experience. Well, of course, or else it's not a real marriage. Right. I mean, is that the whole point of marriage? I think so. I thought so. Right. It is certainly to say on a, I'm not very familiar with sort of the marriages that you're describing. Well, that's just a roommate situation. Yeah. So wow, these stories came out in your paper. Can you just describe for maybe people haven't been reading the Daily Mail? So what are the stories that we've, what have we learned about Doug M. Hoff? Right. Um, that he had this relationship with this pretty professional, pretty successful female lawyer and that he struck her in the face when they were at a public event together. And then afterwards he kind of forces way into her taxi, even after the incident and basically it was like, well, this is just the product of our relationship. And, you know, this woman is clearly very upset, very frightened by what he's done, but he doesn't necessarily, it's not, let's, there's no attempt to heal or it just seems like it's the product of what happened that night. And he certainly doesn't seem to repent it from that. Certainly not publicly. Okay. So the, the bottom line is he was dating a woman there in Cannes, France, South of France, right at the film festival, but it's on AIDS event, as I remember. Yeah. And he hits her in the face waiting out of jealousy. She says waiting for their car in the valley line. I think that's the allegation. Is it real? I mean, it's October of an election year. Do you believe that's a real story? Certainly. I like the evidence that we've gathered in the fact in the testimony, you know, the evidence from that night is certainly more real than any other accusation we've heard about a lot of men, politicians recently. Really? Can you imagine if maybe somebody accused Mike Pence of doing that, right? Would they, would the media actually care about that? I don't know. That's a whole nother, Mike Pence is a whole nother story, man. I don't know what to think there, but any other. No, no, of course, no, I see your point that if, if the partisan positions were switched, of course, it would be. If Donald Trump Jr. was slapping women in the face with that big story, it really hard spinning around with his hand. Right. So, but when you say testimony, can you tell us what that is? You talk to other people who are there? Well, it wasn't my story at the day. I know, but, but yeah, the reporters who worked on the story and the editors who worked on the story spoke with a lot of witnesses about what had happened who recall that day, the day that she called them to tell them what happened. And this, you know, corroborated evidence with evidence of the flight ticket. There's certainly enough there. And you had a great conversation with Megan Kelly who came away, you know, Megan Kelly is pretty a sharp lawyer, right? She came away saying, I'm very sharp. She, it was very interesting here. Her talk about it and say, you know, I believe it all. But she's a, he experienced these type of men that do this things and be knows enough to smell whether or not a story is fake. Yeah, it's, I guess. And who does he go to to sort of wipe it all away? Joe Scarborough. So funny. And just go to scramos like, well, what about all this stuff and the tabloids and Doug M. Hoff just looks and straight in the eyes like, we can't get distracted from our mission here. Oh, so M. Hoff never denied it. No, I think it's team did in some passive language, but he certainly hasn't personally. So, but bottom line, you're convinced and again, you work at the publication that ran this story that this is a real person in your reporters. Oh, I've heard people say, oh, we know who this woman is. Like if the mainstream media was actually concerned about validating the story, they could pursue it. Yeah. But as is often the case, when you have an uncomfortable narrative or in the last days of an election, you know, I guess we didn't get censored, right? We didn't, they didn't call it Russian disinformation and that's from social media. I think they're trying to cause of making go really, really like and go away. Right. Which it will. And the fact that you're talking about it and Megan Kelly is talking about it is very inconvenient for their campaign. Yeah, it's just it's look, I just want to be consistent. However, I don't like Doug M. Hoff's politics. I feel sorry for him. Just because his life seems depressing, but I don't like his politics. But I also know that there have been a lot of people whose politics I also don't like who've been destroyed by false accusations of sexual harassment, physical abuse. Like there's a lot of falseness around me too claims, including people I know and had one on the other day, Mark Alpron. And so I just just want to be fair. Right. And I'm also really uncomfortable with any accusation from an anonymous source against someone we name. Like so we we name the person has been accused, but we don't name the accuser. I just want to say it for the record. I think that's immoral. I don't think we should have anonymous accusations, but whatever it seems very common now. But I just want to make sure that that um, so you believe this they know this is and this seems like a real thing. Right. And I do believe it. And when you have multiple witnesses, they're willing to say something means that they're deeply upset by what happened. And not only that, they're deeply upset by the person he's being betrayed. And they should have gotten happen witnesses. You had you interviewed your paper interview witnesses, you saw it happen. I think that they were witnesses who were there who the woman talked to, right? So they're woman who, you know, this isn't, uh, this isn't, you know, we can't be too cavalier, but this isn't a Christian Christine Blasey Ford accusation. This is something where multiple people are. And it wasn't for Robyrate. It wasn't 40 years ago. Right. This is something that happened very recently. Amazing. Do you think that story has penetrated at all? Well, certainly you and Meghan have talked about Yeah, but yeah, has and Donald Trump made a joke about it. Well, I'm not not about the violent story, but he made a joke about the nanny story. And so that story is that M. Hoffman predated his nanny. Right. And that that just seems like a fact. He actually addressed it and said that yes, it happened. Hmm. It has Kamala Rispo said, no, no. No. And it's very, it's one of those stories, right? You don't ask about that. If you ever want to get an interview with Kamala Harris again, that's not something you bring up. Right. So certainly a lot of media figures aren't interested in asking about that story. How do you assess the coverage of her just kind of a meta question here as a reporter is someone who's really tried to cover Kamala Harris? Yeah, that's what I've kind of, you know, because I remember Obama and I remember how the media was how they acted during the Obama administration. And if they had actually held them accountable a few things, then it might have gone better. Yeah. I think as a journalist, you kind of want to just hold people accountable and puncture through like their false narratives reveal who they really are kind of expose their weaknesses. Yeah. Warren, the American people like this is the type of person that you would vote for. Yeah. This is how they act behind the scenes. This is who they really are there. And we're not going to let the politician tell their own story. And that's not good for America. That's not good for democracy. You have to know the full story. And you have to have impartial people looking into it. But you, but Kamala Harris as a hero of the civil rights movement has a story, has exclusive rights to her own story. Right. You don't get to tell her story. Right. And you can write your book every politician writes a book before they run for a higher office. Look, at Ron DeSantis, he published a book telling his whole story. Yeah. But we don't just take the biography and run with it as as the next American icon, they have to earn that. And certainly, well, we get to we get to ask questions. Do we? That's our, that's what we like to do. I think yes. Actually uncover interesting things about people that, yeah. And paint a bigger portrait than just the one that's on their campaign ad, their campaign slogan. So I do, I do find that very rewarding. I think every journalist should find that rewarding like who is the real Kamala Harris? What is she believe in? Turns out not much. If there's any issue, she's never changed her position on and one issue she actually cares about and can speak passionately about. It's abortion. I think that's her number one. Why do you think she's so is she? Is this someone who never had children and not attacking her? I feel sorry for children and source of joy. Really, the only endurance source of joy. So I'm speaking of joy. So I'm definitely not attacking her for that at all. I feel really bad for her. But why? But it's just interesting that someone who never had kids would be so committed to abortion. Like what do you think that is? Yeah, I'm not sure. Um, it's, it's obviously something that she has dealt with. She's obviously had people in her life who have dealt with as she had an abortion. She's never anyone asked her. She's never publicly said anything about it. And no one asked that. So she's constantly talking about other people's abortions and abortion abortion abortion. Why is it out of bounds? Say, if you had an abortion, right? Because if you had, you would certainly expect that you would be this, you would champion that moment. And since it's the expression of human freedom, if I'm running around talking about how we need how no, it's the guys to happen. Decks to me, then I think it's fair to say, if you've ever had an appendectomy, right? If there's nothing to be ashamed of, then why does nobody ask her? I don't get the, you know, I'm kind of sick. Yeah, along with all this stuff. I must say all these weird we have that only serve one political party where there's some things you're supposed to talk about, but only in a certain way. Other things are never allowed to talk about certain people have a right to tell their own story. Other people who have no right to talk at all. Like, I'm just who makes these rules? And why are we playing along with them? Right. Has any pro choice woman who is in political office shared her experience of having an abortion? Yeah, I mean, I'm really just from the record. Don't want to hear about other people's abortions or abortion or all. It's killing it's good. But if it is, the, the, the act of ultimate human freedom and you, and you campaign on this. Well, there's also what's we're talking about it constantly. So maybe, maybe you would consider that this would, but if Brett Bear had said to her the other night, um, you know, Madam Vice President, have you, you've talked about abortion on have you ever had one? I mean, I think you would have been fired from this job for saying that. Right. And he certainly would become instantly a villain. And he's wonder like, why? Why? If there's nothing wrong with abortion, if it's supposed to shout your abortion or like Tim Walls is obviously gay, I look at him. I'm like, you're gay. And I'm sure I'll be attacked for saying that. But he's not gay, but he certainly seems gay. Right. And you immediately say, where's your evidence? I don't have any evidence. I'm just saying I look super, super gay to me. But they're the ones always running on being like, it's great to be gay. Okay. If it's great to be gay, then why is it an attack on him for me to say that? And why would it be out of bounds to be like, Hey, Tim Walls, you seem super gay? Are you gay? Have you ever subbed dudes like if you asked that question, you would be, you'd be funny. You're just asking that now. It's very controversial. Right. But why would that be controversial? Have to get nothing wrong with it? Right. Then why is it so offensive to ask that question? Like this doesn't mean any sense. Like ultimately Democrats feel like these issues are very private, which is why they campaign so strong. They're so private. Really? You've got a LGBT Q plus parade in San Francisco, New York Seattle, every big city in the country, people having sex in the street. So it's not private. Right. They're telling my kids constantly that it's a good thing. So there's nothing private or forbidden or taboo about it. Right. Just to be clear, those are their menus. So why can't it keep the hell out of my bedroom weird? We're the weird party of privacy. But if there's nothing wrong with being gay, which is certainly a position. In fact, it's morally superior to being heterosexual. Obviously they say that. In effect, if the state department's pushing it on every country around the world, then why would it be somehow crazy or out of bounds or taboo or offensive for me to say to Tim holes, you seem gay. It's not an attack. Right. Are you gay? What? But you know as well as I do that if I had an employer, which I don't, I would immediately be fired for saying, right. So like, what is that? That doesn't make any sense. And why are we playing along with that? That's my, that's my point. Yeah. I'm not going to ask that question. By the way, I wouldn't either because I don't really want to know about Tim moles is sex slave. I don't want to know about anyone's sex slave. I want to stop talking about our sex lives actually immediately. Right. And I want to start with this on the path forcing other people in other countries to talk about their sex lives. I just wanted to clear a truce on race and sex in abortion. I don't want to hear about your abortion. Right. I don't want you to talk about abortion. Shut up up at abortion about your sex life, about your race. That's the world that I want to live in. But they're not allowing me to live in that world. So as long as they're not allowing me to live in that world, why am I playing along with rules that are rigged against me? Right. These are fair questions. Right. So why do you ask him? Why don't you ask Tim holes that question about abortion? No, no, just say hey, Tim holes, you seem gay. Not attacking you. But I've seen the video if you do in jazz hands. Yeah. Are you gay? Have you ever had sex with a man? I don't know if I would, I don't know if I would have enough evidence to make that. Do you see it just seems that way? Kind of my impression. Yeah. Are you gay? But that would go badly for you, wouldn't it? Right. I would never, I would never ask that question. I know all of us have the freedom to ask that question. Oh, I'm poor. The same like interest in that question. Right. So yeah. Interesting. He's the one who's constantly, he's the one who ran a gay straight alliance where he's talking to children about their sex lives. So right there, that's your criminal has in my book. You don't get to talk to other people's kids about their sex lives period. Yeah. Freak. Right. But there he's bragging about it. Okay. You know, why am I barking? You try. I don't mean to barking. I don't know. Just trying to be rational for a second. It makes sense. You know, when you learn when you look at what our media has become and when you wonder when you look at the questions that they ask when they get the privilege, you know, interviewing a presidential candidate is now a privilege. Right. The stodot you and you have to demonstrate that you're worthy on a number of issues. Right. The first person that got an interview with Kamala Harris was the woman from MSNBC who publicly said she didn't need to do interviews and then suddenly she gets an interview. So that's what our media has become. Right. So you're filling me in on so much that I've missed. Who would MSNBC said that Kamala Harris didn't need to do? And Stephanie rule. Stephanie rule. She was on Bill Maher and said Kamala Harris doesn't need to do interviews because it's so obvious that Donald Trump is the worst and that she's the best. I mean, I'm paraphrasing. Stephanie rule the perky business reporter. For them, it's NBC. Yeah. She was a business reporter. I think so. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, she was the first one to ask. She was the first one to get a major. Well, I guess Dan about she got the first one, right? With Tim Walz and Kamala Harris. But Stephanie rule got the first solo sit down with Kamala Harris. I think that's true. And yeah, she publicly said on Bill Maher that why does she even need to do media when it's very obvious that she's the best candidate compared to Trump. Wow. That's crazy. Right. She's just so great. We don't need to talk to her. That's her position as journalists. Right. That's the and she's the one who got the first interview. Right. I think it's because I think Donald Trump said something nasty about her. So that honestly about Stephanie rule, right, which is why you instantly get elevated. I don't know Stephanie rule. We did not overlap. I once worked there. She's going camera, but I haven't seen her on TV in a long time because I don't have a TV. But right. She yeah, I am kind of free, but it's a missed stuff. So I'm grateful that you're filling me in. That's amazing. And she said that. Yeah. So I just want to boil it down. And these are just my perceptions. And can obviously disagree. But I don't think you're likely to get a combo here, Senator few. Hope Springs internal. No, it's very true. She has, it's been reported that she has an enemies list of reporters because she's very thin skin when it comes to coverage. She hates anything poorly written. And I think one of the biggest examples of that was when she was very angry with the Vogue cover that came out after she won the vice presidency. She was very displeased with this Vogue cover of her standing there in her chucks. You know, she's her sneakers. And she was very upset by that. That was one of the first controversies of her life. So the Vogue was too tough on her. Vogue was ran and very insensitive, racially insensitive, ignorant cover. And she was very displeased by that. What was it a candidate? She didn't know she was posing for a Vogue. She was posing. She just didn't know that would be the cover. She got to choose the outfits and the background. But that was supposed to be inside the magazine. But it was not really hard to put her on the page. She was very upset about it. People found it very demeaning. Are you serious? Yeah. It was one of the biggest controversy. Before she even took office, this was one of the biggest controversies of her career. And that was even the narcissism of rich people in this country. It's just it really doesn't even the Biden team communications team was like, can we tell them down a little bit of that? We don't want this to be the first major controversy of our minister. We haven't even taken office yet. And this is our what was racially insensitive about it. I'm not sure. I think portraying her in a casual manner was something she did not appreciate. I thought she was she was a joyful warrior, a joyful casual warrior. So you just you just can't with someone like that. But the point is is that she has an enemies or a joyful casual warrior. So you just, you just can't with someone like that. But the point is is that she has an enemy's lifts of reporters who don't appreciate her rise to power in any time that they stray from the official common Harris narrative, then she's not going to do an interview with you, which is why you have so many report reporters being very cautious, very careful. And she certainly earned that reputation throughout her whole presidential campaign. I mean, reporters and editors were very familiar with getting angry responses from the way they covered common Harris as a presidential candidate. I honestly feel like this is like some kind of weird right wing parody meant to discredit people like Kamala Harris. I mean, she's she's like living down to every stereotype, but totally fragile, indecisive, narcissistic. Like this is not the female leadership who are promised at all. This is like right. All politicians narcissistic. Yes, pretty much they are. Sure. Oh, so she's not the only one that's going to be clear. But also, you know, being thin skinned narcissistic, very adamant about how you're covered and very angry with how you're treated. That's kind of if she called a vogue racist, then we're dealing with, I don't think that she actually said that, but people close to her. We're upset of it for that. I'm just saying, okay. Last question, are you going to make sure that she sees this interview? Do you think she'll watch this? You can send this over to a press team? Yeah, I think I will and see if they have any response. But ultimately, I think it's going to affect her. There's a lot of people who are talking about common Harris in a way that she would not approve of. Yeah. And up until this point, she's decided just to ignore it. But I think like there's enough people talking about you've had some great people on who, including an attorney for San Francisco, what's her? Army Dylan. Army, very, very, she was not a source for the book, but very insightful. Yeah. Growing up in that neighborhood. Yeah. And experiencing common Harris for who she is. I mean, very insightful interview. And I think there's a lot of people talking about who the real common Harris is that I think that's why ultimately she feels like she has to come out and do a media tour because she has to distract from the conversations that are actually taking place. It's not working well. You'd think she'd feel obligated just because that's how democracy works. Voters have a right to information about you before they vote on you. Right. But she doesn't feel that way. Well, and obviously as these news institutions lose the power to control the masses and cheer lead for you, even though you don't give them interviews, then what's the benefit? Yeah. I mean, we don't have a working, it's just North Korean press agency here. So yeah, well, bless you in the Daily Mail and anyone else who retains a commitment to telling the truth, you know, imperfectly because we're people, but you know, right? I don't think we can function as a free country without it. So I appreciate your doughnut. Well, thanks so much for having me. Charlie, thank you very much. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about we could wind about it? That's a waste of time, not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that's true. It's unintentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel, subscribe, and you'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say. I hope you will.