The general going to experience. When did all this come to light? When do people start understanding the negative consequences of plastics and your food? Well they came to understand it first in animals because that's the way science works. You know first you do animal studies and then you try to replicate them in humans, right? And so in around 2000 they did some experiments where they fed a rat food contaminated with alloys. And then they looked to see how the offspring developed, right? And what they saw was that the males were born different than the females and different from unexposed males. Do you want to tell you how different? Yes please. So this is a really interesting way to think what happened is, so let's go back. So before the phalloids before the early in pregnancy the genitals are just a single ridge, same in males and females, undifferentiated. And then at a certain time and in mice and rats it's 15 to 18 days of gestation the testicles start making testosterone. And then that gives the signal to produce the male typical genitals. So if they don't have the testosterone there will be ovaries and if there is testosterone there will be testicles and so on and so forth, right? And that migration requires testosterone at exactly the right time and the right amount. It's a very delicately programmed, okay? So if that happens, if everything goes well then the penis will develop, it will have a size and then there's something which is very key to my research which is something you might know by the name of the taint. That taint or we call it anagenital distance. Yeah it's not a real, it's not really a technical term is it? But anagenital distance is. Yes but taint, it's hilarious listening to a PhD setting. Right. And I'm talking to a lot of people who might not know. The area known as the taint, okay? Yes, known on the street as taint, right? Yes, the streets. And or the gooch or the grindle or the gooch. I've never known as the gooch. You know about the gooch? I just saw something that they didn't know what a taint was and they were like oh you mean the gooch. I haven't heard the gooch. Yeah. I thought the gooch was like a baseball player. No, well it could be that also but isn't there a guy named? Maybe he's named after. Sorry. And also ABC. Have you heard ABC? ABC no. I have not heard that. How's that one go? Aspaul connector. Oh, the Aspaul connector. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Let's go for a woman. Yes, you can measure. Yes, it's not called an ABC. It's not called the ABC. Sorry. So here you got this distance and it's been measured in animals for like 100 years. And what they usage for was first to just sex the animal. So the litter is born. There's a lot of little pups. They want to separate the males and the females because they're going to do different things in them. And they just hold them up by the tail and they look. And the reason you can do this is because in the male it's much longer. It's 50 to 100 percent longer. This is stop and think about this. There's nothing else in the body that's that different between males and females in terms of size. Organs yes. But size no. You know our heights don't differ by 50 to 100 percent. It's nothing. Nothing. It's this is it. This is the the mark. Is that in all animals? It's almost all mammals. Really? The hyenies a little different. We could tell them. Yeah, well I know about those. You have a whole bit about them. Yeah. So you know their males the females are masculine. So they have a longer AGD right? But most for most mammals it's this way. Okay. So here's this little pup that's born and he's if he's unexposed he'll have a good you know standard penal size and AGD and he won't have any malformations of his penis and so on. You know he'll be normal. But if his mother was exposed to thalates everything can go south. And what happens is the penis is smaller and the AGD is smaller and the scrotum is smaller. And the testes are maybe not descended. And other was it didn't finish the process. It was arrested if you will. So we say that that pup is incompletely masculineized. Now the amount of thalates that get into the pup system in in in in utero is that the same is that possible to achieve those levels in the modern world with human beings? Absolutely. It is. And I'm going to tell you what I did to show that. I showed that. Wow. So when I heard this story I was flying on a plane to Japan to go to a conference. I was with a friend who was a chemist for the Centers for Disease Control and he said Shauna you should study thalates. And I'm going why? I never heard of them. Why thalates? And he said well we have been measuring them at the CDC and they're in everybody. They're in pregnant women. And this group of scientists in the National Toxicology Program has shown that they altered the development of the male newborn. And they called that the thalates syndrome. That's what it's called. That collection of changes that come about after the mother has thalates is called the thalates syndrome. So I thought well does that happen to humans? Same question you asked right? So how would you answer that question? Then I'll tell you what I did. How would I, well you would hope that you're not running experiments like you're running on animals. Are you measuring the blood of the people that are having children that have issues with development, development issues in the way the children look when they're born? Is that what you're doing? It's really close. So thalates have the property that they dissolve in water. Water is soluble. And so they go into the urine. So for this class of chemicals, if you want to know how much is in your body, my body, we've got to measure the urine. Other chemicals like flame returns we would look in the blood. So it depends what the chemicals, but your right idea, look inside the body. Then rather than looking at kids with problems, what I did was I just took a whole population of pregnant women and I got their urine, measured their thalates, got their kids, measured their kids. So then I had the problem of what to measure in the kids because nobody had made this translation from an animal genital development system to a human. So that was kind of a challenge, figuring out how to do that. But we did that. And we developed this system for this exam for measuring all these things that you measure in a rat. We measured it in our children. And then we showed, and this was big news when it came out, that the mother's thalates did alter the generals of the boys. So that was the first evidence. That was 2005. And then we published some more in 2008. And then we fortunately I got money to do it all again. NIH doesn't like to pay for replication. It's very expensive. These things are $5 million a study by the way. Well it seems like it's very important though. Yeah, so they gave it to me. They gave money to do it again. So the second time I did it better because I really knew what I was looking for. And I got urine actually in three points in pregnancy. And I measured the kids exactly when they're born. So everything was much more precise. And I found it again. So now there's no question. I don't think anyone questions that at least this class of chemicals, which we know lower testosterone, alter the development of these boys. And then I asked, well what does that have to do with sperm count? Because actually for a long time, we haven't talked yet about sperm count. But I've been studying, tracing, what's happening with sperm count. I'll tell you the history of that in a minute. But so then I thought, well is this related to sperm count? Well these are babies. They don't have a sperm count. But in rats, it looked like the AGD was permanent. So if you had a short, just like if you have a small hand, you're a stature, certain set it at birth. So the AGD, if you're born small and my friend Earl Gray, who was a toxicologist, said AGD is forever. We don't know that for sure about humans, by the way. But because we haven't had the 20 years yet. But if you believe that, then a sensible thing to do was to take a group of adult men who could give you a sperm count and measure their AGD. Right? And then you could see whether those with a shorter AGD had a lower sperm count. And then you would have one pretty solid piece of evidence that chemicals in the environment lower sperm count. Are you with me? Yes ma'am. Okay. So I did that study too. So I got students in Rochester, New York to volunteer for 75 bucks to participate. And they gave us a seamen sample and they gave us opportunity to measure them, also a questionnaire. How does one measure kids' taints? Do they just bend over and you bust out a ruler? I happen to bring you something to show you. So I noticed, yeah, this measuring device. Jamie's volunteered to let you measure his taint, by the way. I was on the inside. So this is not for a baby. This is for our Rochester young man's study. It looks kind of fierce, but we had the points taken down in the... Yeah, I use one of those to measure pull cue tips. There you go. All right. So you know all about it. Turn it on. You want 13 millimeters. That's what I like. But only for pull cue tips. So look, I also brought you a little diagram. So you see where we measure. Okay. I can't show this. I don't know how to show this. So the calipers are in their in millimeters or in inches or both. Both. Yeah. Yeah. And so what do you do? Oh boy, you got a diagram. Is there a chart online? I could look up like a eight. How about I just hold this up? Yeah. That works too. All right. Can we have a selfie with you and me in that picture? Yes, ma'am. Okay. All right. So when I published this, the... The headlines were size matters, but it's not what you think. Right. Right. Yeah. And so I got all these people asking me what should be? What's good enough? What's big enough? So I did this translation from the millimeters for you. So here it is. The two inches is the median. Okay. Okay. And in this population. And here's the kicker. If it was less than two, men who had less than two inches were seven times more likely to have a sperm count in the sub-fertile range. I can tell you what that is. As men who had an AGD longer than two inches. Wow. Seven times. It certainly is related to sperm count. And then another study in California showed that infertile men in an infertility clinic versus men who had had born a child had smaller tail length. When did this stuff start getting into our food supply? Has that been estimated? So the growth of these chemicals tracks with the growth of the petrochemical industry because they're made from petrochemical byproducts. Okay. If you look at a curve of the growth, it starts around the 50, 1950. Okay. So back in 1950, you have people loving science, jumping on the science bandwagon. There's this better living through chemistry that everyone's talking about. And everybody is just wanting everything made of plastic. You know, it's the new craze. It's the new, you know, and it just took off. It went faster than a straight line, you know, exponentially up. So somewhere in there, it started having an effect. But we're not sure, but I did look at the decline in sperm count over time. So we could look at that as an indication that this is not the only thing that's affecting sperm count, by the way. These satellites. But that's one where I feel I can say this with confidence because I measured those babies and I, you know, I did it. I did the science. I did it again. And I know how it really, and other people have done it. And so it's, I believe it's solid. And that's just one example of the many chemicals that can affect our hormone system. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.