Are you still a pilot or are you retired now? So I retired two months ago. Okay. When you turn 65 Congress fires you and yeah, Congress, Congress, it's a law. It's the only non government job that has a required retirement age in 65. It used to be 60. Now it's 65. They're trying to raise the age again, but it's ridiculous because you're at the most experience you are. I get a I get a physical every six months from my entire career still pass all my physicals. I got cheaters with me, but that's about it. Yeah. And yeah, it's 65 year out. So but now I'm retired. I'm a Medicare and unemployed. So, you know, is there any sort of a good reason for 65? Like, did they do any like cognitive testing or is it just because of age strictly? No. So they do do cognitive testing, but it's not what you would think like sit down, take a test. You've got 20 minutes to pass it. It's not like that. Every time you take a check right and I take a check right every, take a check right every nine months. And that's your cognitive testing in addition to that flying the airplane with two other co pilots. So you get, you get thoroughly examined all the time just by doing your job. And there's ways for other pilots to report you without having to, you know, kind of confront you like, hey Steve, you know, you're kind of like, you're missing a few things. There's a professional standards at each airline and they would just kind of call professional standards and say, hey, you know, Captain Steve here, he kind of missed about 25 radio calls on the last trip. And we think he sees missing a, you know, a thing or two. And then they'll call you up and they'll start that process. Most pilots will catch it on their own, you know, and, but the process of getting a physical every six months, it kind of identifies the issues as you're aging. So the main, the first medical issues show up in your mid 30s, there's two things primarily that affect pilots and its substance abuse and mental illness. So if you think about it, you know, alcoholism and depression are the two biggies. And those show up in much younger pilots. If you get to be 64, 64 and a half and you haven't developed any sort of cardiac issues and these sort of cognitive issues, you don't have diabetes, you're probably one of the most physically fit. You've come through that whole gauntlet. Yeah. And then six months later, they've foreshoot a retire. And the background on that goes all the way back to 1959, there wasn't a pilot retirement age until 1959 when CR Smith, who is the CEO of American Airlines, was having golf, playing golf with his neighbor who happened to be the head of the FAA at the time. And they were, he was complaining about how expensive the his pilots were over age 60. And so the two of them concocted a plan to introduce some mandatory retirement age. They didn't hold any hearings, nothing. They rammed it right through Congress. They made it a law and it's been a law. It was a law until 2007. And then President Bush added five years to it. Congress passed the five year extension. Now it's age 65, but still he turned 65 in your own regardless of how we're getting to the bottom of it. Too expensive. Back then it was now it doesn't make any difference. If I stayed another two years, I wouldn't cost the company any more money. I wouldn't make, you know, I would continue to make money, but they wouldn't replace me with another captain that's making the same money. It's just you keep the experience and the cockpit. That's the key to it is you're taking the most experienced pilot and pulling them out arbitrarily because it's a one size fits all policy. It doesn't make any sense. Is it about being an airplane pilot or is there anything about being an airplane pilot that predisposes certain individuals to things like depression and alcoholism and drug abuse? Well, I think it's like any other job. It's a lot of travel with it. And so along with that, there is certain amount of stress in the job. You don't it's like anything else. Why don't you do it for a long time? You don't really sense the stress, but it's kind of always present. It's like an underlying high baseline of stress in that job. Your traffic controllers are the same thing. You'll see the same issue. You show up with them depression, alcoholism, substance abuse, so on. You're on the road all the time. You're not eating well. You're always jet lagged. Right. You're behind the clock. You're eating processed foods. And then what do you do to wind down at a layover? You go to the bar, get a couple of drinks. Maybe you go up to the room, get a couple of more. Most pilots are very good at obeying the restrictions. There's a 12 hour cutoff. They'll do that. But they'll drink right up to that 12 hour cutoff. And then when they go home, you know, the whole thing begins to snowball. I don't know. You know, alcoholism is it's an insidious thing and it'll take you over. But it shows up in much younger pilots. If you haven't developed a drinking problem by the time you're in your mid 60s, you're probably not going to. Right. Right. Totally. Well, I mean, think about like rock stars too. They have very similar lives in there, but they're drinking kind of goes hand in hand with doing that. They're always on planes. They're always on the road, always traveling, never seeing their family. You know, I always, I always think about this. Because I've met a lot of people who like in different industries that live very similar lives. And they all seem to have that follow that same pattern of like depression, being just unhappy, being always on the road, not around. They're like their kids if they have kids and they're always traveling. Well, we're, we're creatures that were created for habit. We like our habits and our routines. I talked to course, I wrote a course for the Navy years ago. And one of the things I talked about was how we are predisposed to wanting to get into a routine. So no matter where you go, even if you're on the road, you'll have a road routine. Most people, they'll get up, they'll go to their layover, they'll sleep for a couple hours, they'll get up, they'll take a run, they'll take a walk. They'll go get dinner at the same place at the same time. And it's, that's all part of the habitual thing that gives you kind of stability. Right. If you're at home and you're a nine to five, you're going to have a lot of stability in your life more so than the person who's constantly packing their bag, unpacking their bag. And with the airlines, many times you'll pack your bag to go some place and you won't get there. You know, like, see, you got a trip that starts in Miami to get to the airport and they go, we can't answer your Miami leg. Now you're going to Dallas or now you're going to Minnesota and it's the middle of the winter. Well, wait a minute, I packed my, my, you know, my bathing suit for Miami. No, sorry, you're going to end up in Minneapolis St. Paul tonight. So those kind of up peevals are the routine, the normal routine for a pilot. So a lot of that, that stability that most people have, it's kind of not there a lot of the times. Right. No, were you, were you in like the military before you flew? Marshall? Yep. I did nine years on active duty in the military and then I did another 21 years in the reserve. So about 30 years altogether. I was a pilot. Yeah. We got trained as a pilot that I was so, so this is a good story. I had no, I had never been in the airplane before, the military. And my best friend went to the Naval Academy. And he was, he was one of those guys in high school that knew what he wanted to do. Really super smart guy. Got straight A's, got accepted to the Naval Academy. I was more of a knucklehead. I had a good time. Same thing with college. And I got done with college and it was 1982 and the job market was super tight. And nobody was hiring. And so I was on the phone with him one night and he said, why don't you get on the recruiter and tell me you want to be a pilot? I said, okay, how can walk me through that? So he did. And so I went down the recruiter the next day and I walked in. And after the small talk, the recruiter said, so what do you, what do you want to do? And I said, want to be a pilot just like that, you know, that pilot voice. And he laughed at me. He just looked at me and he goes, well, you in 40,000 other guys. And I said, well, I don't want 40,000 spots. Only want one. And he looked back and went, okay, well, he goes, I like the attitude. He goes, let's all right. You got to think test. So the game you hold battery of tests. And then about three weeks later, he called me back and he goes, Hey, you did really well on the test. He said, in fact, you ace him. He said, come on back. He said, let's get your thing going. Let's see if we can get you that pilot spot. And so the next thing out of his mouth was I need your college transcript. And I said, can we skip that part? And he said, no, no, we got to have it. And I said, so I sent it to him and he called me up and he goes, Steve, he goes, you had a good time in college. Didn't you? I said, yeah, he goes, I don't know if we can send this in. And he said, I'm not sure you're going to get accepted. I kind of sweet talked him into it. And he did. And about six weeks later, he called me back. This is back in the day when the phone was on the wall. And I answered the phone and his voice was like three octaves higher. And he said, you're not going to believe this. He said, but they hired you. He said, you've been getting down here right now and signed on the dotted line. Wow. I ran down as fast as I couldn't. The rest is history. Did your, did your take off or land on an aircraft carrier? No. So just a couple of years prior to my getting hired in the, by the Navy, they were training everybody on the carrier, whether you went there or not. That was kind of a bad use of resources because if I'm not going to end up there in jets, then why are they training me to do it? Sure. So they got rid of that. I ended up flying an airplane called a P3. It's a big four engine turbo prop that hunted submarines back in the day. Oh, wow. Yeah. On it submarines. How would how did that work? That was fascinating. I loved it. There were 12 people on the crew. So there's three pilots, an engineer and then a whole bunch of geeks in the back that ran computers. And it's pretty simple design. We would drop a buoy out of the back of the airplane. A little parachute on it and it would cascade down to the water. And then it would drop a microphone down in the water, kind of like this. Really? And that little microphone would would transmit all of the sound in the water through a little one watt radio transmitter that's bobbing around on the ocean surface back to the airplane. And you drop a whole bunch of them all over the place. And then if there was some sort of mechanical frequency sound in the water and you look down and didn't see a ship on top of the water, something underneath the surface is making that mechanical noise because everything mechanical operates on a frequency where ambient noise doesn't. So then they would just kind of localize where the sound was coming from. They triangulate and then there's your sub and then you get a course in speed. And you'd never have to see me below the surface the entire time. We did that for years. Wow. That's fascinating. There's always boggles my mind how many submarines are traveling through the waters like within miles of the coast of Florida or the coast of Southern California and just all around. And from every China Russia, you name it, they're all circling every single ocean like coming within like within miles of I guess the international water zone right before you get into like United States territory. And some submarines need to get closer. Some not so much. The ones with the big inner continental ballistic missiles, they can stay a couple thousand miles away. They don't need to be all that close. But it was back in the old Soviet Union days. It was surprising how many submarines they had deployed it in a given time. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty terrifying. Yeah. And especially like during the Cold War, you know, like that whole time when it was like that constant threat of nuclear war. Right. That's why I love the mission we did. It was it was the Cold War, you know, it's kind of, there wasn't a lot going on, but there was actually because we wanted to keep track of where all of those Soviet submarines with the big missiles were at all times. So there was a thing that the president could do, I guess I can talk about this now, but it's because it's years ago, it's called a smooth touch. And he would the president, we come out of the Pentagon, but in theory, it came from the president and the president would, we would track in these subs in real time. And if the, if the bubble went up, the balloon went up right and we said, okay, we're going to war. We, we wanted to get an asset, a P3 on top of a submarine within 30 minutes. And to deliver a weapon if we had to, this is all simulated. Now we don't, we never do the submarine to the submarine. So let's say we're going to war with the Soviet Union. Yeah. And the president gives out the order, you know, go after their subs, you know, the rules of engagement have changed and it's now DEF CON one, and we're going to think subs. So we'd be tracking this guy normally. We would, we would localize him, come down within 30 minutes, open up the bomb bays, weapon away and sync us up. And the, the aim was to do that within 20 to 30 minute timeframe. So sometimes we were more successful than others, but I only ever got a couple of those, you know, they would simulate one. You'd be messing, you'd be flying around on a normal night, tracking some submarine and all of a sudden the guy that two seats behind you start screaming. Yeah. And as soon as you hear his voice raise and he'd start screaming, I knew exactly what it was. And he'd, he'd run up to the cockpit and he'd show, you know, if you're the mission commander, you'd show you piece of paper and it says smooth touch on it. Not yet. Let's go man. Let's go. Wow. So, you know, you'd, you'd, you'd announce that to the whole crew and then it was game on. And so you had to do it within 30 minutes. And we were successful the two times I had him. So right simulated success. We never sang anybody. Right. Right. And the, the crazy thing about that is if like a nuke was ever long. All of that's futile. Like nothing matters now. Right. Because once one, once one, um, I learned this, this book called Nuclear War by Energy, Gibson, once one nuke is launched, that means they're all launched. Right. Cause I guess they have this thing called launch on warning to where, uh, if the United States detects with their, uh, with their radar and with their satellites that there is an incoming ICBM, we have to assume that they are going to try to, um, take out our, our ICBM sites that can like in Montana and that part of the Midwest. So we have to get rid of them as user or lose it. So we have to get launch all those. Hopefully at the place we think the ICB is coming from. And within like 12 minutes or something insane like that. So yeah, once one launches, they're all launching and then it's, it's just Armageddon. Yeah, and that was the real world, you know, back then the, the old movie war games, which was, you know, kind of a funny silly movie, but it was the serious side of that was what happens if the computer messes up and, and launches a fake attack. Right. You know, there's, there was a bunch more serious movies made back in the 60s and 70s with the same kind of premise. The world goes to nuclear war, but it's strange love. You know, that's the classic. Yeah, because the computer got it wrong. But, you know, we're not out of that yet, but it's not, it's not, it's present as it was back. Right. And we have these things called doomsday planes too. You've seen that the doomsday plane that the president has to fly on. It's like a, um, find a photo of the doomsday plane. It's like a super rugged, like tank version of Air Force one. And apparently it's got all the windows blocked out for radiation. It's like, it's like code in the special material to block out like nuclear radiation. And it's got this antenna that it drops to like pickup radio signals that like drops it from underneath the plane. Find some images of it, Steve. That's not a very good image. That's not the doomsday plane. It can fly 12 hours without refueling. Is that normal? Well, yeah. So you have the limitation on how long those airplanes can stay airborne is not so much the fuel, but the oil in the engines. So you can, you can refuel Air Force one and stay airborne in theory as long as the pilots are, you know, okay. But eventually the engines are going to run out of oil. Right. So that's your limiting factor. Yeah. So I guess the idea about this is like they have to, uh, to maintain continuity of the government. They have to put the president in this thing. If there's a nuclear war and they fly in circles, I guess, just until they run out of gas and figure out a place to land. Yeah. But the people in the submarines would be the ones that last the longest because they're underwater and they're filled by nuclear power. Correct. You know, every year around this time everyone wants to talk a big game, new year, new me, blah, blah, blah. But you know what? The truth is nothing really ever changes until you actually start. We all have great ideas. And if you have been sitting on one that people keep telling you to launch, then January is the time to do it. We launched the Danny Jones Immersion Store about a year ago and it's powered by Shopify because Shopify gives you everything you need to sell online or in person without overcomplicating your life. Millions of entrepreneurs have already made this jump. Big brands, small brands and people launching their very first business. Shopify makes it stupid. Simple. You can pick from hundreds of beautiful templates and customize them to look exactly how you want. They're built in AI tools, even helped write product descriptions and headlines. And they can even clean up your product photos. Marketing. It's handled email campaigns, social posts, all built right into Shopify. So you can reach people wherever they're scrolling. And the best part is as you grow Shopify grows with you more orders, bigger audience, new markets, you manage everything from one clean and simple dashboard. Don't let February hit while you're still slacking launch your idea today. In 2026, stop waiting and start selling with Shopify. Sign up for your $1 per month trial period and start selling today at Shopify.com slash Danny Jones. Go to Shopify.com slash Danny Jones. That's Shopify.com slash Danny Jones to hear your first this new year with Shopify by your side. When we're going to have nuclear powered airplanes, never, never. It's amazing that airplanes are like, it's so wild to me how airplanes don't like commercial airliners. It doesn't seem like they've evolved at all in the last 50 years. Correct. It's like they're the same thing. Yeah. Is it? Do you find that weird? Now, back when I was a kid, everything was going to be super sonic transport by this time by the year 2000. Everything was by the year 2000. You know, there was going to be 100 billion people on the planet. But we were all going to be traveling, you know, super sonic. And that didn't happen only because it was too expensive and too loud. The people around those airports hated those airplanes. You can only get about 80 people. It's like a regional jet. Right. The 12,000 to ticket paid 12,000 for a coach seat just to get there a couple of hours earlier. And so you know, let's say you go across the Atlantic and three and a half hours, but you got stuck in traffic going to JFK and that ate up another two or three hours. It ends up being the same amount of time anyways. It's like, why did they do this? And the airlines had a more as kind of a halo thing. The prestige thing to have those super sonic jets. Now, I think the age is coming back because the technology has actually caught up with it. There's a company called Boom on the North Carolina. And I heard about that. You know, American Airlines has 29 options for airplanes. I don't think they've built an airplane yet, but they've, they're designing it still. So, you know, we'll see remains to be determined. But I think the future will be hypersonic travel at some point. Yeah. So one of the reasons they like the conchor, I think one of the reasons they stopped it was because, I mean, obviously the things that you mentioned, but like to me, it just seemed like that was the, that was the, basically, that was what was having with everything during the cold where we were racing the Soviets. And I think they had some sort of a prototype of a super sonic jet like this. And then so we were like, oh, we got to create one too. Then we can come to the conchor. And then it was like, oh my God, this is like insane to manage. It's like, this is way too hard. It's like sprinting to try to get this done. And it's costing so much money. It was breaking. I think they had to keep one on standby in New York. And it was like, that was not very cost effective. And, um, and I think one crashed in France. If I remember correctly, a year before 9-11 and then 9-11 happened. And then all of the stock or all like the airline companies, like they're stock plummeted because of 9-11 and that like wasn't, I was like, dark ages of air travel. Yeah. And that air France crashes would doomed the conchor all together because it wasn't cost effective. It was, it was a nightmare to maintain. Um, again, it was a prestige airplane for the airlines and they were looking for a way to back out. And when that airplane finally crashed, I think they said, you know, this is our exit strategy. Right. Right. Right. I'm on the conchor. And it never came back. Now it will sometime in the future, but it's got to be cost effective. Right. At the end of the day in airline, you have to have your head examined to run an airline because even in a great year for an airline, you maybe make two or 3% profit in a year. It's just, right. There's too many moving parts. There's think of all the things that have wheels and are associated with running an airline. It's just a nightmare that it runs as well as it actually does. Now you're throwing an expensive airplane that people don't have the appetite to pay at this point. They'd be paying $15,000 a seed for, you know, they're just not going to do it. Even if it's not super sonic, it was, it's like, I mean, what the reason that airplanes are, they, from what I understand when we're correct, I'm wrong. We take planes from like the 80s and 90s and we just refurbish them. Right. And put new engines on them, new seats inside, redo the interior, but it's essentially the same design. And everything's the same as what they were in the 80s and 90s. Sort of, I mean, when you get down to the, like, if you look at cars from the 70s and cars today, yeah, they have a lot of the same things. They have four wheels, steering wheel, some of them do at least steering wheel still kind of, kind of. But, but the technology has improved and the build quality has improved dramatically. Right. So all of the technological advantages show up in the little things. And so, oh gosh, the reliability stuff, the stuff I deal with is a pilot is much more reliable than it was, you know, 30 or 40 years ago. So the airplanes, I think they look the same. They're kind of the same basic thing, but the 787 is a total departure. It's all carbon fiber and, and it's, it's a lighter, more nimble airplane in a lot of ways. They had some issues rolling it out, but I think it's the kind of the future of, you know, airliner design. What makes so because it's carbon fiber. So if you watch the wings on a 787, you know, it's time to 787 Steve. Yeah. When it, when it first takes off and it rotates, the wings bend way up. Like you'd look at it and go, oh, that looks uncomfortable. Is that normal? It's normal. It's really designed it. So it almost like a bird. The wings go up in the near point eventually settles in the wings come back down. But it's meant to have a lot of flexibility in those wings. It's a nice, much nicer ride. They've got you see the, how the wings bend up. That's not, that's not, you know, the camera doing that. that's actually how it flies. And that's what it looks like when it's cruising. Wow. Just like that. Right. And then when it sits on the ground, their, their flat is can be. But when he gets airborne, it's designed like that. Now, is this the same plane that there was a new plane that Boeing came out with where they had to move the engines up above the wing a little bit. And that was causing lots of issues and like crashes. That was the max. So when they go. Yeah. So that's I think the 737 all the variants are the most prolific airplane on the planet. They at least are rivaled by airbus, but, but 737s have been around forever. They've had dozen different versions of it. When they came out with the max, it was to put bigger engines on it, more fuel efficient. Okay. And so forth. And this was to compete with airbus, right? Yeah. But then they kind of cut some corners. And the corner cutting was we had to move the engines, the center of gravity, the airplane changed and they thought they could take care of that with a software fix. And that and that's and then then when they did put the software fixed in place, they didn't tell the pilots about it. And they only had they had the software was forcing the nose of the airplane over because it thought the airplane was stalling. So the airplane is stalling. It's getting slow. Right. And the airflow over the wings is disrupted. Yeah. So the airplane is now saying an airbus does this all the time. It knows as the airplane over for you so that you don't stall the airplane. It's usually based on two or three inputs from different systems telling it that you're actually stalling. What happened with the max initially was there was only one input. And if that one input gave you erroneous information, they would, it would push the nose over. And the pilots didn't know what was going on because they hadn't been trained. And so they're like, you know, they're trying to, they're fighting the airplane. They're pulling back, but the computers pushing it over their pulling back. And so they, they crashed two of them. They grounded the whole fleet went back fixed not only the software issue, but also the hardware part of it with the engines and all of that. And so now they haven't had any problems since. So it's been, I think it'll be reliable going forward, but it's a, was a heck of a price to pay good Lord. Yeah. Did you ever fly one of those? Nope. No. I love Boeing products in general. Do you? I get so much criticism on my channel for this because why? Well, because I've been a Boeing guy my whole life. And so the difference between Boeing and Airbus is this, Airbus is like a computer that has an airplane attached to it. Boeing is a airplane that has a computer assisting it. So it's just a basic general philosophy, but you're managing a computer when you're flying an Airbus. So it's fly by wire. So instance, you got a joystick over here and you're flying the airplane, but there's no real cable or anything going out to your flight controls. It's a digital signal that goes to another box. It does another thing. It doesn't know the thing. The advantages of it is it's a little more quick than then the old yoke in a Boeing, but and it also saves a little bit of weight. But beyond that, again, it's like going back to Hal from 2001 space, Odyssey, when Dave's trying to get the bay doors open in Hell, saying, I'm sorry, I want to allow that the computer sometimes overrides the pilot on a Boeing, a pilot can always override the computer, but not so on an Airbus, except on that max before they had that issue, because they didn't know what was going on. Right. It was brand new. Right. And so the the initial kind of take on that was the, you know, a more experienced crew would have handled it different. I'm not sure about that. But I would I do know is that they, they hid something, they didn't train the pilots on it. And that was that was another layer of the mistake that was made with that airplane. Do you think maybe maybe they've already done it? But what point do you think they're going to start incorporating AI into these planes? Well, they're already starting with that. And I was I was on with the peers Morgan a few months ago. And he at the end of the interview, he he said, you think there's you're going to be a pilot or a plane. And I said, well, no. He said, what do you mean? Because there's cars that have no driver. And he said, I was just in went on Los Angeles. Well, that's a different deal. I said, you're talking about two dimensions as opposed to three. Okay. And if you got a problem in your car, it's just going to pull over and shut down and you get out and go and you call the company or you go on the app and say, send me another car. That's different. You can't do that in an airplane. And now will AI assist in technology and making the pilots load lighter? Yeah, sure. I don't know. I don't know for that. I think that's great. Could I see a future where they get rid of one of the three pilots in the cockpit because of AI? I hope not. Only only because of the few emergencies I've had over the years, that third pilot, especially in an international flight, that third pilot is worth their weight in gold. Because you and the co-pilot are busy running checklist, flying the airplane. That's your administrative assistant. They can look everything up that you don't have time to do because you're busy. And so having that third person there is hugely important. Now, could AI do that? I'm sure I suppose so. But let me ask you this, though. Can't sorry, interrupt. But could somebody potentially take control if there was an issue with a remote control or an airplane that was not manned, was just running by AI, pilotless, would there be an option for someone on the ground to take remote control of the airplane if something goes south? So here's my idea, my business model. You might want to invest in this. Okay. It's the it's the the PID program. We used to call it the pilot in Dallas, but I think maybe the pilot in Delhi is probably better. But at any rate, we'll find the right place to base this thing. And then it's basically go down to a single pilot in the airplane. And the cold pilots are a guy sitting down in a room like this with a bank of computers and screens. And he's monitoring 25 flights all at the same time. Now, the the selling point on that is you have a real pilot in the airplane. Right. But now the airplane becomes hijacked proof because if somebody on the airplane tries to hijack the airplane, the guy down on the ground, Steve, down on the ground says, I'm sorry, we're not going to allow that. He just hits a button and takes over control of the airplane. Right. And says, we're going to fly this to a safe place where the police can intercept this airplane and so forth. So there won't ever be another 9, 11 style hijacking with this system. But the downside of it, a couple of people have pointed out to me is what if the guy running it on the ground gets, you know, taken over and they take over all these airplanes. So there's no perfect system out there. I'm trying to work out that. See, I would I would imagine that after 9, 11, we would have figured out how to take over airplanes because if it does get hijacked, you want to have somebody in the Pentagon who can tap into that airplane and just take control of it. The in theory, the technology would be there to do that. But again, it's technology you would only maybe use once in a century. It's heavy. You'd have to carry it around all the time. You'd have to test it all the time. It's not they're never going to do that because it's just too expensive. Everybody's going to push back on that. once in a century, it's heavy. You'd have to carry it around all the time. You'd have to test it all the time. It's not, they're never going to do that because it's just too expensive. Everybody's going to push back on that, say it seems like basic technology though. Like it doesn't seem like it's that complicated. Well, then you're also talking about the government trying to do something to make sense. And it took, it took a couple of years for them to put reinforced doors in between us and the public. And they still haven't put in secondary doors. I don't understand why. It's a $50 fix per airplane. Right? And then in the military, I had cargo nets that would clip, clip, and clip like that. 50 bucks. And so you put a secondary barrier outside the cockpit when the pilots come out to go to the bathroom. You clip the things in place. Nobody can get through it. Pilots come out, do their business when they go back up to the cockpit and close their door. You take the clips and throw it, wad it up and throw it back in the closet. And that's the fix. And they still haven't done that. Congress last year mandated that every new airplane being built has a secondary barrier now. And it's a big complicated second door. And you know, so right now, the the door between the cockpit and the main cabin is something that someone could break through fairly easily. But it's a Kevlar reinforced door with lots of latches on it. And it'll it'll lock nice and tight. Here's the problem with a single door though with a single door, it works for you or it works against you. So that door is going to have to open at some time during the flight, right? For people from other nature. So you got to go to the bathroom. And if you're a bad guy and you time it, right? And you can get in through that door and you close it. Now it's you and one pilot up in the cockpit. And you've got the door now working in your favor as the bad guy, because now it's locked. You throw the latch. Nobody can get in that door. Right. So all you're able bodied men in the back of the airplane, they're going to take on that bad guy. He's on the other side of this barrier that you can't break. So it's it's a two edge. It's a double. I saw you what you're saying. So there would have to be two separate locks two separate doors. Yes. Yeah. Secondary barrier. That's the only way to fix the problem. And there was not a willingness on anybody's part to spend 50 bucks in the airplane to fix it. All right. We need to talk about those so-called mushroom gummies that you see at all the local gas stations and head shops. Because most of that stuff ain't mushrooms. It's just mystery chemicals dressed up in wizard art. There's a wave of fake Amanita products out there. Some lab tests have found research chemical trip to means, benzodiazepines and even synthetic cannabinoids being sold as mushroom gummies. That's exactly why I've always avoided that stuff. If it's behind the counter next to a scratch off in a boner pill, I'm out. But here's the thing. The real Amanita mascara mushroom is legal. And when it's legit, it's nothing like that gas station nonsense. And that's why I trust Amantara. These guys are the real deal. They're one of the main importers and processors of actual Amanita mascara in the US. No synthetics, no secret ingredients just properly prepared mushroom ethically sourced and lab tested. For the last seven days, I've been taking too Amanita caps with the blue lotus gummy every night before dinner time when I get home because it uplifts all the stress from the day and sort of keeps me in my bubble at home with my family where I'm not worrying about the next day, not worrying about work. What it does is dissolves the stress from the previous work day and it deletes any anxiety I would have had about the following day, which allows me to stay present when I'm around my family. We often spend our lives reminiscing about the past or worrying about the future when the only thing that matters is right now. And that's why I love if you're curious about Amanita, please don't grab something random off the counter use the brand that people in this space actually respect. Amantara's 500 milligram capsules and Amanita gummies are consistent and beginner friendly. Just start low and go slow. Go to Amantara.com slash go slash DJ and use the code DJ 22 for 22% off your first order. That's Amantara.com slash go slash DJ and make sure to use the code DJ 22 for 22% off your first order. It's linked down below. Not back to the show. Yeah. We don't really have hijackers anymore. Like since 9-11 there haven't been any like planes that have been hijacked out of there. Well, there haven't been a few attempted cockpit breaches, but it was usually somebody that was out of their mind or you know, on ambient in alcohol and you know, there was it wasn't an organized, you know, thing that was going on. No, right. Right. I was watching a video the other day on I think it was on Instagram of this dude just joy riding this plane. Like this, maybe seeing this, this guy is like, he's kind of a key is communicating with the tower. And they're like, have you ever flown before? He's like, nope. He's like, I just got bored and I wanted to take this thing for a ride. My life's not going too good right now. And they're like, well, we're gonna try to get you to land this thing. He's like, I don't know. I don't know if I want to come back. Yeah. And then I think he crashed it. Yeah. I saw that video. There's another guy over in Vancouver that stole an airplane and he wanted to make a political protest. So he stole this little says to him, flew it up and he was just flying over top of Vancouver airport for hours disrupting traffic. Oh, broad casting his, his manifesto over the radio. And then the controller on the ground finally got it and this guy is brilliant. So the controller makes a fake call at first. It was actually real. But at first, he makes a fake call to somebody else. But he broadcasts and he says, hey, yeah, the, um, the F 16s are inbound and they're about, they're about eight minutes out. Um, and, uh, he said, yeah, it's weapons away. He's, he's just making all this stuff up. It was, it was about an hour later that the actual F 16s made it up. But this guy, he hears it on the things like, yeah, I'm gonna get shot down a bit of land. Oh, God, he brings it around in lands on next thing. The cops arrest him and take him off. You know, oh, my God. But that air traffic controller should get an award for them. Yeah. That's a great idea. That's a very creative idea. Yeah. Like that. Um, so out of all the airplane disasters or conspiracies, which one is most interesting to you or your favorite? Well, I've got, I've got a 911 story. Oh, really? Yeah. So my, my background goes like this. I was originally scheduled to be the co pilot on the first airplane. It was hijacked on September 11 lights. Yeah. And so I was based in Boston at the time. There's a film on it called in my seat on YouTube. And it's actually what got the captain Steve channel started back in 2011 for the 10th anniversary of 911. We made just a 15 minute documentary about my story. So my story goes like this. I was a first officer of co pilot of American Airlines at the time based in Boston. And I was on reserve and reserve means that you're on call to fill in for another pilot that they can't make it their sick or they have to train you and whatever. They'll call you the day before in a sign you a trip that's not assigned. And on September 10th, 2001, which is a day that means more to me than the 11th actually on the 10th, I have been watching the trip. It had been open all weekend. It was really nice trip. It was a morning departure out of Boston to Los Angeles. Yeah. Very senior trip. And nobody picked it up. It was just there in open time. Nobody picked it up. So the day before then at three o'clock in the afternoon, they will assign the trip to somebody and reserve. So I looked on the list of reserve pilots and there was only one guy on call for the 11th that was me. So the computer then will automatically assign your name to the trip. And then about 30 minutes after the assignment, the somebody, a real person will call just to make sure that you've seen the assignment and know that you're going to work tomorrow. So I had three o'clock in the afternoon. I went over the computer and I looked and sure enough, I had been assigned the trip. My name was assigned to it. I told my wife I'm going to Los Angeles tomorrow. I packed my bags, put cars at my alarm and just waited for the phone ring. And we kind of lost track of it because sometimes they'd take more than a half an hour to call. And about, I don't know, about 730 that night. I said to her, I go, did they ever call? And she goes, I think so. I looked at her phone, I looked at mine, I thought, I'd better double check. So I go back to the computer and I logged in and sure some other guy's name was on the trip. Okay. I don't care. I would still get paid to stay home. And so I went into work. I went into the Navy the next day. I was doing some Navy work then. And I'm watching 9-11 on the screens like everybody else. Like I walked in and I'm watching these airplanes crash. And I never connected because they were talking at first like 10 airplanes. It had been hijacked and it was American Airlines and some of you united. They didn't know. It was a lot of confusion in those first few hours. And I was on the Navy base and we were going to war and it was nuts. So I later on that evening I went home and we got into on my computer because I thought maybe I can look up the names of the crews that were on those flights because I know the back doorway in in it American. So I logged in and tried to find the names of them on the manifest. And when the screen came up in front of me, it looked exactly like it did 24 hours ago the day before when I saw my name assigned to the trip. And I looked at the screen and all the names were scrubbed off the trip. All it said was sequence failed continuity, which is a code that they put on every flight that doesn't make it to its destination. So if you have to divert for whether or some other reason, well, you talk about an understatement, you know, sequence failed continuity, no kidding. And I just looked at the screen. I was just like in shock. I just I just stared. And a few minutes later my wife came around the corner and she said, you know, what are you doing? I said, remember, I told you I was going to LA today and she said, yeah, I said, that was the first airplane they got hijacked this morning. And it's still it's a moment, right? And so all the radio interviews and everything over the years, they always ask you me the same question. How does that how that make you feel? And I don't have an answer. It's there's the best I can come up with is there's an empty space where a feeling should be because you can't get angry. You can't get sad. You're, you know, it's just hard to describe. It's just it was a it's a vacant feeling. And I still I was watching. Okay, this I don't normally get political and I'm not trying to know, but after Trump got shot in the ear in Butler, the two days later, three days later, was a Republican National Convention. He's sitting there with that bandage on this ear and the cameras going over to him. And he's got that he's got that thousand yards staring his eyes. And I was looking at him. I thought, oh, I know exactly what's going through his brain. He's sitting there and all this hubbub is going on around him. And he's having that moment where he's searching for a feeling that he should feel and there isn't one. And he's going through the he's nodding and being polite, but inside he's there's a vacant feeling right now. Because the reality of a bullet whizzing by your your head that close and taking off the top of your ear. There's nothing like that. You can't there's no way to describe that feeling other than, wow, okay, what now, what am I going to do next? You know, so there's an obligation that comes with that. I think, you know, when you've been the the talk I give associated with it is living on borrowed time because I am I can mark on the calendar when I I should have died and I didn't. So the rest of my life has been marked by, you know, let's let's make the most out of this thing. And I can. Oh my God. Yeah. I'm sure you think about that all the time. Yeah, it does. It's like groundhog day for me because I still spend probably 20 times a year going around. And we show the filming in my seat film and then I go and tell them about my story in various venues. And it's like reliving it over and over again. But, you know, there's an obligation. You have to tell the story. Right. It's not my story to myself. Yeah, totally. Right. So when you logged back onto the thing, the computer back back toward into the computers the next day, it still hadn't updated. So it had said that you were still assigned to it. No, they had taken all the names off. I'll hit all the. So that other guys like me trying to find the names couldn't report them to the media. They wanted to keep the, that's one of the protocols right away. Like if there's an incident or an accident, they'll scrub the names off the list right away. So the media can't get a hold of them. They want to make sure they can get to the family's first, let them know what's going on. And then, you know, it was about a week later. I think they finally came out over here. The names of the crew members around those flights. Right. Yeah. Cut Lord, man. How much, how much attention did you pay to all of the media about that directly? Right after it happened, like they played phone calls and stuff like that from people from from in the air calling their loved ones. And like you hear them from the one I think the one in Pennsylvania, like they were like talking about like trying to go like breech through the door or something and get them. And yeah, there were so there were so much. There was a lot. And you couldn't get away from it for a while because right after 9-11 it was just all was the news was absorbed with it. But, uh, if you ever go to the flight 93 memorial, the one in Pennsylvania, it's a really, really good memorial and they have all of those recordings playing there. So you can go around and there's little walls hanging, there's phones hanging on the walls and you can go and there's pictures and memorabilia from the flight and you can go and listen to those various recordings. And, you know, after, for me, after listening about three or four of them, I was like, that, I'm done. You know, that's enough because it's just, even now it's still hard to kind of bring all this up. Yeah. Because the ramifications of all of it. It just is, um, you know, the more you talk about it, the more real it still becomes. And you were living where at the time? I was living in Maine at the time. You're living in Maine at the time. I was pastoring a church up there. We started a church in, in a top some Maine. Oh, wow. I was a senior pastor of a church we started and, and, and it was an ideal job, me being on reserve with the airlines and started in church because there's no money to plant a church up in that part of the country. So I didn't have to take a salary, but we could, I could be more or less a full time pastor as long as they would give me up like for two trips a month. That's about what I would fly in those days on reserve. And the church is more than happy. Like, yeah, great. You know, if we can have a full time pastor, we'll, you know, if you want to go, you know, Monday through Wednesday and fly two trips a month through awesome. Yeah. Yeah. It worked out. Oh, wow. So that could fund everything for you and just a couple of flights, just a couple of flights a month. Yep. Yeah. I get you when you're on reserve, you get pages of straight salary, no matter how much you fly. So like, I mean, not, not to linger on the dark stuff, but what, how did that like affect your work after that and people around you being an airline pilot after 9-11? Like, I'm sure it had to have been weird, say the least. Yeah. It is, it's not, it's not the first near death experience I had in an airplane. So the, the Navy time, there was a couple of moments where, you know, my knees were knocking after a flight. And so you kind of get a little inoculated that. And remember, my 9-11 story was, it wasn't like I was on the airplane and I escaped. I just didn't get the, I didn't finalize the assignment. And so here's, here's the rest of the story. So people will ask, well, how did you get off the flight? So I had seen my name assigned to the flight. There was a guy, the guy who eventually took it, his, his name was Tom McGinnis and Tom was celebrating his 42nd birthday on the 10th of September with his wife and his two kids. And Tom had been, he was a line holding pilot. He was one of the guys I would fill in for. He could pick up extra trips if he wanted to to kind of fill out his schedule. Tom had been looking at that trip all weekend and doing the, we do this all times like, I want it, I don't know, you know, you go back and forth and do I want to go to work him in? So he got his birthday celebration out of the way and he looked at the trip one last time and I had already been assigned to the trip, but there was a little code next to my name that says they hadn't made the phone call yet. So until they make the phone call, it's not final final. So he said to his wife, hey, I'm thinking about taking a trip to my, she's like, yeah, it's fine. So he calls up and says, hey, is it too late? Can I still get that trip? And the schedule is says, well, no, but you gotta let me know. So he talks to his wife, gets back on the phone, says, yeah, I'll take the trip. So at that moment, they raised my name from the trip, they put Tom's on it. Oh my God. And then the rest is history. So Tom was just trying to provide for his family pickup an extra trip. Uh, it was a wonderful trip. It was the most senior trip in this on the schedule early morning departure out of Boston early return the next day. It was a luxury trip. Direct flight to LA, direct LA, direct back, get back, you get back home by five o'clock at the next day, time for dinner. So, you know, really nice trip. And, uh, but, uh, so he took the trip, they erased my name. And that stuff happens all the time in scheduling with the airlines. Sometimes you don't have it. I only met him once. I didn't really know him. I wouldn't even call him into Clayton's. I remember bumping in no months. I know much more of his story now. His, his son, Tom Jr, followed in his dad's footsteps. So my son and his son are about the same in their late 30s now. My son's a filmmaker and he's a producer of my channel. And his son became a pilot. And, uh, he I, I talked to him one time on the phone. I text him almost every September 11th just say, you think about you and so forth. But, uh, he was about to get his interview with American Airlines mainline American. And he said, you know, do you think they're going to hire me and do you have any advice? And I said, Tom, I said, I don't know what the hiring practices are these days at American. This is back in like the 2011, 2012 timeframe. I said, but if they don't hire you, they're crazy. Just, just for the story of it all and they hired him and he might be a captain now for for all. I know he's, he's a super sharp guy. His dad was a top gun trained pilot to really sharp people. Yeah. Have you ever thought about or like maybe there's training that goes into this for like those kinds of situations for like a couple of dudes come in with box cutters or whatever it is to try to like breach the cockpit. Like, I'm sure you've you spent hours and days probably processing this kind of stuff hypothetically in your head. Yeah. Well, the, the paradigm shifted after 911 because the paradigm prior to that was the old hijack model of, um, they want a hijack in airplane land at some place, publish a manifesto in the newspaper, get their names on the news to get their cause out there. And, and they might threaten to kill some people and they might even do it, but they're not going to fly an airplane into a building like around the world would do that. They would, they'd be killing themselves by doing that. Right. So that was the old model until it all changed on 911 and it shows you how quickly a paradigm can shift. That paradigm changed on September 11, 2001 by the time the fourth airplane, United 93 was still being hijacked, the people in the back of the airplane had gotten a word. Hey, you guys aren't going to go land someplace to publish a manifesto. These guys are serious. They're flying these airplanes into buildings. You're all going to die. So with that information, Todd Beamer and the rest of the guys in the back of the airplane said, well, if we're going to die, we're going to die fighting. Right. So they try to take over the airplane. They did break into the cockpit. There was a fight in the cockpit. There was it's all on cockpit voice recorder. Oh, really? Yeah. They, and the, the, um, the, the guy at the terrorist at the controls was shaking the airplane back and forth to try to get these guys to hit the overhead and come off of him. And then he, and then he finally just turned the airplane around and just noticed it right in the ground. So, um, the only fortunate part of that is they didn't hit the capital or the White House or wherever they were headed. I've never heard that recording. I didn't know that that was yeah. If you go to the flight 93 memorial, all that's really there and it's, they got the transcripts of what, what took place. You know, just in the cockpit, there's just a lot of yelling and stuff. But they actually got back into the cockpit and I don't know if they had a pilot on board. They could have flown the airplane, but they, they never did regain total control of the airplane. Good Lord. Yeah. And whatever happened to the black boxes, do they ever find those? Yeah, they found all those. They did. Yeah. That's so scary, man. So, so now, what is the protocol? So now the protocol has changed and it's because of 911, it's, you know, we got that we got the armored door between us. Um, I don't come out unless it's a positive handoff. We have to have somebody else to flight attendant come in, close the door. There's strict security over opening and closing the door. All of that stuff is they put the carts out, you know, serving carts out the block people from trying to run in the cockpit. Right. Um, and then the, the, the backup option able bodied passengers. So if somebody is on board, there's a lot more federal air marshals and there ever used to be before, but, you know, I wouldn't be stretching the truth to tell you, there's not a federal air marshal on every single flight. You know, you can't have that big of government agency, but there are a lot of flights. What is it for people that don't know? What is a federal air marshal? They're just a cop on an airplane. So they're there, they blend in in the undercover cop undercomercup and their whole job is to be the law on an airplane. So essentially they're there to make sure the airplane doesn't get hijacked. Right. So if you're, if you're, if you're pulling a misdemeanor, a lot of carry a gun on them. Oh, yeah. And, and if they get, you get sideways with a flight attendant and there's a little argument, the federal air marshal is not going to intervene. This is for the serious stuff that they're there for. But, without federal air marshals on every airplane, the conventional wisdom is that able body passengers will tackle and subdue somebody that tries to get in the cockpit. Right. Right. You would jump out of your seat and jump on somebody right away. If they, you know, they're yelling something and they break in the cockpit, you'd be out of your seat and harping me all over that guy. So right, right. Right. Yeah. That reminds me. I was watching, uh, there's this, there's this professional skateboarder, his name is BAM, BAM Marjera. And he said he was on, I was just, this is like totally random, but it's relevant. He said that he was on a flight back from like, um, Abu Dhabi or something like this. And one of his fans was like walking by him going, bomb, bomb. Oh, his name is BAM. He's like, dude, shut up, shut up. He's like, bomb, bomb. Like, pointing out things you don't want to say. It's like, yeah, hopefully there's an air marshal. Yeah. We had a guy just did a video on this. We had a guy, um, I was walking down the jet bridge, as a uniform going on the airplane and this passenger makes a joke about, you know, hoping we're in a drink and two late last night or something along those lines. I'm like, sir, please, you know, you can't make those jokes and he doubled down about the accusing me of being drunk thing. I'm like, the, so the third time he made the joke, I was like, stop, give me your ticket. What's serious it and then let's go back out. And I had to get pulled off the flight because at that point, all these other passengers have heard, you know, the whisper down the lane, this guy, oh, he's accusing me of being drunk. So I had to go down and get the blood test and the urine analysis and all that stuff. And, uh, and he got pulled off the flight. I'm sure he got re accommodated, but there's certain things you don't say it at certain places. Like you're going through TSA, you don't say what you just said. Yeah. Um, that's, there's no humor there at all. And if you accuse a pilot of drinking or being drunk as he's about to step on the airplane, that's there's no tolerance for that kind of joke. Yeah, you had a video about a guy smoking weed in the bathroom. That was it. And, uh, I guess they had to do a May Day and land the airplane because there's a protocol that I get on for a protocol, but apparently there's like rigorous drug tests. And if they would have got some secondhand smoke or whatever, yeah, there's, there's no latitude and any of that stuff. So let's say for instance, they get a random drug test at the end of the flight and for some, now we all know if a guy is smoking weed in the bathroom and you smell some on the outside, you're not going to pop positive for that most likely, but nobody wants to take that chance. And in addition to that, what's going on with this guy? I mean, there's other ways to ingest that sort of thing without smoking a doobie in the, in the bathroom on the airplane. You're just asking for it. Eat it, gummy. When you're doing that. So he there's, there was a lot more going on. But the pilots, you know, did they overreact? I don't know. Did I overreact? Nope. Because at some point you got to go, hey, look, this is my livelihood man. I worked a lot of years to get here. And I'm not going to let you jeopardize it. So we're going to play it right by the book. I've always had a problem with keeping my firearm in reach and also some more safe and not around the kids, keeping it in the closet is just too far away. I remember finding my parents firearm and I don't want that happening with me. And that's what stock box USA solved with their stop box pro. Their customizable five button pattern is 100% mechanical and easy to open. I love not having to fumble around with a combination lock or an electrical keypad in the dead of night. And what a relief it does not have to operate off of a battery. It can stay under your pillow or under your mattress for fast access. And the best part is it's super safe around the kids, which means I never have to choose between security and readiness again. I love how well made it is. And when I travel, it slips right into my bag. No need for a separate bulky pelican case. This is hands down the best solution I've found. And I'm super happy to have stop box sponsoring the show. Stop box is made in the USA and it's tariff free. Stop box is also TSA compliant so you don't need a separate carry case. They also have a wall mount version and one for easy access in cars. No longer do you have to trade safety for speed and readiness. And for a limited time, our listeners get 10% off at stop box when you use the code Danny at checkout. Head on over to stopbox usa.com slash Danny and use that code d a n n y for 10% off your entire order. After you purchase, they're going to ask where you heard about them and please support our show by telling them we sent you. It's linked down below. Now back to the show. What is your take on the the MH370 airplane that disappeared the middle Asian airlines? Yeah, that's that's an interesting one. That's one of the craziest ones. It is. You know, the all the theories came out right away. You know, somebody stole the airplane. They're going to turn it into a bomb. You know, I just shook my head because I'm like, first of all, there's there's only a few runways around the planet where you can land an airplane that big, then to hide the airplane, you have to have a huge hanger. Right. And seven triple sevens don't fit all the way into most hangers like the tail will stick out. Oh, really? And then on top of that, you had what how many people on 250 people, let's say, on board the airplane? Yeah, you would have to get you'd have to, I guess kill all of those people or or and then think about how many people it would take to coordinate a plot like that. You'd have to keep everybody silent. Nobody would come in front of a camera behind a microphone and spill the beans about what happened. So none of that stuff was ever plausible, even though there's people that write books about it and make videos about it. Yeah, that airplane is probably down at the bottom of it. Very deep ocean. Right. And so deep that they they'll never find it because they haven't found it up to this point. Two things. One, the fix for that is floatable black box that you could put in the tail of the airplane that on impact ejects and floats. Okay. Then you would found you would find what their airplane was within and that connects to satellites or something. Well, the black boxes, you could put the black box anywhere in the airplane. Right. But like if it comes to the mill, the ocean, how would you find it? My question. Like, but it would float and it would have a little, there's things called ELTs or emergency locator transmitters. Okay. There's a bunch of them on the airplane and on impact those things start going off. And they they've got a battery in them. They'll go off for, you know, 24, 48 hours until the battery runs dead. You would have found the airplane by then. But it's again, it's a more of an expense. The airlines don't want to incur that expense. But and the governments spent what 300, $500 million looking for that airplane. Yeah. So, but it wasn't any one government. It was a bunch. So it's a long story. But at any rate that so the prevailing theories where the captain went off the deep end and just kind of took the airplane and did what he did with it. That's one theory. Yeah. I don't put a lot of credence in that. Like that he was suicidal or he was trying to or something. It wasn't. Yeah, I guess. But he again, why would you why would you work that whole way to get to that point in your life? Right. Then just to kill a bunch of people. But Air India, you know, I'm I'm stopping short of saying what what I think completely happened with that airplane. But it looks like one of the pilots transition the fuel control switches from run to cut off as the airplane rotated. Because the only way was what was this? Air India, 171 the the airplane that that crashed over in India about six months ago. Oh, the one where it took off and then one guy survived, right? Yeah, the one guy walked away. That was just amazing in all in itself. But the one passenger, but the the they they came out with a preliminary report on that. And it's the fuel control switches, which are their spring loaded into the locked position. You have to pick them up with both fingers pull them up, bring them down and let go of them for them to turn off. And one of the pilots did that. And the other pilot said, why'd you do that? And he said, he denied it. He said, I didn't do it. And then the other pilot is there's kind of like panics a little bit. And then eventually puts him back to run, but it wasn't quick enough to for the airplane engine, the school up. Oh, we know this for a fact now. Yeah, it's all in a preliminary report. Oh, god. They published all that. So again, so there's an instance where, you know, was there a pilot deciding he's going to check out that date. He took everybody with it. Okay. Well, did that happen on MH370? It's it's well within the realm of possibility. The crazy thing about the MH370 one. He's gonna check out that date he took everybody with okay. Well did that happen on MH370 It's it's well within the realm of possibility crazy thing about the MH371 Is that they turned off the transponders at like midnight or something like this around 1230 Yeah, and then it did a U-turn flew back like over Malaysia I think and there was like visual sightings of it Right and then the military tracked it going back out into the South China Sea Right because the it turned off its transponders, but for some reason the military had like some sophisticated wave tracking it They knew it was there and then then the military lost it But then I guess Boeing It was determined months later that Boeing has some Sophisticated technology that can that communicates with the engines right the engines are constantly transmitting back to the satellites to satellites Right so these Boeing satellites traced it going Yeah, down like south into the Indian Ocean And all those all that can tell you because that information that's transmitted to Boeing is not Course speed altitude. It's none of that stuff. It's just that what parameters of the engines operating They still running so that they can monitor that stuff constantly But when you're triangulating where the transmission came from you can get a rough track of where that airplane went So the the here's the problem with the way the media report stuff is In my opinion most of the stuff especially aviation related is 80 to 90 percent wrong Completely wrong. They know no idea what they're talking about And then they'll back off after a while as more facts come in and they finally get it maybe they get it 50 percent right But everybody clamped glammed onto They turned the transponder off stop The transponder stopped transmitting. That's what happened So there's a couple ways for that to happen the pilot can turn it off But the one saying the pilots turned it off that implies a sinister intent All we know for sure is that the transponder stopped transmitting That could have been an onboard fire down in the E&E compartment where all the electronics are There's no way to put that fire out down there. There's no fire suppression equipment Right it would eventually burn out a control in the transponder would stop transmitting however The engines would keep running because they're a separate system So they don't depend on The year I have underneath me in the airplane. They'll just keep on running It takes a lot to get those jet engines to stop running as long as they have fuel and air they'll keep running So there's a potential that the airplane became what they would call a zombie flight right there was an out of control fire like Swiss air 111 It was it was a out of control fire Everybody on the airplane eventually gets succumbs to the fumes and the but the airplane keeps flying until it runs out of gas So that's one of the theories the other is the captain Somehow hijacked the airplane that he would have to get rid of his co pilots or his co pilot To do that But that's not hard to do and then at some point You know, he just he just flies out there and I don't know So yeah, so if there was a fire wait basically what you're saying is it could have been it could have everyone could have like passed out on The plane they were all moving unconscious on it would have been a ghost plane Right just just flying on its own course and tell her eventually running to gas the course of the ocean The hybrid of those two would be let's say the captain is trying to kill himself and everybody else Yeah, so he gets the co pilot goes to the bathroom He locks the door doesn't let the guy back in and then he just depressurizes the cabin He puts himself on oxygen But depressurizes the cabin all the the masks come down in the back everybody's got 15 or 20 minutes of oxygen From those but after that everybody goes to sleep Including the co pilot that's locked out Everybody goes to sleep and he flies the airplane wherever he wants thinking about what he's going to think about and how much oxygen would he have on that On that dedicated oxygen he'd have he'd have a bunch. I don't know exactly it depends on That's a good question He'd have more than the passengers would have when we put in that category Yeah, probably not hours worth at that altitude at some point he'd have to come down to a breathable altitude But he could bring the airplane down to 10,000 feet and just I mean just fine there So so we never found the black box is that right? I mean found the airplane or the black box never found the black boxes But allegedly we found pieces of the airplane right washed up some offmatic gas car Right the coast of medic. I was like a year and a half later. I think So which leads me to how the airplane entered the water So if an airplane you know crashes it's it's gonna come apart and leave an oil slick and everything else and all sorts of parts are going to go replace if it stalled Um at altitude it would begin to spin and it would go in much more like a razor's edge into the water Which would mean it probably wouldn't break apart as easily as if it landed flat On the open ocean because there's swells in the ocean and you're gonna like hit a wall of water and the airplane's gonna disintegrate But if they went straight in like this it penetrate right so if if the airplane just ran out of gas Everybody was dead it ran out of gas It eventually would stall it would start a tight spin and we go right straight down so those are You know Those are my theories on what happened to it, but you know there's You know, it's probably it doesn't work. Yeah. The best one is the UFOs abducted it made it vanish Absolutely Yeah, these UFO and UFOs made it Trump said it through a warm hole. It's a hole portal. Oh, yeah See I get asked that question all the time like I was one of the things I did as a captain was I would ask people I'd say hey if you ever had a question you want to ask your captain This is your lucky flight right down on an African or piece of paper send it up to me. I'll answer your questions right So about every 10th question was have you ever seen a UFO? And I had same answer right back every time I'd say not from the outside and I just leave it at that I'd send it back to him, you know not from the outside not from the outside. Oh That's all I would say Not from the outside. I'd then take one is the earth flat right and is the earth flat. Yeah, and So yeah, so the earth flat one is is fun because There's a couple theories on that. It's the is it the round earth flat or the square earth flat theory There's there's two. Well if it's square Then the moon going around the earth has to make 90 degree turns. So we have to consider that shit. Okay. That's a big deal now It's around like a plate You know like around plate then okay the moon's cool With that, but I think if the if the earth was flat first of all the the cats would have pushed all of us off the edge at some point That's number that's the Top of my theory, but the other is where are the flat mooners? You ever heard of flat moon theory heard of what I've heard I've heard The moon is a spaceship. I've heard that theory The problem with these theories are like you got to be really careful because if you're a proponent of one You got to be careful for you jump on the bandwagon for another one because that one can disprove the one that you've already been a part of So like you can't start saying like The moon's a spaceship if you believe in flat earth because how do they how does those those two don't reconcile? The moon can't be real if you're believe in flat earth. It's got to be like some sort of projection right Oh, this is the UFO for the MH37 Yeah, I mean, yeah, it's right up there with all the other theories. Um, and you guys actually have to You guys have to fly In like curbs Curvatures right till like get places. Yeah, it was so straight earth So it's it's called the great circle and right so the earth is a globe. It's round. No, we might give it away Sorry It's it's it's round in a globe if you if you were to draw take a piece of yarn From New York to Los Angeles on on a globe and then flatten out the globe Your PC yarn would be it would be bent Right right right so to fly straight to some place on a globe It looks like on a two-dimensional flat surface like you're going up and down Like this you're not you're actually going straight. Oh when you see a straight line like if I do a straight line from New York to London Yep on on a map I would actually be going much farther out of my way to get there because to do to do it straight is not Straight because it's round in your flat in notes It blew my mind years ago when I had to learn it and I just kind of punted mentally on it and said you have sounds good It sounds good. Yeah. Just yeah, just give me enough gas. I'll get there right right Yeah, and that's what we have to fly like over the North Pole or over like the top of the earth to get the places like Like Europe or whatever you don't fly over the ocean just like sideways you go about. Correct. That's a shorter distance Looking at a flat map. You go well the shortest distances here. Well not necessarily sometimes if you go this way It's shorter and going this way. Yeah So is there speaking of UFOs is there a protocol if you do see it on an identified flying object? I'm sure there's probably something in a manual someplace. It says even if it's not I'm not talking alien Anything like anything that you can't identify you would you would just kind of call it in you'd say have that you know There's an object out here and it's making a light and What is it and does air traffic control have it on their radar? And if they say no you go well here's what I'm looking at there's lots of things that can they can make a Light that this it fools your brain going up the the east coast of Canada on the way over to Europe All those North Star satellites are up there now And they they actually light up and it's really weird looking at them because they're all kind of in a line But sometimes one lights up in the other and it looks like it's hopping around Huh, you know, but it's just the way the sun is hitting one and then hits another at this and it looks like the same There's a brain goes there's they can only be one light up there And because of all the stars you know that star is not gonna move well, but that one is it's hopping around like this It's just it's just a different satellite's you know what I'm thinking right now We need to show him the video that we shot on the beach Yes, that would be fantastic We love your input. Okay, so we had this gentleman on the show about two years ago who has this wild ability to Pray to the sky and make orbs appear and he said that he could do it in front of us Okay, so we went to the beach we brought a video camera And he started praying to God on the beach and to Jesus to bring these orbs he believes their angels and we sat there for two hours. We saw airplanes lots of airplanes and Then we saw this orb but this little ball of light come up off the horizon and go side to side and then fizzle out Kind of like like how you kind of how you would imagine like one of those Chinese lanterns that float around Mm-hmm in the sky, but it was too far and it was too bright and the brightness changed but Europe pilot and so this would be a fantastic opportunity to get your take on what this could be yeah, okay Sure, so this is the video. It's this is dark. So start from the beginning Steve So that's a plane flashing up there, right? Yep. Now look at the bottom You could flash for us and I'm getting it Right there It's still in the camera. It's still in here And it just disappears there now look at this one moving Here someone he's looked through this. It's very bright. Thank you. Oh You see it. It's right there. You see it All right, so a couple of things I Spent a lot of time in my p3 out over the open ocean right that's what we did it we flew around a 200 feet So you get pretty good at nighttime daytime Differentiating between something that's on the surface of the water in an actual star or planet that's you know Because the lead miles away because you don't want to confuse the two There's been airplanes that have flown into the water thinking that was open sky and it was actually Something on the surface right so you get a real careful about that But there's a thing called parallax and parallax is always like right over the top of the water and At night for instance when the moon first comes up. This is your it's not a brain thing. It's it's because of the the way the I'll describe it The the way light is transmitted just off the surface of the of the planet at a distance You'll see the moon come up and you'll go that's gigantic It's a the moon is like so much closer than it ever was before yeah, and eventually as it goes up into the sky goes back to a normal size moon Hmm, and you're like why was it so big there? It's that it's it magnifies it because it's a parallax so any sort of light that's off at a distance A boat's got a light boats have red green and white lights just like airplanes And you got it and it gets in that parallax. It's right on the horizon It gets real big and then and then it goes away because the boat turn The light's not there anymore. So there's there's lots of explanations for that might the Theoretical side of all of the UFO things for me is it's always It's always just out of touch. Whatever it is. Yes. It's always just beyond Our comprehension or just beyond our region it showed up on the horizon for just split second and then oh went away And the guy had been talking about orbs and he put the planet that seed down mine and she goes it's it is there It's an orb and your brain goes Oh, there's only one explanation for this now this guy's a he's a miracle worker and he prayed to Jesus To validate the whole thing. I mean what could be more validating than that right? Well, he takes all of those things Plants all those seeds in your mind And eventually some boat is going to shine its light. It's going to be in that parallax. It's going to get real big and bright for a minute And then it's going to go away I've seen stuff like that hundreds of times and it's always some surface vessel that's got a light on Okay, and it was we were using a special camera like a night vision camera like a pub Yeah, it was a high So yeah I don't mean to squash anything if you want to be an orb it sounds no I don't want to be you know, I want to bet I'm I was just generally dumbfounded by what it could be and I've been trying to figure it out for Two you stick that stuff You can say oh, I don't need to solve the orb That's that's well so so you think it could have been boats Okay, yeah, it was very low to the to the horizon so that that is definitely possible Like That went horizontal so that one or is one above it Okay, there's a more on the bottom. Yes, you get your line right there in that That could definitely be about probably some distance and it's in that parallax is probably very small light But it's being could be a cop but with this lights flashing And the second one's even farther could be farther away even farther away. Where's the horizon? I can't see the horizon right but it looks like that that's where the horizon is but it's right I see what he said or it could be it could be another airplane. It's moving pretty fast. Yeah You know, but that could definitely be boats. I don't know why I didn't think of that Could be a UFO too Could be aliens could be aliens might be aliens That thing got bright though It was astonishing to me how many planes were coming because I never sat outside and watched the sky for that long It was astonishing how many planes were coming into land off the off the frickin coast It was crazy. There must have been like 200 planes. We saw like that. We're coming into land off the coast Was that in Miami? No, that was right here over here. Yeah, right right like literally right on the beach right there. Yeah, okay Tampa airport So there's lots of explanations for that, but you know, it's yeah, have you heard The navy pilots talk about those those things that they were seeing when they were doing their training off of off North Carolina and off San Diego. What did you make of that stuff? I You know again, I wasn't there so it's hard to say again the the bigger picture on those things are It's always grainy video. Yeah, it's always just kind of out of reach it It happens so quickly you can hardly tell what it is. It's never you know I mean if you're an if you're a superior being from Hundreds or thousands of light years away and you traveled all the way here Don't you want somebody to see your spaceship or Marvel at your technology, you know, and why is it that they always crashed in Roswell, New Mexico? I don't understand that Maybe has something to do with the local economy or something Yeah, again, there's you know, there's probably a lot of I love this one because it's very convincing. It's got though You've got his flare radar on it night. He's doing the infrared stuff So this is coming off of the plane. It's flying in one direction over the water And it's locked on something flying the opposite direction which making it makes it look like it's going like a bajillion miles an hour Right, so there's definitely a parallax Element involved in this video where that could I've heard the case of that could actually be like a bird or something Something normal or it's if you see it's completely stationary on the scope those scopes don't lock on like that Like it doesn't doesn't move what that tells me is that's probably something on the lens Like you'll get you get floaters in your eye that'll yeah, you actually see something It's not really out there in front of me. It's on your eyeball that could be something else. I don't know I don't know enough about how that technology works to haul But it's it stays perfectly right there the whole time. Yeah, it doesn't it doesn't move around a lot You know like the camera would be looking for it like your eyeball would be looking the camera does the same thing It's trying to lock on it's just hmm So I don't know maybe it's bird droppings on the yeah, there's definitely a lot of weird stuff mmm-hmm. I mean I Know that fighter pilots they have to be pretty Mentally sound. Oh, they do. I'm sure they have to go through Probably the same amount of Maybe not I would imagine they would have similar Standards in requirements like to physicals and mental health and stuff like that for commercial pilots like yourself Yeah, there's there's guys that are into this sort of thing. You know it's There's nothing wrong with them mentally. I mean sometimes it's like a hobby or Yeah, a pursuit. I flew with the guy once an airline pilot that was into a thing called a course in miracles and a course in miracles is not a course like you take a college course is an actual religion and and it's a It's the it's the nth degree of existentialism It's the the idea that everything going on around us We don't even know whether we exist or if this is reality or what is reality. Yeah So this guy didn't know whether he was alive or not what reality was and we talked for four hours We're coming back from Los Angeles to Boston. He told me all about what he believed Wow and And I was fascinated by it a little concerned at the same time but fascinated and But he said this could be a giant movie plane in front of us right now and we're just all part of that movie that's plain and I thought okay well as long as your part includes lowering the flaps of the year Before we touched down. I'm good. I'm good. And he did he lowered the flaps in the gear and I was good With the conclusion of that movie, but he was a hundred percent convinced that he wasn't sure whether he existed or not And he passed all his technology analyzer before getting on that plane. He wasn't drunk. He was he was totally into what he believed and So the mind is capable of comprehending a lot of things and they're certain there's certain Substances that can enhance that don't necessarily you don't have to be under the influence while you're correct They can enhance it like long term. Yeah, or change your perspectives Well your perspectives on reality out of the water. Yes, you know I've heard such things I bet you had some very interesting conversations as flying planes. Yeah, did a lot of counseling at 37,000 feet you know so I've heard that is it true that when you are Making a trip on a plane that the most dangerous point of the trip is when you're taking off Correct, the first I think like 20 minutes when you're trying to get into Crew to like the cruising altitude Take off in general is the is the most dangerous part of the flight because you're the heaviest you're ever gonna be you're the slowest You're gonna be You've got the power pushed all the way up And so you don't have a lot of extra power to to grab a hold of if you need it and Now you do have a little bit you got a little bit of a margin But not the way you would when you were landing landing you've got your burned off a bunch of your fuel Your you're still slow, but you've got your flaps out and so forth But the powers basically pull all the way back to idle So if you need those engines, you're just gonna push them up So that's the difference between landing and taking off taking off as the most precarious because you're your Thrust is all the way up And you're the heaviest you're ever gonna be So if you're gonna have a problem and it's like I just did a video it went out two days ago on United 803 took off out of I don't remember where it was now it was Denver when it was airports, but They took off and They had a engine failure between v1 and rotate, which is the go no-go speed on the runway So you have to if you Lose an engine after v1 you must go flying You don't have enough concrete in front of you to stop the airplane Right, so it's the worst possible place to lose an engine they lost an engine they rotated It was out of delis they took off they lit the the side of the runway on fire because of some of the debris They went over to the dry grass and These guys did an absolute masterclass in how to get an airplane off the ground with a single engine at full growth Weight they were going to Tokyo. Oh my god. That was as heavy as a triple seven gets from dullest from dullest all the way to Tokyo 6,000 mile trip that's as heavy as it gets They lost the engine the worst possible spot and just like their training I get trained in this every nine months to the failing engine on the runway at max gross weight And you have to get that airplane airborne So they're they're climbing out and they're doing a great job the the air traffic controllers asking them for information you know tell us about this tells me finally the pilot just goes I'll get back to you. I'm busy It's a checklist. Yeah, they're doing he's trying to fly the airplane right It's a real thin margin But the airplane will fly fine on one engine, but you don't want to stall it you don't want to get too slow But you still got to continue to climb so there it's It takes the skills of a guy that's been around for that many years to fly that airplane safely out and they did Did it right by the book? It was a brilliant rendition of how that should go and they were able to turn it around and land it They got the airplane up the altitude. They got all their checklist done to all their communicating They even dumped fuel to lighten ship a little bit when I touched down. They blew a tire over the ocean No, it was up over dullest. They were over Washington D. What do you mean when you say dump fuel? So the center fuel tank you can get rid of the fuel and that you can dump it out the ends of the wings So if you're overweight and you need to lighten ship a little bit You can you can jettison fuel So the they have to activate the fuel jettison system. It takes 20 25 minutes to get rid of all the center section fuel But you're gonna lighten the airplane maybe by a 100,000 pounds. It is a jut release it into the air. Yeah But you go above 5,000 feet and it dissipates in the out does it really right? So there's a hard altitude for that you don't want to do it below 5,000 because you're rain. Yeah, it's Wouldn't be good as they say in in the UK. It's it's Frankly bad formal chef to do that That's crazy. I was once flying in I flew on this really tiny airplane to the Bahamas and It was like a there was it was enough to fit the pilot the while person sitting next to the pilot And then two people directly behind it and we were like flying really low over Florida And we were just having this conversation about like All the worst things that could happen right now like in this plane and we're flying like over Okocho Be or whatever and I'm like what would happen if it like what's the worst thing that could happen right now He's like, I don't know who's both my engines and I'm like Really I'm like does that not freak you out? He's like no And he was explained to me like how he's already like in his mind He's constantly processing where he can land in an emergency How he would land it all that so he's like I got that highway there. I got that highway there. I got that Big empty farmland over there And he's like just constantly hyper processing like what would have what worst case scenario would be And that got me thinking like okay now I can understand why some of these people are like not you know They're not like fully Mentally like stable like if you're constantly in this hyper vigilant state All the time like and imagine that can't be healthy Well, it goes back it's part of your training So when you first started flying before you even got that first solo or anything out of the way You were flying a single engine airplane Most like it a little says no And you had a single engine if that failed you had to put it down someplace So the first instructor you had you got airborne on the start just and start looking keep your head on the swivel Keep looking out for a place you can put this airplane down if you need to and that gets ingrained into you in those early days Then you get into a two-engine airplane and you're still kind of doing the same thing right now Same as probably a one-engine another I think yeah single engine airplane your heads on a swivel all the time If you lose your one and only engine You're gonna have to put it down in a farmer's field on the beach on a road someplace so you're I've got my own airplane now And it's a single engine airplane I had an flown single engine in 30 plus years and as I was flying it back from where I bought it I had that same nervousness back when I was a young pilot I'm sitting there the whole time just on edge doing like this Like okay, I can put it down there I could put it down there. I thought oh I haven't lived like this for a long time Right because the triple seven so reliable. I'm not sitting up there the whole time thinking where am I gonna put this airplane down? You know, I'm gonna fly into some major airports There's always so many crazy stories about single engine airplanes in Florida I feel like every day in the news you get some crazy wacky story. Yeah, there's a bunch of them There was an interview I watched with this pro golfer a young I think it was a younger dude And this was on a pot he was on somebody's podcast and he was explaining how he would golfers I think with Donald Trump at one of the one of the goal I think it was the golf course in West Palm and They're like sitting there like in the golf carts or whatever and All of a sudden like Trump security comes rushing over to him. He's like Mr. President There's there's a situation when you need to get you off the golf course. He's like what and Apparently like this all happened so fast all of a sudden these like fighter jets came in right above him and there was this little single engine sessna flying over the golf course and I guess there's some crazy protocol where wherever the president is there has to be a no-fly zone around him and There was this like old guy in like his 70s or 80s maybe I don't know how old he was flying his the single engine plane really low Right above the golf course where they're playing golf and these frickin fighter jets come in on both sides of it And it happens also quick and he's like this kid the golfer this pro golf who's explaining this to these people on the podcast he goes He goes Donald Trump looked at me and he goes that's power Like can you imagine yeah, that's so crazy? Yeah, that's how addictive that power gets right every place of president goes There's a there's a prohibited area and they'll put it out on a note on the notice to airman and then that's why you have to check Know it's before you go flying, but you can't fly in that Nobody can fly in that area wherever he is mm-hmm. Yeah, I couldn't imagine I just couldn't imagine being the poor guy in the sessna when there's two of those four fighter jets pull up on both sides of your You would soil your pants. Oh my god Yeah, so like for you What was your personal like what was that the hairiest moment you've ever been in in an airplane? I've had two The not with the airlines airlines are pretty mundane and very regimented Doesn't mean they couldn't have happened, but I back in the Navy days. I was the first one Was we were doing workups to go on deployment? So six month deployment the six weeks before you go on deployment You go out and you practice like you're gonna play for real and you put bombs on the wings and fill the airplane up with gas and go do missions off the coast So it was really bad weather we were from Brunswick main and a nor Easter was coming through and we were still trying to get this mission done So we got out to the operating area took us about 45 minutes We the weather was so bad. We couldn't get anything done So we we aborted the mission and came back So now the airplane is really pretty full of gas still I didn't the four hours. I was supposed to be out there It didn't burn all that gas off so I come back and the weather has deteriorated from where we left and I'm thinking you know I just want to go home right so we try and approach when we come down and and we had to wave off because we didn't get the runway And we came back a second time and the wind was whipping 90 degrees off the runway was All right, so we try and approach when we come down and we had to wave off because we didn't get the runway and we came back a second time and the wind was whipping 90 degrees off the runway. Within the limits of the airplane, but it was really blowing hard and the rain like just buckets of rain. And the top, the surface of the runway, the wind was blowing so hard. There was like little bubbles in the water. It was blowing that hard. So we got the airplane down, we touched down. I brought the four engines on that airplane. I brought all four engines into reverse and we were hydroplaning. But I didn't know it. You don't know your hydroplaning until you go to touch the brakes. And so I tried to bring it in reverse and the airplanes start sliding sideways because the wind is blowing us that way. I'm like, holy moly, we're not. We're sliding. So I brought them out of reverse and I hit the brakes when I hit the brakes. Nothing happened. It was like a cheesy Saturday afternoon movie where they cut the brake lines. You know, the guys hitting the brakes, you know, and I'm pounding the brakes and nothing. And so we're not slowing down and I tried bringing it reverse again. We lost about another 50 feet and we're just about off the side of the runway. So don't do that again. My co-pilot, God bless him. We were at, we had 2,000 feet of runway left in front of us and he yells out to me. He goes 2,000 feet remaining. And I looked at my airspeed and I'm doing about 110 knots still and I touched on it about 125. So I've lost 15 knots in that in all the runway we burned up and I'm like, oh man. And so I'm thinking we're going off the end of the runway. It was black pitch black night out. We have bombs on the wings full of gas. So I remember having that fleeting thought of, okay, when we come to a stop off the end of the runway, if I'm still alive, how am I going to get out of this airplane? Like I went through a real quick inventory of the three ways to get out of the airplane. And then I just threw up an arrow prayer. I just said, God help stop this airplane. And I think I even set it out loud. And I hit the brakes one last time and at the far end of the runway, I guess it was dry enough that the brakes took. Now so the airplane is like a giant tricycle. It's got a nose gear and 10 main mounts. So we're sideways because of the wind. So this tricycle is sideways. And when I hit the brakes and they took the airplane started to hop, you know, and so it's like, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam. And we're coming to the end of the runway and I'm like, I'm going to go off the end of this runway. So I grabbed the nose wheel, the little tillers off to my left and there was a taxi way that went this way. And I just grabbed it and pulled it for as much as I could to get a little bit of nose wheel actually going that way. And we stopped. And the engines are turning like that. And the wind is blowing against them. And the plane's shaking. And I looked and the nose of the airplane was off the end of the runway. But the front main tire was behind us a little bit. That's where it sits. It was actually still on the pavement. So we it was a 10,000 foot runway and we used up 9,999 of it. That's insane. Yeah. So we we stopped on the runway. And now the guys behind in the back, they have no clue what's going on. They're just along for the ride, right? So there's four of us up in the cockpit. So it was one of those moments where we all took our headsets off and put them in our laps because we're all just like, you know, and eventually one of the guys in the back comes like, hey, flight, are we going to taxi off and get rid of these bombs? I'm like, yeah, just give us a minute. And then the tower called, hey, you guys, okay, yeah, we're okay. We're just having a moment. You know, just we'll be with it. So we taxied off. We got rid of the bombs. I went to get I went to get out of my seat and my knees were knocking so bad. I couldn't stand up. And it's hard to describe that feeling. If I'm looking at my legs and they're going to like this inside my flight suit. And I'm like, okay, and that was the adrenaline let down. So my God, that was that was number one. The other one was very similar. I was flying students around one day in a king here, twinage and airplane. And we had the rudder got stuck and the airplane started to kind of go over it about 20 feet. And it's counterintuitive. But if you pull the power back off the opposite engine, airplane to write itself and I did. I don't know why I did, but I did. And in the airplane he write itself, we came around. I slammed on the brakes and same, same reaction. My knees are just knocking so bad. And the students had no idea what was going on. They're totally clueless at that point. I'm like, you know, so after that second one, I went up to my ops chief. This was a Monday. And I told him what happened. And I said, I'm, I'm don't put me on the schedule until next Monday. I said, I need to go have a week and just reflect. And he looked me, said, okay, just let me know when you want to come back. It didn't come off my leave or sick or anything. I just said to have a mental health week and it came back the next Monday. I said, I'm good to go. That's good. You know, to have the mental health time. Sometimes you just got to reflect on your life choices. Yeah. Yeah, totally man. Yeah, it is, it's funny. I don't know if it's funny, but it's interesting how even the most devouting. Theists will find God on an airplane window. When there's turbulence or when something goes south. I even saw this morning, I was watching just some random stuff on YouTube. And there was a, which I don't know if this is a good idea or not. You can probably alluded to this bad in me, but the pilot got on the, on the comms. And he was like, everyone priest, please pray. No, that's, that's not a good thing. And it was, it was, it was, it was some airline over in India or not India. Somewhere over there in that part of the world. And something happened with the engine where the plane was rattling like a, like a, like a, like a close drawing machine for like an hour and a half. And they had to land it. Something was wrong with the engines. And he was telling everyone to pray. Yeah. That might, you got to know your culture and that might work. Maybe. Yeah. Maybe a different culture. Back in the day when I was trained students back in the early 90s, we had Saudi Arabian students that came over. and they were almost in those guys. We'd get up in the airplane and we would give them emergencies on purpose as part of the training. And we'd, we'd fail an engine, not fail it, but pull the power back on it. And to a person they'd start praying. And so you had to, you had to work them through that. And I'd say, you know, Muhammad, or the guy's name was I say, we're going to go up today. I'm going to fail an engine on you. I'd be more than happy to pray with you when we get back down on the ground. Right. Right. But I will give you a down. I will fail you. If the first thing you do is start praying. I need you to do your emergency procedures. And it was about 50, 50 these guys and stopped. They get, they get in a panic and they, their first reflex was to pray. Right. They go, this is not a time to pray. This is a time to do step one, step two, step three, as you memorize them. And, and fly the airplane. And the guys, they would get over it. But they're part of the training was to get them over their initial impulse. You know, either to scream or to, to, you know, just have tunnel vision or to pray in their case. And they get, they did. They did. They eventually get through the training and, you know, they're good to go. Yeah. Yeah. That's a weird thing. That was the time for praying and there's a time. There's definitely not a, definitely when you're flying an airplane is not a time to pray. No, it's a, you can pray if you're in charge of flying the airplane at least. Or if you got 2000 feet remaining, you're right. You're right. 110 knots throw it in prayer. That worked for me. Oh, God. I was in your own head not, not on the calm speaker. Right. Ladies and gentlemen, this is so, so, so here's my question. If something is going south and you're piloting a plane with, you know, a couple hundred people, passengers on board, how do you know when to communicate shit and when not to communicate stuff? Well, I try to put myself in the position of a passenger in the back of the airplane. Right. So you're trained from day one, like that head on the swivel thing. You're also trained, A V 8 navigate communicate in that order. Fly the airplane first. Yeah. That's your first priority. Then get to where you're going navigate. That's your second priority. The third one is communicate. So you saw that, that flight out of dollars with that triple seven crew, they finally get fed up trying to answer questions and he just said, I'm busy. Right. Leave me alone. Right. I'll get back to you when I can. That's the least of my priorities. So same thing with the passengers. You do want to let them in on what's going on. And I think people appreciate honesty. Now there's, there's varying degrees of honesty. You know, you can be totally blunt and, and have that shaky voice and go, I don't know what's going to happen. You don't want to share that level of honesty. What you do want to be is reassuring. Most pilots are pretty good at it. And just tell people what's going on. Hey, folks, we've got the right engine. We've had to shut it down. Here's what happened. The airplane flies just fine on one engine. It does at all gross weights. We're going to come back to the airport. We just took off from we're going to land. It's going to take about 25 minutes. I have a couple of checklists to get through. Please follow the instructions. You're a flight of times. That's all you need to let them know. And most people will be reassured. They heard from the guy in charge and they feel reassured by that. He cares about you and he or she is in charge. And they've got an under control. Right. That's very reassuring, especially if you're on your back. Do you have to practice that? No. No, just, it just kind of comes, you know, it comes with the job. Right. Because I imagine there's got to be certain folks, maybe from like the northeastern United States who aren't that great of sugar, at sugar coating stuff. Yeah. There's, I mean, there's all sorts of, we have all sorts of different personalities. Yeah. Yeah. I've ever an end to some do it better than others. So is turbulence ever dangerous? Turbulence is annoying. It can be dangerous, but there's, we just released a course called Concrete in your Fear of Flying. And in that course, we talk about overcoming your fear of turbulence. Because that's kind of like the number one thing. People don't like when the airplane starts to bounce. So there's light, moderate, and severe, too. You're not allowed to be dispatched through severe turbulence. If it's known, they can't fly you through it. You have to go around it or don't go flying. Now moderate and light. Yeah. All the time, right? The airplane is not going to come apart. It's not. It's just completely over engineered for that. Yeah. If you think about turbulence like the current in a river or water currents, when it's nice and smooth, it's like you're on the lake. There's just no currents. But you start going down the river and the current picks up a little bit in speed. So you start getting some light turbulence. And it's kind of annoying, but it's no dangerous to you. The moderate turbulence or like the whitewater rafting, you know, you're kind of holding onto the armrest and you're holding onto your drink and you're going through the whitewater and you can capsize. You could in a boat, right? In the water, you drown in the water. But you're in an airplane. It's not going to capsize. It's not going to turn over. It's going to bounce. It's going to make you feel uncomfortable. But the wings aren't going to come off the airplane. It's, again, they're not nearly as dense as the water is. just air currents. But like anything else, when there's converging currents that come in together, like the jet streams going this way and something else is going that way, it's going to cause bumps. I try to avoid it just for the comfort level for passengers, but there's no danger to the airplane at all. No dangerous. It's just annoying in the back. And it makes you nervous. That's reassuring, right? And the other thing is, what the hell is this? He's going to show me a low hot air. You said that planes are going to come apart and this image popped up in my room. Yes. Yeah. No, a low hot. I don't remember this. That was a corrosion issue that they had with those airplanes and that hole because of the pressures. What is that? Those are all the seats. Is that like three people, is that plane on the ground? No, they were airborne. How do they get that photo? I don't know. It's probably photoshopped. That's got to be AI. That's on the ground. The other one's on the ground. The sky. They were just showing to you. Yeah. That one. Yeah. That's the ground photo. See the guy standing? Somebody put it in there. They put it in there. I see. So what was the story with this? So it was a corrosion issue and they had basically the airplanes pressurized from the inside. And if something starts to give way, it'll rip and it ripped the whole top of that a low hot jet off. That's a 737. But look, all that damage in the airplane still flew. And everyone survived. I think three people died. I think the one row of passengers was sucked out because they weren't wearing their seat belts. Well, that's why I tell people keep your seat belt fastened. Yeah. That's right. That's the worst never buck on my seat belt. That's the worst case example of that. But okay. I'm going to convert you here. I always go like this when they're walking by so they can't see if I'm wearing my seat belt or not. Why do you do that? Why do you do that? Because look above you. 12 inches, 18 inches above you is a hard surface. So you're probably not going to get sucked out of the airplane like that. That's a one in a billion chun. What's going to happen is you're going to be in some turbulence that pops up that fast and you're going to come out of that seat and hit that overhead, break your neck and that's it. And you know how much liability of the airline is under zero because the seat belt sign was on. And I probably came on and told you to fasten your seat belt. If you unbuckle it, that's on you. I'm converted. Yep. So let me ask you this. Where is the best safest seat on the airplane for somebody? Your couch at home, there isn't one really. Yeah. I mean, I'm sure depending on how the plane, if a plane crashes, no two plane crashes are the same. It's hard to run the numbers on that. Some people say the back of the airplane because the front of the airplane takes the impact. Some people say what 11a because that guy in Air India walked away. He was in 11a. And India. Yeah. And he just next to the exit. So he was right in the leading edge of the wing right where the back of the damages right there. Yeah. There's a thing called the wingspar. And the wingspar is the heaviest hardest part of the airplane. It's like a big old I beam that goes from one wing to the other. Right. And he was right behind that. So they think that that wingspar took most of the impact that he would have taken. the, he's a pretty big strong guy. Yeah. He just got lucky. He killed Lord. He just did, you know, the fireball and everything else. How did he walk out of all that? I have to use the restroom real quick. Yeah. We'll take a quick five minute break. Have you heard of the summer of the shark? No. No. The theory is that during the summer months, there's usually, there was one, I think there was one specific summer where there was like more shark attacks ever reported in history. And that was like the summer that there was nothing happening in the news. And all the news channels, they needed to make stories. So they were just highlighting all the shark attacks that were happening. And they thought, Oh my God, the sharks are on a rampage right now just eating people. What's going on? But that's all it was. Like they were just focusing more on the sharks. And I think that's what happens with airplanes, right? It's like when there's an airplane crash, the news just grabs onto it and makes it a huge spectacle. Absolutely. And it seems like there's a lot of plane crash. And it's been so safe. There's been so little of that the last 15 years that it doesn't make the news. But this past year started out with a DCA crash up in Washington. And then Aaron, he was after that. And this UPS won a couple of months ago. So there's been some major crashes. It's been a long time since then. And channels like mine where I cover incidents and accidents three or four times a week. We're not making them up. There's that stuff happens out there. You just don't hear about it. And now we're reporting on it. So now it seems like, Oh my word, you know, it's not any more. frequent than it was in the past. It's just getting reported more than it was. Yeah. And when you see those graphics of all of the planes that are in the air in the continental United States at one time, it's insane. You can't even see the actual map because it's covered in planes everywhere. Every day 104,000 takeoffs in the landings worldwide. Every day. But try to find an image that because I think people should see that like how many planes are actually in the air. that, yeah, the one on the top right. Yep. Oh my God. How crazy is that? Now if an airplane was as big as Idaho, right? Right. Right. That's true. But that's a lot. Yeah. Is it true you can't fly over the North Pole or over Antarctica? You can. It's just, I've flown close to the North Pole. It depends on what kind of nav equipment you get. gets a little squirrely as everything is south. You know, it gets a little squirrely. But there's so many redundant systems now, especially with GPS, that you're talking to something out in outer space instead of something on the ground or something that's internal that doesn't know where to go when you get to true north or the North Pole. But yeah. What is that anomaly? We were looking at the other day, Steve. There's this anomaly in the South Atlantic anomaly. Have you heard of this? There's like this weird hole in the atmosphere where there's like a ton of radiation coming through the earth. And they call it the South Atlantic anomaly, I believe. The South Atlantic anomaly is a large expanding weak spot in the earth's magnetic field over South America and the South Atlantic allowing charged solar particle to drip closer to the surface. So that must not be a big deal. Well, I think it is. If there's times where solar activity is higher than other times. Yeah. Look at that. That's crazy. We just did a video talking about a bit flip and how this airplane, I think it was a jet blue airplane coming from Cancun just knows to over. And that's what started. They grounded all the air buses, not all of them, half of them, about 6,000 airplanes to update the software because this bit flip possibility in that they said to happen because of a solar flare. So in spots like that, is it the incident of solar flares higher? Yeah. Could it cause a bit flip? It could. So again, you don't want to risk that sort of thing. But it's all kind of very rare anyway to see a bit flip is once in one. Go back to that last graphic Steve that you had with all the airplanes in the sky at once. So what's up with those circles? Why are there no planes in the circles? It's called the Himalayas. So nobody flies over the Himalayas. Oh, those are mountainous areas. Correct. OK, that makes sense. You can't really, there's no, if, so the Himalayas are 35,000 feet, if you got an airplane that's a capable of flying over it, you only got 2,000 foot of clearance. And then if something goes wrong and you lose an engine and you have to descend, you got no place to go. Right. You're in a bowl and you can't get out of it. So those, those circles are bowls where nobody can, can get out of it. So they don't frequently dispatch an airplane through those places. You will round them. That makes a lot of sense. Yeah. Nice. I would be remiss if I had you on the podcast or if I had an airplane pilot podcast, I didn't ask them about the Bermuda Triangle. What's going on there? I was into that when I was a kid. I really like everything about the Bermuda Triangle. It's fascinating. So the Bermuda Triangle, people that aren't aware is the triangle with the connect, if you you connect the dots between Miami, Bermuda and Puerto Rico, right? Yeah, something like that. And allegedly there's been more plain disappearing, plain disappearing in that area than ever. Yeah, it ships, you know, there were some ghost ships where the ship was just floating and everybody was gone. There was even a story where there was a plane that allegedly time traveled or something through the Bermuda Triangle. Have you heard that one? Yeah, I heard that one. But I've heard the story with that one, the time traveling air flight of four or five world war two airplanes and they all disappeared and you know, it was weird stuff. You know, I got was into that when I was a kid. I haven't looked at much. All I know is that that's extremely dense area for air traffic. Is it? Yeah, so the odds of something happening in that area are going to go through the roof. And then when you start to plant those seeds that we have, but you know, and you name it something the Bermuda Triangle, it just becomes fascinating and all of a sudden you're maybe seeing or reading something into it that's not really there. You've never seen anything weird with your instruments or anything going through there. No, never. No, there's no weird magnetic force there. And I've flown in out of Miami, but bunches of times right through the Bermuda Triangle and nothing really. But you know, wow, makes for great books and stories and videos. Yeah. Did you find the time traveling? Thanks, Dave. The story of the plane. Oh, what is this? The Bermuda Triangle time travel airplane myth is fueled by real events. Notably the pilot Bruce Gernan's 1970 claim of flying through a time bending vortex reducing a 90 minute flight to 47 minutes. Oh, that's not much. The story of the stories of flight, 19, 1945 disappearance where comp where comps is failed, leading to loss. Huh. Oh, okay. There was no episode of the twilight zone back in the day where they were coming back from Europe to idle wild airport back in the day. What JFK was called before was JFK. And they go through some time warp and they're looking for they're looking for the airport, but all it is is prehistoric land and there's dinosaurs on the ground. And they're like, what happened? You know, they went through some time warp. It's true because it was on an episode of the twilight zone. Okay. Yeah, this is a little good diagram of the Bermuda Triangle. Yeah. It's like Niagara Falls. It sucks people in like that and then fills itself in. Right. Right. How do you do when that happens? Yeah. Yeah. Damn it. You're you're you're killing all my dreams here. You're killing all my. No, I told you, I was into that stuff. I mean, there's all sorts of great stories about the Bermuda Triangle. Yeah. And you know, maybe I'll do a video on it sometime. You do. So for you, what has been like the most like out of all the stuff that you that you produced on your channel, like all the content that you've made, like was there anything that surprised you that like because obviously you're kind of like you're the when you were a pilot, your whole career, you're kind of like living in a bubble. Right. You're not like really like dealing with the public's perception of this stuff and dealing with like the specific anxieties or interests of the public. But now that you're kind of like in the public light doing all this stuff, you have much more of a connection to like people's interests and what people are afraid of like what's kind of shocked you or surprised you the most about that. Sure, that's a great question because you get in. There's the, you know, having a social media influencer position that's different than being a pilot from day to day. But you don't realize how interested people are and what you do as a pilot. I've told my co-pilot. I said, look, we've got the greatest job on the planet. If you're going to trade hours for dollars, this is a great job. And it's one of the few jobs on the planet that still has a fair amount of respect associated with it. Kids wave to you from the airport. People think you're neat. They want to know what you do for a living when you go to a cocktail party, you know, that people chatted up with you. I'm telling you about flying an airplane right now. So it's it's people respect that that position so that they you have to you have to respect it as well. In addition to that now having a channel where we're talking about incidents or stuff related to aviation, there's a you take on a journalistic responsibility, which is something that I would have never associated with me years ago. Hmm. I didn't have any journalistic responsibility of anything. But now we have a voice in the space and people tune in because they want to know what Captain Steve thinks about something. And that really solidified with the air India crash because we were the first ones to break the the picture of the rat. So the rat is the ram air turbine that deploys if you lose both engines on a commercial jet. And we were everybody was in the first few days, we were talking about the different theories of what they thought could have brought the airplane down. And you could hear in the audio, you could hear the rat deployed because the rat sounds like an Evan rude engine, a little, this is a real high pitched, you know, Evan rude screaming. Yeah, for its life because it is it's got a little prop on it and it provides hydraulic an electrical power to an airplane that's lost both engines. But we were able to see it in the picture. So we got big monitors like you do here and we blew it up. And I said, Oh my word, you see that right there? That's the rat. So we went public with that and all of the nature news agencies around the planet started showing that picture that we put up first. So that was kind of a big heavyweight moment. I was like, wow, we broke the news on this. Yeah. And then all of a sudden you become kind of the voice of, there's a responsibility that comes with that. Yeah. You're really careful. Yeah. That you don't jump the gun on stuff and you don't try to sensationalize something. You know, I always want to have two or three backup sources for what I'm saying. And so there's kind of a weight that comes with that. It's nice. We enjoy it. But at the same time, we want to make sure we do things slowly and deliberately so we don't get out ahead of our skis as they say. Yeah. So that's the, you know, being an influencer part is, you know, you'll get called by, you know, I said, piers Morgan earlier. One of the things that my son and I when he's got the film studio there in Raleigh. And so as he reminds me, I'm one of his clients. And so I said, so if the captain Steve thing ever arrives someday, whatever that means, I said, what's your measure of arriving? He told me what his was and I said, okay, here's mine. Megan Kelly calls. I said, if Megan Kelly calls, I'm going to, there's the, there's the picture right there. Oh, wow. So that little, that little gray thing right there that looks like a, like almost like an anomaly on the screen. Yeah. The rat, the rat has deployed. So they're at about 300 feet right now in a descent. Yeah. The rat has deployed to provide electrical and hydraulic issues. So the power so they can still fly the airplane. Every major news that you just see went with that picture of the rat deployed. So, so, but back to Megan Kelly. So I said, what you're making Kelly ever calls, I'm dropping whatever I'm doing and getting on her show. And she called, I was on a cruise and my son goes, no kidding. She wants you on in 45 minutes. And I said, okay, I'll make it happen. And I did an interview with her. She was going to have me back on almost like your reaction to my 9-11 story. Yeah. I was on her program and she was asking me and a couple of other people questions. And somebody slid a piece of paper in front of her and she looks down. and she looks back up and she stops. She goes, Steve, she goes, we're you supposed to be one of the pilots on 9-11. So I told her a real brief version of the story. She's like, oh, my word. She said, all right. And you could see her, her wheels turning. And so a few weeks later they called and said, Megan wants to have you on 30 minutes on September 11th to tell your story. So I said, yeah, absolutely. We'll do that on September 10th. Charlie Kirk got shot. So that, you know, I didn't want to come on the show after that. Yeah. Everybody was talking about that for weeks. They're still talking about it. And she was devastated by that. She was a friend of hers. So they canceled rightly so. And maybe next year I'll be back on the Tony story on her show. But what did she originally want you to come on for to talk about this? Was it a September 11th? That was the original reason. Yeah. Because originally I was on to talk about Air India. So we were talking about this stuff on her thing. And then somebody slid that piece of paper in front of her and she was like, oh, really? You know, because really it does grab you the whole September 11th thing. Yeah. But so yeah. So there's you have a voice and people trust your voice. And that's a very rare commodity. And you have to really protect that as it's as though it's something very precious. And it is don't abuse that. Take care of it and make sure because you won't have a voice if you abuse it at some point down the road. You'll lose it rather quickly. Right. Yeah. So this rat thing, it's a propeller that provides this power to the plane when it's lost all power. It's a last resort. So if both engines fail or you have a complete hydraulic failure or complete electrical failure on the 787, the rat will automatically deploy. So that was one of the things that told us that both engines had failed. You can't tell by looking at it, the both engines failed, except for the fact that the rat has deployed on its own. So you can hear the rat on the audio and we said high pitch squeal. You can see it in the picture. The guy that survived the crash said he heard a loud bang and the lights flicker. Now, I don't put much credibility in an eyewitness, especially a guy that just survived a plane crash could have been anything that caused that. And his brain could be plane tricks on him. But when that rat deploys, it deploys, it hits real hard. It comes out instantaneously and begins to spool up and it takes over electrical power in the airplane. So the lights would flicker. So what he said was right in line with the rat deploying and then the captain, I think, or some one of the pilots had made a May Day call. And so with all four of those things put together, we went public and said, we think it's a dual engine failure and it ended up being a dual engine failure. Good Lord. Yeah, that's wild. I had no idea that was a real thing. Yep. Thankfully. Right. Have you heard of the, have you heard of the, the Japan Airlines incident where the guy allegedly saw this crazy object in the sky? Remember, well, we had a NASA physicist on here a couple months back, probably about six months ago, a former, uh, the sky. Remember, well, we had a NASA physicist on here a couple months back, probably about six months ago, a former employee of NASA as he was employed as a physicist. Now he's a professor. And he was, he was explaining to us this crazy story about this. I think it was a Japanese airline that was flying over Alaska. And he said that he did this thing pulled up next to him. That was the size. It was like a thousand times bigger than his airplane. And he landed and he had to go through all he told, gave the testimony or whatever. And he had to go through all these psychological evaluations and all this stuff. And one of the air traffic controllers or radar technician or someone on the ground corroborated a story and saying, yeah, there was something crazy on the radar. And I think it's just like a legend now. Do you remember this Steve? The story of this? Oh, this was in, wow, was that long ago? I thought it was more recent than that. Oh, yeah. Okay. So it was a cargo airliner, right? It was a Boeing Japanese Boeing 747 2000 F cargo aircraft flying from Paris to Tokyo was involved in an extensive UAP sighting in its leg over Alaska. So go to the images of it. There's like, there's crazy illustrations of what he explained he saw. Just typing, just go to images from where you were. Yeah, images. There you go. That's how big he says he says he thought it was. The thing that pulled up next to him crazy. So there's books written about it. And apparently this guy was like totally sane. And there were someone who corroborated it on the ground. Yeah, over Alaska. No, they didn't mess with the plane. All the plane was fine. Right. I think you just like pulled up next to him and then like disappeared. So they come from thousands of late years away just to harass a 747 to go home or a reunion. Right. Right. Right. Right. You know, that makes a lot of sense. Some people think that they're already here that they live under the water. They, you know, they could. There's lots of water that we've explored more of Mars than we've explored of our ocean. Oh, notions. Yeah, which is pretty wild. Yeah, they could. But why? I just always go back to the question. Why? Why would you come all the way here just to hide? Well, the theory is that most people have the most of the most rational theories that I've heard is that they, uh, it's a basically similar civilization to us that just lives under the oceans. Hmm. And they needed a notion that we were the next one available or something. Yeah. Well, the way the physicist described it, which is kind of fascinating, uh, this NASA guy, the way he described it was, uh, if, if you're us and we wanted to inhabit other planets, we would look for planets with liquid water. Because the environment on the surface of other planets, the atmospheres are way all over the place. And with the pressure, the temperature, radiation, comets, solar flares, all this stuff, it would be too unmanageable. So you would find a planet that was at that had liquid water on it because liquid water can only exist between 30 two degrees Fahrenheit and 200 degrees Fahrenheit. Um, as well, if you're a used to a certain pressure, you could just dial in your depth and figure out that pressure, right? Like the surface atmosphere of Venus is like 800 degrees Fahrenheit and the pressure is like being seven miles deep in our oceans. So if you could figure out how to get from hot promotion to ocean, you could figure out the temperature, the pressure and all that stuff. That was his hypothesis, which was pretty compelling. Yeah, which is great. If you're intelligent enough to figure out light speed travel or more than light speed travel in something that size, then you probably could figure out the problems with where you were to stay there. Yeah, rather than come here and hide in the ocean. Right. I just, I made me I love talking about it. But it's not, it's, you know, I think it was a Bill Nye, you know, Elon Musk is big on going to Mars. Yeah. Yeah. But I mean, Bill Nye, you just finally said, look, I love talking about this. It's really what we're never going to live on Mars. Right. Okay. Just, right. I'm sorry, there's no universe where that is reality. It's 200 and whatever degrees below zero Fahrenheit. There's no atmosphere. There's no water. There's, it's not going to happen. You can't take enough resources there to somehow rehabilitate the planet at that temperature. Right. Right. But it's great to talk about it's fun. I love to take a a man mission to Mars someday. I hope that happens in my lifetime. That would be crazy. It would be, it was like, why would you want to though? Because, because she can robots can do a better job though. Right. But it's not the same. Yeah. You're, you're not old enough. I lived through the last G.W. in our, in our culture, which was we landed on the moon. Right. And I watched that live on TV as a nine year old kid. I was like, I was just an amazement at that. And, and everybody on the planet was like an amazement that that was going on at the time. And it was the last kind of G.W.s moment we've had as a culture. Everything else is kind of the biggest, like the biggest achievement of humanity. Yes. And when you think about the monumental size of that achievement with the computer power that they had back then, that makes it even one one millionth the computing power of this. Yes. Yes. In the entire Apollo program. Yep. Yep. I ran into an Apollo astronaut years ago. This is, this is a silly Steve story. Because I back into everything in my life. And I, most of the time don't know where I am. And I, I was speaking in an event they were, they wanted my 9-11 story. And so I was the keynote speaker and it was a men's retreat in Vale, Colorado. And that's like 80 guys there that had all the every year they come and they have a guest speaker. So after the talk, I'm done talking to three or four guys and, and we're talking about flying airplanes. and one of the guys has a name tag on, it's older looking gentlemen. And it, it says Charlie Duke on it. Oh, he was just here. Okay. So Charlie Duke, I'm standing next to Charlie Duke. I have no idea who I'm standing next to. So one of the other people in the crowd looks at me and says, we must have flown fighter jets in the Navy. And I said, well, no, I said, I flew an airplane called a P3. I'm looking at his name thing. That sounds like an all American name. Yeah. Charlie doesn't know this story. It sounds like an all American name. I said, well, that guy probably did. And just thinking he had a great sounding name and 1,000 1,000 2 somebody says, or an astronaut, which goes right over my head. Right. And we're, we're, we're still yucking it up. So I, I go back to my room about a half an hour later. I'm sitting down. That's a strange thing to say, or an astronaut. I've got a, I got a Google Charlie Duke. Ten to end of the moon. Right. Everything I see Charlie Duke. I'm like, oh my God, I'm standing next to Charlie Duke. What an idiot. So I got a safe face, right? So next morning, I come down for breakfast and I got a pretend like, you know, you know, hey, buddy. So he and I are sitting at the same table. And I had been stalking him all night. And I said, hey, Charlie, I said, I don't want to ask anything about your, your moon stuff. I said, you probably get inundated with that. I said, but you, you graduated from the Naval Academy and you, you got, um, you retired as a general in the Air Force. How did that happen? Did you, was it because of the space program? And he explained, he said, back in the late 50s, he said, the Air Force Academy wasn't in place yet. So to get officers for the Air Force, they would take them from the Naval Academy and, and from West Point, they would ask a certain amount of volunteering if they didn't, they get volunteered. And he said, I just thought it would be a good transition. So I volunteered. He said, the mercury program was already going. They sent me out to Monterey for advanced masters degree. And I just had the right background. And they, I got ended up in the Apollo program because of that. Yeah. So he explained that transition to me, which I thought was, you know, pretty neat. But at the whole time, I'm thinking he, he has no idea that 24 hours ago. I didn't know he was. Yeah. Yeah. So the way I think about the Apollo program is very similar to the Concorde, right? Like we were just in a full sprint to meet Russia. And put every last resource we had in a holistic program. We didn't care about the risk. You know, obviously there was insane risk to like to human life doing that for the first time ever. And we kind of like threw out that all the, all of the wind just for the spectacle of it, just to prove it, you know? But there's probably be said for that. I mean, there's, there's something that is courageous about winning the frontier or going, stretching the bounds of, of possibility. And, and there's a certain amount of human courage that goes into that. I think we're so afraid now and almost even paralyzed by, well, it won't be safe. And you know, what if we get hurt? And was that, then we, we lose that, that pioneer spirit that said, hey, I'm going to hang it all out there. And if something happens, it happens, but it's on me. I'm taking the risk. Let's go. Right. You know, yeah, I agree with you there, man. I definitely agree with you there. And it allegedly we're going to have, we're going to every president sense, sense what Bush one has said that they were going to get us back to the man. And I haven't been able to do it yet. Yeah, we were supposed to do it two years ago. Yeah. 24 is supposed to be the key pushing it back. Now they're saying, I think 2027. Yeah. Well, you have to have a good compelling reason to go. Like we're just doing it because we can do it or we're going to because we're going to bake a base there or exactly. And is that cost effective? All those, the same things as the airlines base their decisions on the government has to base their decisions on as well. So right. I'd love to go back to the moon just to go back to the moon as a cost effective, as an economic, as an economic and as a, you know, it makes total sense that we would, for going to go to the moon, we're going to go to Mars. We got to frick and get the robots there first to figure. I mean, they can do just as good of a job as far as tasks go or analysis or anything like the surveying. Like what's a human? My five fingers are going to do a better job than these autonomous robots. Right. Right. So yeah. But anyways, man, thank you. This has been a fantastic conversation. I really appreciate your time. And I appreciate it. This is the time went by really quick. Yeah. Tell people listening or watching where they can find you, get in touch with you, all that stuff. Sure. On YouTube, we're approaching a million subs on YouTube where it kept in Steve with three E's STE on YouTube and all three E's. There's a little story. There's a story behind everything. Yeah. Yeah. So we started making short videos on the channel. And I didn't want to think of a sign off. I just started saying Captain Steve for fun. There's, there's a waiter at a restaurant over in Milan. It's a little coffee joint that this guy's got a gift. His name is Rafik. And it doesn't make any difference how long it's been since you've walked into his restaurant. He will remember your name and he will stretch it out. So the pilots are hotel was right across from this coffee house. So two, three years since I seen Rafik and everybody in his mind was a captain, whether you were or not. So you'd walk through the door, you go, captain, Steve. And he'd be really excited to see you. Right. And I thought, wow, that's this guy's I'm the opposite of that. I don't remember anybody's name. But he remembered everybody's name. That's really great. So when I started signing off as Captain Steve, I was thinking of Rafik saying my name out loud. And we did it for about the first 10 or 12 shorts we made and then I thought, I need to get more serious. So I'm just going to sign off Captain Steve. So I dropped it. And the comments just lit up, hey, wait until he end, what happened to the captain Steve and people would spell it with 12 ease. And I thought, well, I've backed myself into a thing now. So it became Captain Steve that drawn out. That's hilarious. Yeah, I'm glad you roll. I'm glad you went with it, man. Yeah, that was a great decision. It is. It makes you distinctive and kind of a fun. We try to be educational informational and a little snarky when we can be hilarious. I love it, man. Thank you again. We'll link all that stuff below. And we have Patreon stuff. We do. We have Patreon. Do you mind answering some questions for our beautiful people at Patreon? Sure. We got we have a Patreon members who ask. We'll do an episode of the question. The captain right now asked the captain. All right. So that's it for the podcast. Thanks again, man. Thanks everybody. And we're going to Patreon.