Play this video. What's this video called? Patriots suite. How old is this guy? He's gotta be in his like 80s, right? Rodar stone. I'm not too sure. He's definitely smooth. I'll tell you. He's got a giant Doesn't he have a giant tattoo of Richard Nixon on his back? Yeah, it's not too big That's me and my dog Enrique right there Enrique Tario look at this This dude, that's awesome. I don't even know what he really does. What is he what is he what it? podcast and doing stuff. He was a great friend of Donald Trump. Wasn't he like working by Trump? Okay You know start dancing in a minute But so we shot that outside of the CPAC two years ago. I remember was receiving but like pause that Go back and try to pause that on the bike. Yeah, I'm gonna show you somebody so pause that Like this is what I'm talking about the magga community Did somebody shows up with a bicycle with a picture they got with me on the back frame riding around all day? I didn't call him and say come out there. This is like these are why I'm outside with the people Yeah, you know what I mean this guy had that done himself He riding his bike riding around with pictures of me and just showing that he's with me. That's amazing. You know what? I mean that's crazy families What so what's the deal with that? Yeah So that gates, you know, I got to know anything about him until that whole scandal came out But I mean I don't speak so much crazy on it But everyone they put a scandal on you, you know, I mean being successful is a gift and a curse And it's almost the biggest curse ever because they're gonna try to get any dirt they can get on you and just hold it For the right time and then be like oh, yeah, you don't want to pass this or do this This is gonna come out. I mean sometimes with pens who knows what they had on Mike Pence pens turn his back on Trump Right where the votes go through That's why a lot of people were so pissed on January 6th and Patriots. You know Mike Pence But how do you know Mike Pence sometime in his career or something within a day to 17 year old or something crazy happened? They're like we're gonna do this. I mean it is dirty there's dirty pool in politics You know, it's almost a little scary for some of these people So some of like Rodar Stonestow and the show me will be in my videos Matt Gates you could look up him I did a song and video with him. He's in my music video So like Rodar Stonestow was inside CPAC he all these people outside can't get in CPAC So he comes outside with a thousand people out here with the streets there like this Rodar Ston and that's Only where we could do the video is if for J out or blow People respect him because if not miss for your video We're taking photos of Rodar Ston, but I'm my yo everybody back and watch the show I got a Rodar Ston 15 minutes period and all the Patriots say yeah cool, but Stood back let us do our video and then he went back inside He literally said I'm gonna come outside 15 minutes real quick and make it happen for you The I parked the truck in front of the hotel Right the security came out it was like this trust got to go and I said better tote it I don't know where the owner went he took off Because I know I'm not moving this car Rodar Ston about to be out as I'm shooting this video Scaredy's calling 911 on the other side So one of the reporters did this clip and it did like three million views in the day On light TV it went on CNN everywhere And you can go I got all types of clips online like CNN putting me on out there January 6 I was shooting this video and they're like as this is going down look at this guy shooting the music video You know what I mean? The other day is like these people They're not cloud chasing they're just respecting what I'm doing for the movement and they're like you know what I'm gonna Go get in this I'm like but they've seen me since 2016 so it's not like they're like They believe that it's genuine, you know, I mean it's genuine so they're like you know all to I don't even you don't need no money for me You want me to do is come hop in it was go. Yeah, which is cool And it gives me a good look and it also helps them because they look I'm like this is a new way to get to the people It's a new way of getting your name out there It's not the same grassroots campaign they do years ago. There's no I mean how the fuck do you you co out? You said you've spent how much on a video average? So this video probably like five thousand on this video and how much how many view there's no way that all these videos make their money back They know so you're just dumping money into this money But it's like the best or v you're like the mr. Beast of hip hop. It's the brand if you go like so that's that Of course it go go hit to my page real quick Right hit that and then if you hit videos and then like scroll down a little bit Scroll down a little more Keep going See that far keep going down one more Right there on the bottom left right there to the left this video probably made me the most money until they demonetize that really This was like let's go brand in like let's go brand in what's crazy. I remember this video. This isn't like hey You know I'm paying everybody ten dollars an hour to come out like these people really generally rock with us in the moment and Trump and you know It's just being the same person these people always see But there's nothing wrong with this video for to be demonetized no because it says fuck no like Every video in the world is fucking it's fine fuck Trump's probably not demonetized, you know So it was just something though that did but I always just try to put the people in the video and Involve them in what I'm doing. Yeah, and also you know that if you got a video with 200 people it starts off with 200 shares This episode of the podcast is brought to you by versus game our question of the week this week on versus game is Will ethereum be above 1900 dollars on friday june third at 1 p.m. Eastern time go click the link below Back to the show. What do you think about the? What do you think about the whole QAnon thing? Did you see that QAnon documentary? Yeah, so one of the guys They're wild, but I've never even big on that like you know, Trump's coming back two months three months three They like I don't get lost in it, but I mean it's pretty deep. I wouldn't say I'm not really in that I'm not hating on someone who is, but I'm not like I just haven't even Took a second like you got spent a lot of time on Yeah, and to get in and then I'd be rapping about like they're already saying I'm rapping about you know false narratives and Medical misinformation and voter and you know if I start rapping whatever they're talking about my videos not even gonna get released Yeah, that was true, but the guy actually on one of my videos who got locked up They had the horns at the Capitol that day. Yeah, my video. I shot on January 6 I think he's knows a lot with the QAnon stuff So I think he's still in prison, isn't he? I think he got out or he got sentenced already He got sentenced this problem was his spear Not to speak too much on his stuff. I'm not 100% sure but his spear had like he had the spear and if you look at videos and him in there He's just like I want to charge my phone. He's walking around like how about the desk I thought of die. I think he'd admit left a note for somebody and that was a problem and the spear they use that as like a deadly weapon So you're not does in here anymore? Yeah I listen to a interview with that guy. He seemed kind of fucking wacky He seemed like he was like super into psychedelics and stuff like and the super in to like You know all these crazy, but I didn't really know much about you know, that's a thing So I might have a video and you might have robbed a bank and you're in my music video doesn't mean I rock with Right exactly like you in my video You know saying so some people came to me about some of the videos on January 6 and said yo I you got my people in trouble and on my position have been in the music video. They shouldn't have been in music video Yeah, I'm not telling you everybody video time You want to be a star and be in a music video. That's all you so I one guy know got locked up for a long time He came to me a lot of people were saying to eat the video Because it's getting him in trouble and physically him so I never said that I shouldn't have got in that video I didn't know I was in the video and then later on he's in my music video Then they got to picture him in the Capitol So they're able to say that is you on that day because you're also out here in this video. Yeah, right We we uh we uh I have a friend who's on this podcast. He's a lawyer and he represented a guy that was went to the January 6 riots and my buddy who's a lawyer. He's a Democrat he's like a lifelong Democrat. He's like he considers himself very liberal and like Left leaning and he represented this guy Who was a part of the whole ride he got charged with he got charged with throwing a fire hydrant and a cop I think which is some sort of battery, but he like they do literally there's footage of he threw a fucking fire some people out there What is doing the most I'm saying and he said that when he first met the guy like he had no problem representing him Like he's not one of those people who's like crazy But he invited him to his house and they met and they talked about it and he said this guy started talking about You know, Patriot this I'm a patriot. I'm a real patriot And he was like dude shut up. He's like we're like stop trying to like say that you're the only patriot He's like we're all patriots. So that's one of the things he really like like that's one of the things that shocked him That kind of like stood out to me when I talked to him. He was like it's so crazy I feel like cool that he represented him still not having the same belief. Yeah He's like you don't have to like he said to him like you don't have to keep saying that you're a patriot and then all you guys are Patriot he's like he's like I'm a patriot You just because I'm a Democrat as a mean. I'm not a patriot just because I don't agree with everything that you did He's like I'm still here fucking being your lawyer working pro bono for you and that in pro bono. That's crazy I'm saying and that's what some people don't get That's what I try to say outside that's a great to hear a story from the other side of someone still can look at somebody's Lifely hood is rare. It's rare. It's rare, but it's still amazing to hear And I'm glad you gave a shout out about it because that might open some other people's minds and say oh, yeah, you know I think there's many people that weren't pro Trump like that we lost relationships and now they're like You know what subbro is go to Hooters or I owe us up and have the music going or and I'm like You know, I'm not gonna be like no, I never talk to you again because you didn't talk to me because I like Trump Yeah, what's up? Oh, it's chill another like man. I was wrong by Trump man or Just I rather be that person to say well you can still kick it You know I'm saying we could still be cool then holding a grudge like life through short the Hooters grudgers You know saying things happen to people every day You know I mean if COVID was so crazy we all could have got COVID and died and never would have seen y'all again I like being able to see you and see how far you then came and see the podcast see your numbers go crazy I like being able to go watch the videos and tell people like yeah go watch this first video I did over here like I said in that video a lot of people that is days still It's just a growth and you can go watch that video and then watch me now. I'm a different person I'm growing up which is the way it's supposed to be like yeah, we all fight for the same country and we might have different Thoughts why it's going on But I'll be the first person to say when something's wrong and I don't agree with it I don't agree with everything Trump does. Trump's pushing the vaccine. I don't like the vaccine But when I go for a president he's pushing it. Yeah He's behind it and Johnson and Johnson he's praising the other day, but my biggest thing is Trump's not pushing a vaccine mandate See you could be pro vaccine my family's members got a vaccine. They still got COVID, but they got a vaccine That's not my problem. My problem is when you mandate something You want to take a vaccine go ahead my brother If I don't want to take a vaccine to make a song about it you can go make it song. How much you love the vaccine? They did it they did it with a juvenile and I think many Whatever they did this redone. Well, that's all in the negative demonetize and they're talking about vaccines What about the people that think that's medical misinformation? Mm-hmm. They don't care Right, but I got a song no vaccine so we should all be able to do we do but when I tell you a you're gonna have to keep this job You gotta get a vaccination Because what why well They're gonna give me so much money as a bonus if I get everyone that works on your vaccine What are my friends works out in the trade wins right? And he was like I'm gonna do a big this weekend with you. Oh, I got $500 extra on my paycheck I'm wondering from what he's I took that vaccine And I'm like you what you took a miss being real not a hate. It's just $500 so that's like me telling you save me and you sell drugs And I'm my bro. We're paying all this money for this work, but me I won't have to make it myself So check this out you be $500 take this tell me what it does. I'll see you tomorrow You gonna risk your whole life for $500 for me. I know a guy who's a cop who got paid He got the vaccine he said he didn't want to get it, but they paid him to do it Stuff time decision sometimes people got take care of their kids and their families is a decision that he should never had to make Well, I mean it's a decision that I mean it's it's all Well, it's a never-a-a-make social it's like your it's like your status as far as like how much money you make like the poor people Like people low-income cop a lot of cops are really low-income naked Which is terrible because they have a job in the world. Yeah, right? I got tons of back to blue songs. I support the police. I remember right back in the day You know, please to pull me over when I was younger. I never did drugs never did anything crazy So I never was really worried, but it was more like no seat belts or like riding with a loud music or two dark tent Now I cost pull me over and they gave me their badges Like from back in the day like a blow. I love you back to the blue song This is where I got my first job over here in San Antonio. Now I work on Terre Verde You know what I mean and it's my biggest things with the police I got tattoos on my face. I'm driving a car that's black tent you can't see in big rims on it, right? I'm not getting pulled over no driver's license or smoking weed or drinking Like maybe if I was getting pulled over a weed smells out of my car and I'm drinking out of a styrofoam cup and I'm like I don't got an ID then certain questions should come up Right, police officers every day go to work not knowing they're gonna come back on they have the worst job in America Imagine having a deal with all the shit that you deal with on a daily then deal with my shit, right? You could be a police officer and go and do with your family find out your wife cheated on you You know, you're saying or you're got double life going or kids or sick or you know, shit happens and then go deal with my Problems today and my problems should just be So easy to deal with because you have no problem because your police officer, right or going to tell somebody hey your kids He's not coming home again. Yeah, you know, that's a tough tough tough job of doing for what they get paid and also go against The whole world because it's like they already don't like you because your police officer now There are some bad cops, but there's bad teachers. There's bad doctors. There's bad humans. There's bad Americans Right, but their biggest thing is trying to make this to me like a communist country So they want to right now take all these Businesses like me and you they got our own brands and make it like what are we gonna do to podcasts? Right, so like when I funny thing to talk about this so the late show you ever seen that The late show which will it which late show it's called the late show on TV So big TV station big show not the late night show but the late show I forget his name. Is it like Stephen Colbert He took my Matt Gaetz video, right? You can pull it up and show them this He took my Matt Gaetz video and ran it on their show muted my words and did a parody to it Saying that like I'm buying pedophiles pedophile zebras and all this stuff So it was funny because they're trying to say that Matt Gaetz scandal He hired these rappers to get pedophiles rap music for him, right? But let's look at it from our view There's people in the world that are being trafficked There's people in the world that are being raped and taken advantage of and have problems every day So you're fighting so hard against people that are pedophiles and all these issues, but you thought it was funny to make a parody out of pedophiles This is funny to run on this huge show The late this was on TV this on the jutsu, but he ran this on his real show Really? You don't think this is a deformation the character? So there's me and my boy J360 song, right? But you think this is funny to put on the national TV to do a parody of what we're doing from Matt Gaetz So why is it funny to rap about the people that are really going through this? It's not funny So you see this is your footage? Yeah, our footage dates hook our videos me and my boy J360 And that's Matt Gaetz show the time I show at CPEC and we shot a video with him But where are you guys at right there? Am I show at CPEC? What? What? Were you like nightclub? Yeah That's the name of the name of the nightclub Not too sure So like didn't think about pedophile zebras I said which you know what I mean? These are different words and they threw all this other stuff in the video, right? Yeah And like has him like he's buying women So my only question is when is it okay for the left to do that and make a mockery out of People really going through that just for their late night TV show Our words were nothing like that But you're gonna take it and make fun of the people that are really going through that Yeah, it's always okay because the last is a huge huge show Of course So I get write-ups like on the top of Yahoo business business management The insider the advice all these big name people talk about me And I can't even talk about nothing because I'm demonetized The platform They did so all these guys hit you up to do interviews No, they just hit me up Are they just kind of like just to tell about you Take my stuff and yeah, just do advice and people like that came out here Vice actually interviewed me these guys just do like opinion pieces on you Yeah, but I mean that's like so people could say like Well, that's the biggest it gets so it's like hey, it's good. They're still talking about you Right, but it's not that because you're painting me As being pro that now. Yeah, so that's defamation the character. That's fine. That's a lawsuit for him Can't take my words and change my word and say that I'm wrapping. Let's go pedophiles That's unfair Now watch if I took his late night TV show And said I hate black people. I hate minorities. I hate the gays. I hate this and then put on my youtube channel And say look what he said yeah, they'd be all over you. I'd have a big problem Right, but at some point they think they can just do whatever they want to us Because we're still a little fish in the palm You're independent these guys are backed by a major massive court So like who would sit around and say hey, you know some geek somewhere That works for that show. They're like hey, we're gonna pay you to write some bars To come in and re-wrapped this song over it a couple thousand bucks and think it's funny Have you seen the um, have you seen the interview or listen to the interview that Malcolm X did about Liberals about white liberals? No, I gotta send out to you Austin so you can see you can play this It's pretty fucking well. I just watched this documentary by this guy named Adam Curtis It's called can't get you out of my head and it goes like back to Mao and his wife when he created like the CCP In China and how it like how it relates to us politics Oh, this is another thing I got to show you too. I'm gonna send two things you Austin first first play the uh I'll be able to hear the words. Yeah, we're gonna he's gonna turn the volume up Where'd you see this at this was uh this documentary just called I just told you about that's called don't I can't get you out of my head by Adam Curtis. He works for the BBC. This is a documentary that he did about what's crazy It's like a lot of people over there from the BBC They come over here and they shoot stories on me then they sell the stories really the BBC does Yeah, I did a lot of stuff on them on here So they come over here and they sell stories So I don't just come around me and I'd be like where is this going on and they'll be like We don't know Honestly, we're just gonna come over here and ride around with you for a couple of days go to the studio Meet your people Do it right you don't have to ask too many questions because you know that pretty much 90% people are just gonna They're gonna shit talk you right. Yeah, that other working on some of my great things coming out on know about You know, yeah, I don't do nothing illegal on that Right, right, but yeah the day is like they just hit me up I guess we're doing the documentary on a couple things. Why don't you come there's there's like So the one you guys put out on me when you don't look at this I'll show you someone did a spin off on you. Do they really from the BBC? They came here and they wrote around the car of me and talked and did all this stuff I had people emailing me asking me to send them foot They were asked they were trying to license some of that footage that I shot for something they were doing I forget what it was but it was some it was some European production company. Yeah a lot of times they come over here And they they won't tell what they're doing it for Yeah, play this this is fucking bonkers turn the volume up You have to take off one of your pieces because we can't pipe it through the audio yet And this crooked game of politics here in America the Negro namely the race problem integration civil rights issue Nothing but tools used by the white who call themselves liberals against another group of whites Who call themselves conservatives either to get into power or to retain power Among whites here in America The political teams are no longer divided into Democrats and Republicans The whites who are now struggling for control of the American political throne are divided into liberal and conservative camps The white liberals from both parties cross party lines to work together taught the same goal And white conservatives from both parties do likewise The white liberal Divors from the white conservative only in one way The liberal is more deceitful More hypocritical than the conservative both want power But the white liberal is the one who has perfected the art Of posing as the Negro's friend and benefactor And by winning the friendship and support of the Negro The white liberal is able to use the Negro as a pawn or a weapon In this political football game That is constantly raging between the white liberals and the white conservatives The American Negro is nothing but a political football And the white liberals control this ball through tricks Or tokenism Both promises of integration and civil rights In this game of deceiving and using the American Negro The white liberals have complete cooperation of the Negro civil rights leaders Who sell our people out for a few crumbs of token recognition token games token proud dress How fucking crazy I mean Honestly, did you even know that existed? No, but what I'm trying to say is that's your normal thing now I mean, that's just a black face With the you know the whole party with the black face is trying to get people just a little bit Just to make them feel like you know saying that they're there and they got their back And a lot of people these days are breaking from those chains and being like, no, I want bigger things I can see better things That's what the Democrats in the left Like what that's what this This is like a thousand percent This documentary really shows how during the 1960s during like the counter the counter culture rise up It's a football game. I'm like it's it's a political football game And he says it shows how like the conservative or the Republicans kind of they had the the struggle hold on the economy Right and the left The only thing they could do was they like embedded themselves in culture And art like they embedded themselves in the counter culture in the art The people who are more about that kind of stuff and not about money and they basically used that Or weaponize that and use that as their sort of ammunition to come back and they basically are using The culture the culture they're using Or exactly yeah, all people trying to perform You know like at a Joe Biden rally is still like 20 people at it like I've never seen a Joe Biden rally Which is like I never seen it but it's so insane I was hit a Joe Biden truck and never even see people riding around bottom flags right It's just so insane how Malcolm X Fucking was ahead of his side this way back in the day I'm our other king or somebody that would have been down with Trump. They would have been down with his crap that they're kicking You know right now they wouldn't have been down with his crap. They're kicking I mean even like this remember last year when people were getting the the pvp loans What the fuck Yo, the TV that's crazy What the auto so long, but hey Oh, whatever you what the fuck have you done Austin Jesus Yo Are we good? Oh, you changed your audio You changed your monitors on your headphones What did you do why did how did that happen change the output? Oh? Okay, I see we did so we're back going yeah, we're I think we're good. Okay, so remember right the pvp loans Yeah, right They really were like I set up for a lot of people So it's normal like the normal tax drops. So you know you make out one person That's like hey, I'm getting these pvp loans and everybody's getting like 20 $30,000 Right so then they're like okay. How do I get these how do I get these? Well, some will come to neighbor and say I get you guys all the loans But I need $5,000 out of your money, right? You don't know what these people are filling out For you to get this $20,000 Right so the next time around when Joe Biden sitting there and everybody's going through their taxes and the people that are on Welfare and the people that are getting Medicaid. They're like well, you don't get that no more What happened to Charlie's grass service that made a hundred thousand dollars And you got a pvp loan for it Like people fall for their tricks Gonna come back and buy a lot of people in their ass. I did that Tom Brady got a pvp loan I heard yeah Well some people probably did with his business any loss. It doesn't matter how much money Your worth are you making it's your company took a hit it took a hit became free money when a lot of people I know people that didn't go get them because they were like I know I'm gonna get like a milieu Whatever people some wealthy people and I might blow it on something or whatever and they're gonna pay it back They got a lot of people pissed off when they realized they weren't getting paid back Because say if you had a company and you got a million dollars on it How many companies can sell today for a million dollars? Not in that many so you could just close the door and got a million dollars your company and said peace Right it's out right out of million for my company. Thanks. I'm out of here So but a lot of people signed up for that little bit of money This has someone that knew how to do it Oh, I actually had to do it But you're not looking at what they're putting down they're just thinking $20,000. Yeah And now next time you know that That income housing they're living in or whatever it is down the line They're gonna be like it's gonna catch up to people Yeah, and they're gonna be like damn I just sold out for $20,000 They're gonna say what says you got a boutique that makes $90,000 here So you can't get the free benefits anymore of the Medicare you got to pay this and pay that Well, yeah, that's not true. We took the money. It's not true. You're a jail Yeah People with people with jail. Yeah, a lot of people I seen some people on there. I get an Amber gave Tises stuff they were just living it up for the moment, but um It just kind of crazy. I feel like how they try to Like you said use the culture But they also check a lot of people. They don't know any better You know they don't tell them hey do this But there is a shot that you could get in a lot of trouble for doing this too. It's just I do this It's gonna be great here I give you 20 grand. What do you think? What do you think it would take to Close the gap with like the division. It's close. I feel it's closing And that's because I see it. Do you think Trump should do anything different this time around? I think what Trump's doing is great because even something stupid is gay people to listen to me Was money this and that if you were a regular person or say you were the dope boy whatever was Trump gave you $1200 to go flip gave you some money the last thing was to a David Lucas said The last a bit of money he was trying to give you an NCP was holding it back because she knew of the Trump gave them one more Simmons pipe or the election Trump wanted to give you the money NCP didn't give them the money Bied my brother give a fucking $10 billion to Ukraine. Well, look at this We can't get a couple million dollars to build a wall, but we can build a wall for Ukraine Exactly. Yeah, we can set out we can send all that money to Ukraine You know what I mean? That's beyond crazy. And imagine this to say if like Hunter Biden was a Trump If you what was a hunter Trump Right imagine if he had Trump behind his name. Look shit he would be in I see the cray I see like stuff come across internet on him though like him like you know Beat people with lips at all types of sexual People are like you know click play hunter Biden footage. I don't even want to know my computer. I'm like I don't know But if they give it's like If any of you know junior or any of the trumps had a laptop I'm the over for them man. Yeah, you know a lot of trouble Trump can't get away with nothing so I feel like they don't got nothing on trunk. They did he'd be locked up Well, it's yeah, they they had the puts on going back now I mean hindsight's always 2020 But going back now and like seeing some of the things that Trump did say like especially during the debate because he was fucking going at He was really going after Biden about the Ukraine and the China stuff about how much money I'm making money on how much money they were making over there with this body doing them side deals patrons keep your eyes Yeah, you know me Have you seen that I don't know if you've ever seen it, but there's a documentary Oliver Stone did about Ukraine called Ukraine on fire Did it's a new? No, he made it probably in 20 I think I want to say he made it like 2015 or 2014. So early. Yeah, what's it on? It was on YouTube, but as soon as the as soon as the Ukraine thing start to hit Yeah, that's what it up 2016 as soon as the Ukraine Things start to pop off early this year YouTube fucking shut it up turned it off YouTube They fucking blocked it. Well, that's like 2000 meals the movie just came out. I was telling you about my boy Dinesh this shows pretty much about you know the stealing of the votes and the ballots and the mules and And They're doing a big tech and I think do whatever they can do to censor it, you know I'm saying yeah, and they have my song 2000 meals in the movie, which is dope So the other day like I see the song airing on Trump's up doing a big tech and I think do whatever they can do to censor it, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. And they have my song 2000 Meals in the movie, which is dope. So the other day like I see the song airing on Trump's up on stage and the song's playing the credits. It's cool, man. You know, I'm doing some shows with them performing, but I just feel like 2000 Meals is the name of it. And you find that Austin pull that up. So I feel like freedom of speech is gone. Yeah. Do you think Elon will be good for it? Everyone's so quick to be like Elon, Elon, like, you know what I'm saying? He's not a die-hard Republican. He came out today saying he's going to vote red. You know what I mean? I read that for I got here, but that's some the problems with people sometimes. They're just so quick to like jump on the team, you know what I'm saying? I'll be like, oh, that's what we're doing. You never know if he's part of their playing. Do you like Elon? I like him because he's hustler. I like anybody. I mean, make the Tesla's and do this and that like it's genius. Do you think he'll be good for Twitter though? I don't use Twitter. So I don't really care. I hope he buys Instagram. He's my page. I just paid someone a $7,000 for my Instagram page. He doesn't even use Instagram. He's on there, I think. I don't think he has a page. Probably got everyone has a backup page. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Burger thing about Elon is he takes like he's he's pretty relying on the government. You know what I mean with SpaceX? I mean, SpaceX launches military satellites. You use SpaceX to launch all their satellites and military fitness space and Tesla's super relying on federal grants. Well, I feel like everything has an agenda. You know, so everybody's so like, oh, he's bringing people back like like check it out when he bought Twitter. Some people say he didn't fully buy it either. So I don't already know the story. That's awesome. No, I saw yeah that he backed out of it now because he got the attention when I already would say if he would have bought Twitter that it's done. Then he reached out the Trump, but they say he did and bring him back on the platform. What's bigger? Elon bringing Trump back to Twitter or buying Twitter. Bring your Trump back. Bringing Trump back for sure. So someone like Trump is going to give you that power because he don't already know if you should get that power. Well, Trump says he's not going to do it, right? No, he's not going to do it. But if I was Trump, I would have said cool. I want 20% of Twitter and here's a money for it. Exactly. Right. Yeah. And they were probably like no, and then Trump's also like, I'm going to make you a super superstar now by being the first one to bring me back. I don't need you to bring me back nowhere. Yeah. I'm down with Trump. So Trump might go back there free six months later on his own. Yeah. Then that unless it was rolled out a little better like, hey, big Trump. Man, I got you back. You know what I mean? And I'm loyal. And I'm going to show you I'm loyal to bring you back on here. There's no hidden agenda. I'm going to give you 20% of this Twitter. Yeah. Just cause. And then Twitter went through the roof. So how fucking crazy would that be? But bringing Trump. He ended up owning part of Twitter. But bringing Trump back to Twitter would have been bigger. Yeah. That's why Trump is the rock star of America. So yeah. So like in 2024, where I tell you when he comes back, he's going to have the biggest rock star year of his life. People are going to have to rock with Trump. Yeah. So the people are they eat their words. Now, the media, they're always going to, you know, fake news go at him. And you're regular TV shows and your ratings, but Trump's the best things for ratings. There is. Yeah. Hey, the mer love him. He's winning. You know, but so like Elon, I don't really know much about him. But a lot of it, that's a thing. A lot of patriots were so quick to be like, yeah, we're going back on Twitter and do all this and that when he jump it on the Elon train, they are. But I mean, I haven't, you know, I mean, my boy, Bryson Gray put a song with questions that Elon, I thought it was pretty dope with questions to you know, like a song like Elon, like you already would have got some questions for you to answer. You can pull it out. It's pretty cool. He did it. But were the questions. You got to watch him again. It was just like asking questions like he's really with us. And I'm saying, yeah, are you just doing this for the clout? Are you doing this just to get a bunch of people on there and then switch it? You know, like what do you what your intentions? Yeah, I wonder that too. I mean, he's basically, I mean, he's probably Trump was the most famous person in the world back when he was president. But now I think it's Elon. You know, I think it's more touching than anybody right now. Maybe at this moment. Yeah, I just this moment, right? That's why I was so confused when I saw the day that the Twitter thing wasn't done yet. But there's a lot of fake tabloids. So I don't really know his real or not. I'm not there. I'm not someone that's like, oh, yeah, he's official. I love him. I think what's happening is he he basically signed like he put an intent to buy it with at $54 a share or something like that. And then the CEO of Twitter is refusing to acknowledge how many of their users are bots. That's what I was thinking. So I think I think what Elon, because Elon's actually doing something where he's like trying to sell off shares of SpaceX to actually buy Twitter. So I don't think you're trying to back out of the deal. I think Elon's trying to get it for a cheaper price. I think he's trying to get it to China. Which I saw that with saying some of the fake the fake bots or whatever. But it just like you don't really know everybody's intentions. Until you I feel like to you meet somebody. That's why I told you like when I met Trump, I was just hoping that Trump was that dude, like honestly. But I came out with songs and asked Trump questions. I said, you know, I was big Trump was stopped pushing the Vex. I was seeing them with fact check they faxed and all the way into Patriots. It was like a lot of people were like, well, are you going to Trump like you got a vote? They don't give us like 85 presidents to pick from or 10 presidents. You know what I mean? You got A or B. So I says man or females whoever you are. You have to look at somebody and say I agree eight out of 10, seven out of 10 with this person, 10 out of 10, whatever it is. And no, this is the best for me as a person in what I'm doing. So I respect Trump. What he's doing the most. I'm not going to agree with everything Trump says because I'm not. I was like, Trump said it's got to be gold. You know, a lot of people are like that. Yeah, but I would have a problem with Trump if he started pushing the like Dr. Oz. That was a weird endorsement. Well, how many doctor? I don't even know what that was. Well, he was Dr. Oz. And, you know, he'd be like, we'll be Goldberg getting all them on their stuff. But there's a mother Republican candidates, but that was out there in Pennsylvania and Trump kind of knew that he said that he might not be the best to most of Republicans in their eyes, but he's the best for us to be a Democrat, right? So it's kind of playing his version of chess strategizing to come back in 2024 when a lot of people were like, I went and it went with him. And I don't know, you could put it up. I don't know if he even won with Trump's endorsement. And he was, um, last time I checked, he was only winning by like, lightly close close. And when it's so close, they're going to do a recount. But if Trump came out with like saying, I'm going to mandate air would take a vaccine, a lot of patriots would have big problem with Trump. You know, as long as you're not forcing me to do something, like my body, my choice, right? And they all say, my body, my choice, I'm getting the abortion of I want to get a book about it. My choice, why is it not my body, my choice to go back seeing? Why is it not my body, my choice to wear a mask? How did the fucking abortion thing get so political? That's so fucking dumb to me in some ways. I mean, so you would think people should be able to have abortions? I don't fucking know. I just think it's a fucking, I don't think I have, I have no real stance on it. Obviously it's a super, it's a super blurry line because when does when do two cells become a fucking person? I don't fucking know. I mean, that's a, it's a, it's a ethical moral debate that I have no. I don't really have a hard being a patriot. You know, I just keep it Jew myself, but I don't have kids. So it's kind of hard for me to really talk about like people's children and bills for children. That's all I did that don't say gay act. I feel bad because I'm thinking like, that's just too early. I'm not gonna tell you how to raise your kids, but like second grade talk about a tranny coming in here is a cross dresser. Kids do things for attention. This is an attention thing. You know, when I went to school, if you were, you know, gay or whatever, it wasn't like a, hey, I'm gay and everybody's like, whoa, whoa, that's a quiet thing on the, on the, on the, you know, low down. Now it's like the most popular kid. That's the attention. He's gay. He's got nail polish, whatever, but it comes from the culture playing the culture, making the rappers, paying their nails, want all this money, whatever. So with the abortion thing to me, it's like it's tough because, you know, say if a woman was gonna get killed by having a baby, you know, what did the baby would kill her, right? But then some people say, well, that's life you say. But people say that's very slim chances. Like it's not a chance that we really think it is, but a lot of doctors, I don't really know there's some chances that take a stance on that. Right. Then again, say if a little girl or boy, you know, was being molested in the guy made the little boy have sex with her or the guy had sex with a little girl and she was raped. Right. That's a tough thing to put her through all that. But if you buy the Bible, she needs to go through all that and give the baby a production. There's a lot of people I hear the one. The Bible says if you get raped, you should have the baby. No, but I'm saying it's just abortions and people, you know, have and in the day you should always keep the baby. It's a life, you know what I mean? But my part is like, I don't have, I'm not a female. So it's kind of hard to tell a female what to do with her body. But if someone's out here having 10 abortions a year, that's like a serious red flag for them, for the world. Yeah. You know what I mean? That you're just out. I got saw a song the other day by Meg Stallion called Plan B. Right. And it was like, I'm not getting stuck with you. You think you're going to keep me. I'm just playing you. I'm getting your money, taking your cars, doing it in the life with you. And I'm popping Plan B's because this is my Plan B. And that's just disgusting to me for kids to be singing that and hearing that. Like making these girls is thinking, well, I could just have unprotected sex. I like everybody was so worried about COVID. Nobody's worried about AIDS. No. People have an unprotected sex, like it's not a big deal. But COVID, whoa. Yeah. Stay back at a mask. Yeah. Yeah. No, I know that the weird thing about the abortion thing to me is just like people will take a stance just based on their political identity. They'll just be like, I'm Republican. So I'm anti-abortion. Meanwhile, the dudes fucking persons never thought about it for more than five minutes. Well, there's difference. That's why politics. But yeah, and there's liberals the same way too. Exactly. Me. I'm not the perfect patriot. You know what I mean? Like, I'm who I am. I keep it. You are the perfect patriot. Well, why would you say you're not the perfect patriot? No, I'm saying how somebody would paint. I got to be where you're saying patriot is a Republican. Yeah. How people would look at like what the statues are. You know what I mean? Like I'm big two way. There's no reason anybody should have the guns. Yeah. But then I don't feel great with anybody that's being able to carry a gun for any reason. Like I feel like guns need training. You should have it for sure. You should be trained to have a gun. I don't feel like just because you're not a criminal. Anybody can carry a gun. Then that puts people right. Like the difference I try to tell people is like, you think criminals are like, why can't carry a gun? Because I'm a felon. They're still carrying a gun. You know what I'm saying? So you still need to have your gun. All laws don't do anything. I mean, the right way, well, they're trying to change the laws now that anybody can carry a gun. Right. If you're not a family, you don't need any type of a, I wonder what, CCW. How would that change? How would, how do you, how do you think anybody could carry a gun? So how do you think what would change? It's far as we all had Donkey Kong. People are going to be popping off. And then it's quick. Like the biggest thing is me. I keep my strap everywhere. I go. Right. I got nice stuff, nice cars. You never know what someone's going to do. I'm not trying to take somebody's life over a Trump truck and you don't like Trump. But like if you're talking shit to me and you can carry a gun, you got a gun to the window. So I see the gum shoot. Because you could shoot me first. You know, but we need guns for protection. So like on that bill, I'm big too way. Like the government shouldn't take our guns from us. Because then when they take our guns, these other countries are going to know we can defend ourselves. They pull in a not to mention our own governments pulling our own government. Yeah, they're the big ones. So it's like, that's what Trump said in that interview. What was that interview that he, uh, I think it was a dayport, no interview that Trump did where he's talking about like getting shit done overseas with like different countries with like, he's like, Trump, who was it, who was the hardest to deal with? Was it China? Was it Russia? He's like, no, it's a fucking United States. Yeah. I mean, what was that? He said he said that he's like, you don't think that he's like, you think these other countries are killers. You think these fucking people and Russia are crazy videos and China with this, with this vaccine stuff over there. And like them killing all the cats. So that, oh my God, I've seen crazy videos that like pets had COVID. So they're killing them. They have bags full of cats outside. You know, I like the pets. I'm not like, I don't have any pets. I'm not very big on pets. But you know what I'm saying? You want to be getting your cat killed because you had COVID. You know what I mean? It's just crazy. So I'm big. I go in two way. I'm big on freedom of speech. But I think it's because my lifestyle, like, you know, I got a risk. I got a name. I stand out. I want to be protected. Um, I have a voice. I do a music. I don't want my speech taken, which it has been taken, right? The whole abortion thing, you know, I've never had a child. I never had anybody pregnant in my life. I haven't had a cross that path and where we look at, you know, having a child. It feels a life change and experience. A child is a big thing. But I think that they should still have the baby. There's a lot of people out here that can have kids. There's a lot of good people that want children. And there's a lot of shitty parents that are just one of the dog kids and maybe get money. You know, you got houses where they got eight kids adopted. They just collect the money on these people. You know, I saw some crazy thing on Netflix. I'll be seeing this. I know, but it was about squatters because that is about piece of property and Hudson. And I went up there and I got squatters on my property. And man, I'm a different kind of person. I told them, look, you know what, y'all can stay here. But you know what? I'm getting a big dumpster here tomorrow. And you guys are going to earn your keep up here. No more free land. I got this land. I'm not going to live here for a while. Y'all can live here. You can stay in your wheelchair. You got here. But you're going to clean. I'm going to come up here. You're going to paint all this spray paint at it right now. They got a shower. I got side with a hose. It says no stinky pussy spray paint on it. Like, you know, I mean, I told them we're not going to live like that. I could get you guys off it. But I'm going to let y'all stay here. But you don't clean up. So there's a Netflix thing that's like bad roommates or there's about squatters. Right. And I had this lady on there. Do you see what she had like disabled people living in her house? And she was murdering them. And they're all like the worst roommate ever. Yeah. She was buried in them in the backyard. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. She went in the backyard. Barry and Barry. I could move in. You were disabled. She was still here. Check every week for you. And she would open a new room for the new person. And people wonder where you went. She wouldn't say you were dead. She just keep like your check for years. And you're buried in her backyard. Yeah. That was crazy. And that whole thing was crazy. You know, roommates are a crazy thing. Yeah. But we're living in a world. We were kids. It was like their stranger stay away from them. And now we're like, get shit face drunk, take some drugs, and call Uber or stranger pick you up to you. I'm saying, yeah. You never know these days. Even like, you know, with the police, I always feel like if somebody's getting pulled over, they want to drive to a Walmart or to a gas station with their blinker on and they're not drunk and they're not throwing anything out the window. There's no problem with it. They want to go to a safe place, say a woman or somebody was getting pulled over and their dress have naked from somewhere. And they're in the middle of the interstate somewhere. They shouldn't have to take that chance. Right. A cop should not want to take that chance. Yeah. We'll just go 30 miles an hour to the next exit and get off. And we both protect ourselves. Yeah. Sometimes I've gotten pulled over before like I was driving a Tennessee for a show and I was like going like a hundred miles an hour trying to get there in a quick shot. And the lady pulled me over and it was like snowing a little bit. And she didn't all she wanted was my ID and just make sure I didn't have anything crazy to she didn't. I she didn't want to take it to the point where she has checked the car and be there too off. It was like, make sure you're not a fugitive or something. When she could have said like, well, you know, you're a tattoo, you're a smoke of weed, you got weed in the car, what's going on? You got your artist in there. Like she didn't want to get into that because there's six or seven of us and there's just her. So it's not a good place in time. So she was just like, I'm not even going to do that. So I just feel like sometimes people should, you know, be able to go to the safety net or do something like that because, you know, shit happens every day, man, not here. Not everybody's having a great day. Not everybody's the best kind of person. No. Yeah. Man, the shit gets crazy, especially when cops are, you know, aggro and paid low, not trained well. And they just want to fuck with you or do whatever. I mean, a lot of those guys aren't having, you know, don't have the best lives and aren't the happiest fucking. Well, it's like military society. You know what I'm saying? It's like military. It's like a lot of things. But there's a lot of good people out there that our police officers keep us protected every single day. And they do a lot of stuff. They take a lot of chances with their life to put us first when they're going home to their kids and their family. So I always have respect for police. Like when I was younger, I would be, you know, get pulled over and and always think it was everyone's against me. Now I'm just like, man, I got to pay my ticket, you know what I'm saying? Yeah, I was speeding. I'm not going to give you no excuse. Boom. Yeah. I mean, I mostly get okay with the police that already give me any issues. Yeah. I'm pretty vocal for them too that I backed the blue. But I guarantee if I was doing something illegal, they'd pull me over and, you know, like a lot of people say like this happened, right? This person, someone so happened and then they got pulled over. But they leave out that like, they had weapons. They were smoking weed. They don't have no driver's license. Cars not registered. Like, you know, shit that you're not allowed to be doing. Yeah. You're not allowed to do it. They forget all that from the story. Or they'll be like, you know, Black guy, done down by cop when there's more white people being killed by police officers under Trump and they don't show those numbers. More whites have been gunned down by the police. They just show the black people. Right. They just show the black cases because the black cases is clickbait and it gets attention. Yeah. They definitely do that. They're also is a lot more white. They're not going to care to be like, yo, Billy Bob, guy, gun down in his trailer park or in his, in his nice neighborhood. What is that? It's not stories. Yeah. They're not stories. Yeah. They look at the mass shooter. Look at the mass shooter. The recent one. Yeah. I posted it. What was the story with that guy and Buffalo? Yeah. Everybody on Buffalo. What was he? But there's been like 10 black mass shooters that haven't hit the news in the last like two years. Have there? Yeah. I get my phone over there. I can get her a quick. I can show your whole list. I posted it today. Yeah. You can go grab it. Yeah. So yeah, I'm not sure the camera can take this up. Senate just texted to me and I'll send it to Austin. I think I had you on my old phone. Oh, yeah, I might not have your new number. I can hear drama to you, right? Yeah. You're dropping to me. You don't have to be connected to Wi-Fi for that. Yeah. Thanks. That's crazy because I thought it most mass shooters were white people. Is that just fake news? I thought they were most here to drop. Says I phone. There you go. Got it. I got it. Okay. I got it. Boom. So this doesn't make the news though. This time stuff. So this is where did this come from? Where did you get this screenshot? It was on a news site today. So these are all mass shooters in 2022 that never the story's never made it like to mainstream media. Google one of them. Who's this guy? Google, oh, the Brooklyn subway guy. Oh, that was a fucking crazy story. That was all over the news. Yeah, but not as much as this one. They're not like white supremacy. They're like a black supremacist without. Yeah, they said he was a YouTuber, wasn't he? I think so. Now that was crazy the other day. That was it. That was a Marxist like what happened the other day. That's like a, you know, a live video game. That was crazy. I watched the body cam footage of that shooting and buffer. Really? It was crazy. One of my friends was like, oh, I found that on TV. I found the internet when it was going down and like FaceTime me and I saw it and I'm like, I'll ever show me that again pretty much. Because that was just for it. It was a body cam footage from a cop who showed up there. Yeah, it was like it was footage for the news got it. It was just all over the internet. Someone said, yo, oh, wow, this is a live shooting going down. That is what happened in the video. Like what did it show? It just showed like the show on the news now. Like him getting out of the car, walking right in, catching his first two people outside. Boom, boom, walks inside. Was this body cam of the shooter? Yeah. Yeah. Camera. Oh, you mean he had his own camera? Yeah, it was a camera of the footage. Oh, what is fuck? You didn't see the, no, I didn't watch it. I didn't see that. So you could pull that up. Yeah, yeah. I don't know if I might have viruses on it. But it's a lot. What was his, that kid's story? I'm a red bunch into it yet, but I know there are like he's a white supremacist and that's how they're on. Right. I'm not 100% sure that everybody shot that day with black either, but I'm pretty sure there was a pretty sure there was different races. Yeah, I don't know. I haven't, I haven't looked into that. It was definitely a hate crime and just to get out kill people. Yeah. Excuse me. I'm just talking about they don't talk about they don't get the same media. Is everybody else? Because it doesn't get the attention. It doesn't fit what's going on. Well, it's hard to know what the fuck is going on. I think it's like the combine accident years ago. It's like school shooters and shooters are like kids. They made it. Yeah. It's like, you know, I've heard some of my friends that are black playing around and they'll be like, it's sort of grow to be a school shooter. You know what I'm saying or I see like little things. craziest thing happened today. Like I was driving here, right? And there's a car in front of me. It's a truck. And I see somebody like hanging out the window, something like, maybe they're saying what's up and see my car. And then as I look, I'm like, I see him with his finger going like this, right? Something like what the going on? This guy's a truck like a tundra. I know. He's out the window. He's like, look it in the window. Right? So I'm like, then I look and it's a four-door, you know, truck. So it's a kid in the back seat. So I four around it. And then somebody's child out the window. Oh my God. Oh, the car is a kid. Yeah. And I'm thinking of myself. I damn go to school shoot. Jesus Christ. I'm thinking of myself. I put the hell's going on. Because I thought with somebody like knew who I was, they're like, I'm going to shoot you. I don't mean whatever. I'll go around them. And when I got up to the window, he's out the window. Look at at me. He didn't do it to me. They saw the car. And he's looking like, whoa, you know what I mean? But I'm watching them far back the whole way to air shooting everything around. Oh, okay. Yeah, that's fucking wild. And some people play video games like you're about to say, I never played a video game, but it's never played any video game. Never in your life. Never. I don't play it like some like blitz or NBA jam when I was a kid, but not in the game. So I got to be outside of the house. Never. I play with like Michael Vic, little bit. of fuck with the NFL. Do you? I go to a lot of the games. I got to see. So you take it. Okay. Because it's more like four jot-a-blows in the house. That's a great place for independent artists to take 500 photos of Patriots and fans of mine. Yeah. Bring my truck outside. I park it all the way up on the hill with everybody comes outside for the pre-party. And it's like, is that your favorite sport to watch football basketball? Basketball. Do you want it to put black lives matter on the basketball court? Yeah. Yeah. You know what I mean? I still watch hit or miss games, but. Well, the NBA's got to way better commissioner than the NFL does. I think that guy's way better. Well, I feel like the thing they did in the basketball was just crazy. It's like, you know, imagine if I had a white NBA basketball team. Was that? What if I had like a white basketball league? White basketballs matter on the basketball court. I don't think that's right. Does the right that on the thing? Obviously, we know black lives matter. Do it's lives matter. Spanish people matter. Mexican. I think that was more of a corporate thing that they did. I mean, obviously it's super hypocritical, but I think it's more like they're like, so American, but they're holding all the money. It's all about money. LeBron's like stop the stance, but he's got every Chinese person in the world making shoes and clothes. Right. So pro-American, LeBron. Yeah. How much money you donate in to George Floyd's family? Right. You know? Yeah. Well, the thing is about like people like him. I mean, he's kind of an exciting. He really doesn't have much of an excuse, but like a lot of these guys, like a lot of these young NBA players and NFL players, these guys fucking are paying attention to politics. Not at all. They just see that fucking this black dude got fucking his throat kneel on by a cop right, man. It's got killed. And they see that every other guy, every other guy. They're going to a pregnant person belly like right, but they just see it before. But they don't know. They don't know what I'm saying. They should look into what they get. But they want communication. Why though, because their fucking job is to play basketball or to play football. Like their job is being better. Their job is that we the kids that look up to them in the community. So a lot of people that look up to these right, but someone like LeBron. So like Kyle, Kyle written house gets out. He's free. And LeBron is making fun of him the whole time on the stand eating scoodles. Salverskiels just crying. Right. When does he have the right to do that to somebody's child? When if that was an African-American kid up there fighting for his life, he would not have been acting like that. And to say if I was like, oh, look at that, look at that dude crying and laughing and doing all this. I agree with you. I agree with you on LeBron. But I'm talking about most other NBA kids. Most these kids are in their early 20s. But most of those kids, most of those kids aren't the ones taking a stand. It's the bigger players and the league forcing them to take a stand. I don't know. I mean, why Kaepernick say let's go football. Yeah. Cat. Cat. He's cap. He's going to A Tony of Brown say about him. He's all cat. He's an indoor cat. He's not out there here in the street. Funny thing is, I was so pissed when the bug's lost in Tony of Brown. I know. Because he's like a trumpet football. I was so pissed. Like I love him. He's a trumpet football. He's so loud. Literally, no, he's like the Allen Iverson with the Donald Trump mix. Like to walk off the lady. He was up in the crowd. He was like, amazing. He was amazing. And somebody would definitely pick him up. When you have raw talent, instead of taking a big money, you're going to get picked up. some of them pick him up. You think? I don't think somebody should pick him up. He said the other day that he was, but not played just retired. He was a retiree of piss. I mean, he has the best hours of what I'm saying. Something happened with him in Brady. You know, Brady got him over the box. I don't know. I mean, I know he was living in Brady's house for a little bit. He were saying. Brady had to tell me Robins to try to get his mind right. But I saw videos of him going through with his girl on the line. And like sometimes, you know, I was signed to NFL football player before Thomas Jones. He's an NFL running back. You know, when everybody thinks rich white family of mine made my career, I was signed to NFL football player that got me started and put his money into me. That's why. That's a lot of people don't really know. That's my first deal. And that's really helped me. Who was it? Thomas Jones. He was running back for the bucks and chiefs, the bears. Me and him don't have any talking. I'm saying we're not cool with each other. But yeah, I'd matter his political beliefs or whatever. I would never shit on him. And they ever got on him because he gave me an opportunity when nobody would. I signed for free. I took the opportunity. He had me out here doing songs or French Montana, a little dark, had me living in his mansion driving his Rolls Royces, Aston Martin's. So when people think like, oh, it's mommy and daddy money, I was living with Thomas Jones. And the NFL football player, tell me, hey, I left. I'm late to practice. My Lamborghini broke down on the interstate. He could pick it up. Or, you know what I mean, I need you to watch this. So anybody who ever believes in you to put their own money and do you got to respect them. But the concussions and stuff are crazy. I know because I have conversations with Thomas Jones. He's similar to like the same build as Antonio. Oh really? Small guy. Kind of small. Like my high babe, but he's big. You know what I'm saying? He was from Virginia's family and mom were coal miners. Remember you call Montersano's chest. His brother was Julius Jones. He played for the Cowboys. But I learned a lot off seeing him. You know what I mean? I saw how much money he was getting, what he was spending. We go to the club. We didn't want to spend a couple stacks on rap who just bought 10 bands on bottles. You know, because it was just like the lifestyle of having, so my point was a lot of people in the football, they want to be rappers. So Antonio Brown, like deep down must be a rapper. He's got this song. I'm from the dirt and out the palace or something. The pit and out of the palace. And that joins hard. The video is hard. It's hard. I like it. I would do a feature with him. I think he would be pro-Trump. You know what I mean? I saw him. I love how he dropped it the minute he ran off the field. Yeah, I'm from New Zealand. You know, he's got a good PR guy. He's a marketer. Oh yeah. Probably said that. I mean, somebody else probably. But you know, the day is like when I was time the time is Jones, we used to have conversations and then he would just completely forget what we're talking about. Yeah. And say, well, my bad bro, what were we talking about? Yeah. Because they put their body on the line. Yeah. The point I was getting at before with like the younger guys, like in the NBA, for example, like when they put those big black lives matter things across the floor on each side of the court, and they put those things on the jersey, these kids who are like 19, 20 years old that are just like their dream is coming true. They're in the NBA or they're in the NFL. They're making almost, you know, say it's 500 grand to like $4 million for the first time in their lives. When I was 20 years old, I didn't know fuck all about politics. No, I didn't care. I didn't know about it either. I agree. It's all I tell people. So let me tell you, start making real money to get it and they're making real money. That's the first day they're in it. But if the company that's paying me a million dollars and making me famous and is fulfilling every dream and every other guy, and every other guy I'm playing with is doing the same thing. You think a trolley, Chris can't in me right now. I said, , I'm going to plug, give you half a million dollars. I'm making a song about me and push it. I'll do it. Yeah, but you're not these guys. You're selling every other guy and every other guy I'm playing with is doing the same thing. You think a trolley Chris can't in me right now. I said, blah, give you half a million dollars. I'll make a song about me and push it I do it. Yeah, but you're not these guys. You're different. You're you're 37 years old. You've learned you you're educated. You know what I said pay attention to things. These guys these guys have tunnel vision, but I'm they're focusing on basketball. Yeah, I'm agreeing with you. I'm agreeing with you is that it's the first opening, but I think that when you make your first amount of money When you really start to realize my taxes and do things the right way Take care whatever debt you have I feel like people start to mature when they start to get money So these guys are young just getting that check. I'm telling you like that like I'm agreeing with you It didn't wait till I was like 30 something to care about political stuff or care about what's going on It may take you to have a child. I know you have kids, but you have child to realize okay Well, I'm gonna pay attention more because this is has to go with my kids future or what's going on So I agree there in tunnel vision that is playing their sports, but the other people know I better and they should know I better I think they mature once you get the money and you lose it I think when you're young and you get the money it is sent you even even crazier down the image her lane I think I think I was able to paint such a crazy lifestyle when I almost didn't even have the money when I got the money Everything born to me and I'm able to like I was with Thomas Jones. I was with all this stuff. I seen this I don't been a show as I know the lifestyle was like Right now if I drove around in the Honda Civic like an old car People would think like what he's got some cars somewhere else. You know what I mean? I don't get the points. I always got a Rolls Royce like you said I will you know if you're not give you're different you know come on a trader like just because I came out of trade I mean I had to buy my Rolls Royce No one's this is gonna give you nothing the people got to realize that that's a lot of problem people are not gonna Now I've been blessed to see some nice things so I know what nice things feel like That's why a lot of my homeboys instead of giving them money. I'd say you can want to roll with me I'll take them to the show sometimes people only go five blocks their whole life Yeah, it's crazy. They know the corner store. They know where they go to the hoop the YMCA They know the street they got the clubs. They know their school. They know their neighborhood. They go they have this car wash They go the same five blocks at 10 blocks and then maybe one vacation the tower has to your mind Yeah, I got homies rolling our 30s and they're been on airplanes My airplane they were flying. I'm like yeah, they're like I ain't there but on a plane, bro Hop on a private plane. They're like nervous, you know, I mean jet, you know, it's like it's like changed people's lives the smallest thing Giving something a little opportunity instead of just knocking them down. I feel it's big You know then I do a lot of stuff for people and then I realize who's gonna make it through who's not Some people got all the time on the world as soon as I pull my plug on them back to square one Because they can't do it without somebody tell me you can do it and doing it for them. Yeah All you know here's rounded with thanks so I surrounded myself with some pretty well-known people some billionaires a couple million theirs and Nobody ever gave me a cent but they gave me hell of opportunity I took advantage all the opportunity I could get and takes 10 years to be overnight success So I'll go I'm 10 years in the game and people will get me like man You did it, but everyone's success is different so like what you might want to do with your life Might not be make money and do songs or rigrocks and no Donald Trump and driving ice cars and it might just be with peace I'm fine, which is cool. You know what I mean? Some people like want to rap they'd be like they would do anything just to get a million views Right or just to get a feature or even have a picture with a big name artist. Yeah, oh, man I want to meet Kodak I got a song with Kodak. It's cool. I wrote with Kodak, but it's not like my daily thing That's not like when I did the stuff of Ross I wanted to like that was like my dream Then when I got done with it. I was like, what's next? I talk about it here and there But that was like my pitch at one time. I think I saw a rock I'm saying I do music take me serious the Mago lane doesn't care about a song request Didn't care about that. That's not my pitch the pitch is like what are you changing? What are you doing for the country? So when a lot of these other people hit me up still to do features that like why you charging for a versus? I'm a patriot like you ain't spent $250,000 like I did. You know, I mean you're not invested You didn't take a career risk. You see it working. I never seen you out of Trump rally I have never seen you in the streets I never seen you out here with people doing I just want to sit on your camera with a green screen of shoes music videos and go Viro up what we're doing. I'm not rocking with that Get out there and your city. I'm not going to a different state taking that route I do my own rallies here. I took my truck and started saying hey, buddy want to come come I started getting thousands of people showing up so many people they were nervous and had to delete me Because they're trying to say that it's a cult because you can form a group of people that could go do something They could maybe do harm to people. That's why we have to delete you pretty much So it's not so much your political views. It's that you're telling thousand people to show up somewhere and you're demanding that you guys take the country back and It words Take the country back doesn't mean I'm gonna go run on the White House tomorrow. It means I went to the country back Oh in the vice-archal they said something about a song that you did that you were saying like let's go to war or something What was that song? There's a song I have now for my boy Enrique who was locked up and it just said The Patriots be ready for war Right, but it's just like tell mom I'm coming home. It's like any big song. I wore could be anything We are at war. We're not at war. We're gonna go hurt somebody. We're just fighting We're at war with each other. Not so much at each other. Where does that war fight for our freedom? We feel freedom of speech is gone. It's like people could take anybody's words and flip them into something else You know what I mean? They can take it in the room with how they want to run with it So they try to make a big thing out of it and not I didn't really like that They asked me about it because they want to me to be like yes war time. What's up? Like you know what I mean? Which I want to do. I'm ready for whatever to make trouble ready for war Yeah, I'm ready for what they stole our election and we're ready to take the next one back right Not saying that I'm ready to go get a bunch of guns and start a whole war Yeah, but that's how they try to take like little things you do and make it a Yeah, like well, what about you know six nine I'll shoot you in your face, right? Talk to him. Yeah, but and be a young boy You know I'm saying what about all these rappers that are wrapped and actually getting killed in their own cities Yeah, and then they're pussy because they don't got security. What about dawg? Yeah, that's crazy That's a crazy thing See dawg I got a lot of love for dawg because he's independent with it He was grinding like me built it up from the bottom I've watched documentaries where they said that he had people who might have investors and this and that doesn't matter He has somebody somebody wants to invest in you. That's amazing Me to tell me I got you made a song or didn't he make a song? He was like some people try to kill him and he is they be made a whole song basically making fun of him for not We have a hundred shots whole you missed out how the hell you miss a whole other shots But that's how he was up, you know we you got to put that that that that that That persona on when you want to be that dude, right? When I go to DC I'm not out there like oh man I'm from the internet. Everybody's gonna see me. Someone's not gonna like me. Oh, there's being a lemon better go. I'm outside What's up? You'll kill me and broad daylight and I'm going out like this that's how I'm gonna go out I can't you don't know when your time's coming you just got to live But all these other people that just have all these opinions are not even there I don't want to hear it. You're not there. You're not seeing these people You don't know me personally to know my life story. How much shit I got to go through how much free money I really get You know, I mean I you think if I was getting free checks out be I hear selling baseball caps and say mag on them and my t-shirts My CDs think I give a shit if someone that said here's millions of dollars man. Thank I care about my country No, I'd be one street away at the beach chillin all day not caring about nothing. I built an empire I built a brand. I got to stand for something. I got people that look to me and say blood was next They can't go to Trump They might never meet Trump in their life, but they're gonna meet me at a rally. Yeah, so they look at me as like yo Well blows here and I got respect for blows. I got a lot of people dependent on me. I can't stop Yeah, man. I don't know. I think I Think if anything anyone's realized over the last over the since the time that Trump Left and Biden's come in. I think what it's done is sort of like shown how much of a fucking mind virus the woke shit is You know, I think there's more there's more independent people coming up You know the mainstream media people don't trust it as much There's more independent people like us that are coming up doing their own whatever it might be podcast or like interview shows or documentary series On YouTube or or whatever it might be mostly podcast of come up more than a crazy podcast and and everybody can There's no gatekeepers you can just you can have a voice talk about whatever the fuck you want for now for now Yeah, because they there was no gatekeepers are rapid one-time You know when the very beginning there was a gatekeeper with rap like being independent labels But I don't have a label. I'm billboard and going on charts. I was a selling yeah, but in the beginning early there was labels like there was Labels, but I'm saying I'm just trying to yeah, I'm just trying to say well back then it was like that 20 artists They gave you 20 artists right DMX we got jacket at R&B and these people you're gonna listen to we got camera on Yeah, I said that was law whatever they get no limit whatever they put in front of you was law You had a plan one or six in part gave you 10 songs at the 10 songs you can put on a CD and book right now Like your now you listen whatever you want so I think podcast is grown I just feel like at one time They're gonna make it so like oh he can't talk about this anymore. This can't be on Apple. Oh, I already doing that I feel like they're gonna start Monter terrain and be a little bit of a gatekeeper what they're doing I think this is the best thing ever if you have a podcast talking about how much you love or hate Trump or politics or me At least you're doing something with your wife. I'm all for you right Okay, everybody can have their own opinion, but I feel like when I have my own opinions a big problem Yeah, like I said, I think the big biggest thing that's getting exposed and sort of like getting hung out to dry Is the woke shit. I don't know. Maybe that just is just me No, I think it is I think I think across the board I think people on the left are starting to realize how much of a fucking mind virus that was thousand percent I got people that hit me up now that my blue were you banned? I'm like my IG got deleted. They're like damn Yeah, like what I'm like yeah, they banned me for social media. Yeah, yeah Yeah, they went too far with that man feel me that's that what they say Mm-hmm. They went too far banning you should have been able to talk how you want to talk Have you heard have you heard of the thing called have you heard of horseshoe theory? So there's this podcast I heard this girl on this podcast called the IDG podcast It's fucking great and she brings up this thing called horseshoe theory and Basically, it's the story of the bootlegger and the Baptist or I think it's the Baptist and the bootlegger What are the Baptist and the bootlegger having comment? They both want alcohol to be illegal The Baptist wants it to be illegal for moral and religious reasons the bootlegger wants it to be illegal So he can make money selling it right? So the KKK and woke leftists There's a the KKK and the woke they both want segregation There was the story of a school in Colorado They had a playground where they they'd pick a certain time of day every week for children of color to play I swear to God it's a real story. You could probably find it find it Austin find the school I got to find you whoever giving you your TV show you to put me on three different shows Check out bro. There's still watching those are there's the legit school in Colorado who has a time of day every week for children Of children of color to play only that's terrible. It's fucking segregation. So it's a horseshoe theory. That's what the KKK wants That's terrible. How fucking crazy is that that's terrible Anyways, that's horseshoe theory and it fucking blew my mind when I but I like the idea You know they want to be able to sell the alcohol. They want it for more reasons. Yeah Yeah, completely completely opposite ends of the spectrum. They come to the same fucking conclusion. Wow, so this is Colorado enter elementary school accused of segregation over playground for families of color This is legit. Yeah, it's legit Scroll up awesome. What's the parents the parents aren't they want to fit about this? This is okay? This is daily mail Scroll down Denver Colorado elementary school has sparked outrage with segregated playtime for families of color at its playground The centennial elementary school organized the equity event for families of color to gather and play on December 8th But critics out. Yeah, but it's a real fucking thing. I don't know. They're still doing it. They're not still doing it I'm not doing it. I'm not doing it. I'm not doing the message somebody had the idea today. What was this from? 2021 yeah How fucking wild is that that's what we that's what we I think it we're still having problems no matter what with everything Nothing's ever gonna be all the way done right, but that's just disgusting that we still have people that think like that Yeah, you know, that's what people don't think I try to tell people magga has no color Like I told you I came in here. They're all like oh, they're good blow their white supremacists My all my friends are black and they're transporters Mm-hmm and if they're kind of the white boys that I'm with they're still urban white boys like myself They don't show that on these these messages, you know, vice in that I was with two black people for my vice interview They didn't put them in there Yeah, man, they're all they're trying to they're saying it was there with me at the photo shoot They didn't talk about us blow in two of his friends America talks about how much they said you drink gallons of Dr. Pepper every day. Yeah I told them I was on it really no no He said blow who drinks gallons of Coke and Dr. Pepper every day and he's because they yeah I go to Hoolders every day But they said I was making a bet with my friend if I had a soda. I got pay $1,000 But I told them I don't drink it because they were like was gonna drink and I could the lady the reporter She smoked so she was like you got a weed no my gosh smoke and they were like, you know You don't do drugs they came for three days and they left two days day early because I wasn't entertaining enough Yeah, then they wanted to come to my house and they were mad at it when I come to my house in the long run You did let them come to your house. But should I let them cut should I go to their house? Reason so it was Easter and I forgot it was Easter and I had my whole family there Oh really so I was like my family said Easter on the edge of my house. What do you need to cut in my house for? Yeah You're already writing a hit smash piece on me right I took you to the studio took it in my cars They said they wanted to see some cars. I pull six seven cars up tell where you want me to meet you do a vlog But you want to come in my house for where you gonna put in my house and leave there Yeah, you're need to cut in my house. I'll know you like that Yeah, but I was gonna let them come but they didn't understand they were pissed about that were they really yeah They were pissed about it, but I had my sister who came in town Her husband or my nephew's my mom I had about ten people in town. I forgot it was Easter Sunday because I'm you know, you guys work like me You're not thinking like oh, I got a holiday called up. You're just working then everybody's like yo It's a holiday you're like oh, okay So I'll be there and there was an issue whenever like they were kind of I think pissed off about it Why you need to kind of my house when I see why I take a shit Maybe they wanted to fucking bug it party going to hang out in the pool or something I wanted to bug it the bug or bug your house who knows what they wanted to do. Yeah. Well, bro. Thanks for doing this man I sweep my rules of race after they got out of every bug did you really But a role that's they run over sweetness joy for me one time dude is funny if you really comment on any vice video now It's just like they fucking any any post vice does especially on Instagram just read the fucking comments that it's shit on So I enjoy it. I enjoyed that you know people like you know even someone like you know me and you might have every Same view, but we could still be cool See each other four years later and still be like, you know I'm not saying you like Trump or not, but you might not be a die hard Trump or whatever Well, you could still be like I like blow he can cut on my podcast Oh, yeah, and chop it up with me and have a cuz you know Discussion about stuff that's you know people don't do that these days. So I appreciate you guys appreciate the listeners Appreciate everyone the watching or listening where they can find your shit if they don't already know Oh YouTube for gout a blow F o r g I a t o blow and then Instagram It's may or blow and Forjout a blow us save or some merch and they show you follow these boys. They're doing a good job I mean, I know y'all are huge, but I remember back when you were working with Ben and all these people y'all were doing our thing and It's as great to see you guys like get out of that situation Whatever and then still keep your stuff because I feel like when people start they have like a key factor with their building off Yeah, for sure that's what y'all you got to find somebody that's why some people come to me It's like he's entertaining whatever thought that was super cool when y'all started doing your own thing and look where it's building Man, it's like y'all doing y'all the next thing up. I feel thanks man. I really appreciate that. All right goodbye everybody