Go Roman Ryan! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night! All day! How are you man? Good to see you again. Good. Thanks for having me back, man. My pleasure. You made another awesome one, man. This, uh, the Krishna's one. Oh my God. Whoo! There is something about these cult documentaries. Right? This is just... Right. Whoo! That one's heavy. Do you remember the Hare Krishna devotees in the airports? Because you're like me, like you're old enough of that generation that you might remember the white robe, like... I remember the flowers. And they'd be selling books and shit in the airports. I don't remember, no, if I remember them in the airports, I remember them in some places. Yeah. I never have seen them, you know? Yeah. But, um... Yeah, I just always thought they were just cooks, you know? It's just... It's interesting, you know, knowing what I know now about the sixties and, you know, what was done to sort of... to kind of crush the hippie movement. Right. You know, it's interesting to see that this was... connected to, you know, the Beatles and Peace and Love, and then you see this sect that this... What was his name again? The Kirtananda. Yes. Was the guru that went... Right, went way wrong. Yeah, went way wrong. Yeah. But it is... Well, let's just get into from the beginning... How did you get involved in this particular subject? So there's a production company, Marwar Junction, and they had actually sold this show to Peacock, and they were looking for a director. So this is the first show that I've made or helped to make that I haven't been involved in the sort of conception, the story from the jump. So they had developed the story and sold to Peacock, and they were shopping for a director, and they liked my work, and so they hired me to make it. And so did you have any experience with the Christians before this? No. No. And I had a lot... You know, like a lot of people, had a lot of misconceptions about them. Like I thought that the Hare Krishna movement was invented in America in the 1960s. I just had it associated with the sort of the hippie movement. You know, that's not the truth of it at all. It's like actually a spiritual tradition that dates back thousands of years, like far predates Christianity. It's based in these ancient spiritual texts called the Vedas. Mm-hmm. You know, the written version is at least 3,500 years old, and the oral tradition goes back thousands of years beyond that. So I learned a lot about, you know, the Krishna consciousness and the making of this. And this show is about a particularly dark chapter in the history of the movement and the 70s and 80s that I don't think is a representative of the movement like today. Like I think it's a force for good in the world today, actually. Yeah. I think the principles behind it, if you pay attention to the main guru, what was the older job of being proud of? Yeah. Yeah. My friend Duncan loves that guy. Yeah. And what the whole concept behind it sounds beautiful, you know, it's all just love and, you know, relinquishing your possessions and the whole that they have on you and just living this very peaceful, loving life and not just forgiving your enemies, but letting them into your home. And it's all that sounds great. But all it takes is one psycho. Yeah. One psycho. Well, probably took a risk. I mean, so Prabapad was a guru. So several gurus, Krishna consciousness gurus had come over from India to the U.K. or to the U.S. you know, in the 1800s even then through the first half of the 20th century and had no luck because their timing wasn't right or they weren't the right person or both. But Prabapad was the right dude at the right time. He showed up in Greenwich Village, New York City, 1965 and started preaching Krishna consciousness. And it just like, you know, took off like wildfire. And you know, like Alan Ginsburg got down with it. It wasn't maybe a full-scale devotee, but like he was hanging out with them. And but Prabapad was already an old dude when he showed up in the U.S. And so in 1977 he died. So it's 12 years. And by that time, Krishna consciousness, there were like Krishna temples all over the country and in the U.K. because George Harrison had converted. Right. That was one of his like strokes of brilliance. Bobapad is he like sent a group of devotees to go camp out outside the Apple records office and just like chant and dance until they basically got a meeting with the Beatles. And he was literally like, let's see if we can make the Beatles, you know, Krishna's. And with Harrison it took, you know, that song my sweet lord. I mean, that's what it's about. That's about Krishna consciousness. Yeah. So, but when Prabapad died in 1977, you know, he hadn't had a lot of time to build up successors. And most of the most of the leaders of the movement were young or most of the members of the movement were young. So he took a risk and I don't think he had a choice. And he appointed 11 of his closest longest time devotees, all men, to be the gurus that would carry the movement forward. And while you could say that it worked and that Krishna consciousness is still around this bigger than ever, a few of those, these are dudes, these are like dudes in their 20s. Okay. That suddenly are being worshipped as direct conduits to the divine. In other words, treated as gods on earth. Yeah. And some of them were not spiritually prepared for that. Yeah. It would be a kind way to put it. And some of them went wrong and one of them particular, Kirito Nana, whose, you know, government name was Keith Ham. Went really wrong. I like the term government name. Yeah. Well, that is a thing that they always do, right? They give them spiritual names. Yeah, you were a link wish here. Yeah. You're original existence. Yeah. To take a Christian name. There's a place out here. You know, I built a comedy club and before I got the spot that I have now on six-street, I bought a place called the One World Theater. And the One World Theater was owned by a cult. And it's a beautiful theater and I heard about it from my friend Ron White. Because I was telling him, you know, I think we should open up a comedy club. And he said, you should buy that theater. It was owned by a cult. And I was like, that would be hilarious. By a theater that was owned by a cult. And there's a documentary on them called Holy Hell. Okay. And it's the same sort of day. Yeah, I know that. I know that. Yeah. So they start off. It seems wonderful in the beginning. Everyone's doing yoga. They're hanging out together, cooking meals together and dancing. And like, it seems like all cults, it goes sideways. Yeah. Yeah. In the beginning, it looks like a wonderful idea. Like society sucks the way, you know, the modern world, the way it's set up materialism. It's all foolish and spiritually vacant. There's a way to do this and the way to live. And this is the way. And everybody joins and then Waco comes along and the cult awareness network starts investigating this guy. And so he changes his name for the third time. His name is Jaime Gomez. He was a gay porn star and a hypnotist. Right. So he led a rich life. Yeah. So he was he was already on a certain path. And then starts this play. He changed his name again. And he changes name to like, I forget there's two different names. One wish Michelle and I forget what the other one was. So he changes name again, moves to Austin and starts this cult and has his followers build him this theater so he can dance in front of them. And that was the place that I bought. But it was all fucked up and we wound up getting out of the deal. And because there was like a lot of problems and a lot of issues that had to be resolved with the property. And they didn't disclose that. So I got out of it and then got this place on six street. But you know, in the process, I really started investigating the cult. And I didn't investigate it unfortunately before I signed contracts. And I kind of called for my friend Adam. And did you watch the documentary on the cult? I was like, oh no, whatever the documentary on the cult, it's generally a cult that went bad. And this one went bad. And but it was the same sort of deal. They all got names. They were all given, you know, spiritual names. And they were told that you're reborn. Yeah. Reborn in this new persona. Well, even in the 60s and 70s, I don't think it's it'd be fair to call Christian consciousness of cult, but the way that this, so this guy Kiera's in a non that one of the 11, you know, disciples that Pabupada pointed to carry on the movement. He already had a commune up in the hills of West Virginia. There's still there. That's called New Verndavent because the city of Verndavent in India is the sort of mythical birthplace of that cult. That compound is still there. Still there. Yeah. But it's not a cult. It's not a cult. And it's like right now, I've been there twice. And like today, again, it's like it's a really like positive place with a great virtual vibe. But when Kiera's in on was in charge, the 70s and 80s, like some really dark shit went on down. How did they turn it around? Well, like, well, it finally like his followers turned on him, you know, and is con, which is the international society for Christian consciousness, which is sort of the formal name for the heart of Christians, but we call the heart of Christian is they actually like, you know, kicked the new Verndavent out of the movement for a few years, half a decade or so. And gradually brought that compound, that communist not compound, that commune back in. But they had this fucking temple there, the palace of gold, the public pods, the palace of gold that they were originally building for public, probably to live in. But then he died before it was completed. But it's like this, it's like this Taj Mahal-esque structure that's in that's in that's in kind of the middle of nowhere in the hills of West Virginia. I mean, it's just, you know, it's like a couple of hours from Pittsburgh, basically, and up in the mountains. And so God, that's beautiful. Look at the images. And these are like untrained, you know, disciples making this just based on like ancient texts that they studied. So they just figured out how to do all this artisanship. Yeah. That's amazing. Yeah. It really is. It's worth visiting for sure. It's, it's, it's mind blowing. Oh, there's a big box of cash. And so yeah. And so, but this place, I mean, even, even now it's like it's, it's, it's, well, for sure in the 60s, for sure in the 70s, it was cut off from the rest of the world. I mean, these young kids would join the Hare Christian movement. And basically a lot of the fuckups in the movement would get sent to Kirtan and Nanda at New Vondavan because he'd put him to work building the temple, right? So if you like join and you were like, you know, not fitting in for some reason, a lot of times they'd buy you one way bus ticket to like Morgan Towner Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. And you'd lined up up there, you know, in the hills under Kirtan Nanda's tutelage, right? Which is, which is, and that it went, it went sideways in a hurry up, especially after Pueblo Pod died. He was already running New Vondavan like Pueblo Pod had visited it and approved of it. And actually Kirtan Nanda had gotten booted out of the Christian movement because he kind of tried to take it over. And a certain point like Pueblo Pod, you know, kicked him out and Keith Amm, Kirtan Nanda, like mind fuck this, this local sort of like philosopher dude that owned the land in the, in the signing it over promising to be like a non-denominational spiritual movement. That's what he was doing. And as the guy put it, we interviewed his daughter. And he said, you know, as soon as the lease was signed, they put on bed sheets and started chanting, right? And so you got the heart of your Christian as your neighbors. Right. Yeah. Yeah. It's, the documentary is really well done. Thanks. It's like, just like Sasquatch. I mean, you do some awesome stuff. But it's, it's so fascinating to watch these alternative sort of movements get co-opted and how that can happen by the wrong sort of charismatic psycho, right? And that's this. How do you say his name Keaton Nanda? Keaton Nanda, Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. Keaton Nanda. He came up with all these Christian names that are making this documentary. It was like, you know, how much research did you have to do about the movement getting into it? Quite a bit. Before you sit down and start doing interviews with devotees, like you want to know at least a little bit about what you're talking about. And I went to, we filmed in Vrndavin in India. That's how the project, that's how I started the project. Like I signed on, I signed on to the director gig and like two weeks later I was in India. What was that like? Hey, James, can we get the coffee in here? Well, one thing about Vrndavin India is the fucking monkeys. Okay, there are these monkeys that will steal your shit. And it's a whole racket, right? The monkeys will be something back. Yeah, and of course we're like knocking around with bags full of lenses and camera gear and audio gear and stuff. And so we're a target rich in opacity for these monkeys. But they'll get your sunglasses, your phone, whatever if you're not careful. And then they like sort of skitter up a drain pipe or a tree. And you got to buy these like frozen mango packs from the street vendors and like throw them up to the monkeys and the monkeys will drop your shit back down to you. I'm convinced that the street vendors are in on it, right? That it's like this. It's probably our thing. Yeah, so they probably are. Yeah. Very least it's so strange that the monkeys know that you can barter. Yeah, they learned. Yeah, you can make a deal. Yeah. The legend is that hundreds of years ago, this guy that was like he brought a circus of Vrndavin and the monkeys came with him and they were trained to be pickpockets and then they just kind of stayed behind but I don't know if that's true or not. But that's the local legend. Is that, but there's hundreds of them, thousands of them, man. I mean, they're everywhere. And you got to watch, you got to be constantly have your head on a swivel because they are so quick. And what do they live off of? Do they just live off of what the people give them? I don't know. They probably scavenge, but also like they do get a lot of like, you know, mango treats from Stanley's ship because the Balaraman deer, which is like the head, Harry Christian to Temple is in Vrndavin India. And so devotees from all over the world go there like a spiritual tourist basically. And so, you know, monkeys still ship from them or any other, you know, there's a lot of Krishna devotees from all over India too. They don't necessarily quote, unquote, Harry Christians, but like follow the Hindu deity Krishna. So they come to, it's like a, you know, there's a lot of spiritual pilgrims to this city. All right, there's a lot of spiritual tourism there. And so the monkeys have a lot of targets. And so when they steal your stuff, you have to throw it to them. You got to buy something and then throw it up to them. And then they will relinquish it. Sometimes they'll be like, nope, nope, that's a cell phone. That's a three mango pack deal, dude. You got it. They won't, you know, they'll be like, oh, thanks. And they'll like, go like they're gonna drop it too. They'll be like, oh, how about I drop it in the sewer? Oh, you don't want that mango pack. So they're going to point to the mangoes? Yes. Yes. So eventually you throw them enough treats. And they're like, and they're, these kids too, that if they see that a monkey has stolen something, they'll come over and they'll be like, for a few, basically it's like for a few rupees, I'll handle this deal for you. And then they climb up the tree or the drain pipe, and they do a direct hand to hand exchange. Wow. So we learn the hard way. That's the thing to do. If the monkey steals the, whatever, hire the kid, he goes and brokers the deal with the mango juice guy, you know, and makes it all happen for you. So do other monkeys realize this is happening and try to steal the mangoes before it gives it to them? But they also, they also cooperate too. Like they'll run like, you know, distraction operations. Like one monkey will come out here from an angle and kind of like bluff charge. And then you pay attention to that one and then boom, the other one like grabs your sunglasses off your head. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. But we were there to film. There's this ceremony. These two brothers, whose father, his name was Chaka Dara, his Christian name, his government name, was Charles St. Dennis. His name is known as Chaka in the movement. And his sons were doing this really ancient ritual to sort of release the soul of someone who's been murdered. And so they had their father's ashes, which he was murdered, you know, decades ago at New Vondavan by on orders from Kirtan and Nanda because he was challenging Kirtan Nanda's authority. So Kirtan and Nanda had people murdered too, more than one? Yeah. I think there's probably quite a few bodies up in the hills just don't know about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. One of the one of the principal sources for the documentary is a guy's retired homicide cop named Thomas Westfall, who was a local, just a local cop in West Virginia when the Christian is set up shop at the New Vondavan commune. And so he started keeping a close eye on him early and sort of saw Kirtan Nanda's rise to power. And you know, he believes that there's at least a handful more victims up there. The bodies haven't been found. Because it's really remote country. I mean, I want stress that's really cold in the winter. There's a lot of snow. You know, to this day, it's a difficult place to get to. And so this guy, when he first started running this temple, this area, how long did Kirtan Nanda take for one sideways? Well, I think it was, the question with Kirtan Nanda or Keith Ham is always like, was he bent before, you know, he became a Krishna? Or was it like, did the power get to him? And I think it's both. You know, I think he had a psychological disposition towards being a despot, if you will. And then once PowerPod was gone and he was, and Kirtan Nanda, along with 10 of his compatriots, was appointed a guru, you know, and had that sort of power. I think at that point, it's and combined with like all the money. I mean, he was, he was, he had this guy. That was, he was, Kirtan Nanda was a genius at running schemes and scams to make money. He would dispatch like the hottest, young female Krishna devotees to like stock car races and rock concerts and stuff to like raise money for whatever. They just make it up. The starving children of India, or they just make up charities. And they'd flirt with dudes, you know, especially at rock concerts, guys that are like, hi, and get them to give them cash. A dollar here, five bucks here, 10 bucks there. They'd work at airports too. But and they just brought in literally like garbage bags full of cash, you know, every week. Wow. And they, and he trained them to deposit it in $9,900 increments. So it doesn't deploy the reporting. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. So he was, he looks crazy. That's what's interesting. Isn't it interesting that like crazy people look crazy? And I always, I always try to say, OK, is this because you know he's crazy? Or do you see something? It's hard to tell. But he doesn't seem enlightened. Right. You look at him. He looks like a guy who's a little unhinged. And I've met people like that unhinged. And I've met people like that in like the psychedelics movement. And there's a, there's a few of these movements that are so open. And basically anybody can become a part of it. You know, the concept behind it is, you know, we're all seeking enlightenment. We're all, but then you'll see someone who gets in there. And you're like, what is this guy's a schizophrenic or something? Right. There's something going on here. Especially looking photos of Kirito and Anda over the decades. Like he just gets more and more and more demented. Right. And that has to probably be the power. Right. Yeah. The Washington's feet and worship. Yeah. He was molesting kids there. You know, yeah. But that's, he was a total pedophile. Right. Do you think that's started that he was always a pedophile? I think pedophiles are always pedophiles, you know, but again, once he had like access as, as the movement went on, yeah, more and more Krishna couples had kids. Right. So he had access to more and more and more children up there, you know, in those hills. Right. And that was one of the things that you highlight is that it wasn't just about releasing the possessions. It was also like not having your children, not having control of your children either. Yeah. Yeah. Although I think they, um, especially at New Vondov at the place that Kirtan and Nanda ran, they kind of took that belief, you know, that, yes, children are a material attachment. Right. Um, but he took it to an extreme and just basically just cut off, you know, kids from their parents, like entirely. And that was not unique to New Vondov and that happened in a lot of temples around the country in the US, but it's kind of, feel you happen to get it. It did. It did. It did. And it was like the Catholic church once the evidence started to emerge that there had been, I think it's fair to say, systemic, you know, raping of kids at their religious facilities. They addressed the issue head on. And for the most part, I think I've done an excellent job of, you know, weeding out the petos and being, you know, kids. Because it's not just that it, it seems like it wasn't isolated. It was all the kids. At New Vondov and yeah, this is what you're kind of mostly boys, I think. Mostly boys. Yeah. Yeah. They are, they have communities online and there's a lot of, um, there's a lot of bitterness. You know, it varies. It varies. You can't totally generalize. But, you know, the kids that grew up in New Vondov and, you know, they have online communities where there's a lot of, like, obvious reasons, like resentment and bitterness and anger. Yeah, I have to do that. Still at the leadership of the Hari Christian Movement for not in there. Opinion, you know, fully atoning for the sins that occurred there. What could they do? All right. Well, there was a settlement, there was some lawsuits or some settlements, but I mean, you know, that's only a difference. No, no, no, no. I mean, you didn't fix anything. The technology that something happened, you're ruining a child for life. Yeah. Yeah. And doing it in the most evil way, because you're supposed to be a part of this peace and love movement that's like the optimal way to live life. Right. Yeah. Well, and that's why this guy, Charles St. Dennis, Chaka was murdered. Is he, he was calling out Kirito Nanda for his hypocrisy. Now, I don't know if he called him out for the, you know, rape and kids, but, like, Kirito Nanda was having, like, gay sexual relationships with some, with some laborers that had been hired to come help build the temple. It weren't necessarily devotees. And it was like an open secret, you know, in the commune. And he called him out for it and also called him out for the materialism for, like, driving around in a limousine for having, like, you know, they would buy him a new, you know, fancy SUV every year or whatever. You know, Charles St. Dennis called him on his bullshit publicly. And that's what got him killed. Wow. Yeah. Fuck, man. It's, I know quite a few people that grew up in cults, you know, in standup comedy, you deal with a lot of, like, lost people, like, wayward folks that just didn't fit in anywhere in society. And a couple of my friends, one of my good friends grew up at Jehovah's Witness. And, you know, it's just, you, you live in this world that is this very strange sort of, I mean, it just doesn't make any sense. It's a logical, it's crazy. It doesn't fit it. And once you start questioning things, you find like you're not allowed to. And it's, it's just very bizarre how many of these. Like, how's how in a conversation with Mark and Driesen, you know, the venture capitalist guy. And he was like, California still has a lot of active cults right now. I was like, really? He goes, oh, yeah, there's a lot. So, like, just ones you don't hear about where they kind of keep it together. Right. So I guess there's like, cults have to go completely, like, holy hell sideways before you get a documentary. Right. Some of them, they figure out how to kind of keep everybody together. It's probably harder to, to keep shit under wraps these days than it was for a kid to Menanda in the 70s and 80s. Well, the internet. Yeah. For sure. Everybody's got a phone and yeah. It's also like, people are much more aware of what a cult is now. Right. A bed in the 1960s, it just seemed like a beautiful alternative to, you know, I mean, you're dealing with this civil rights movement, Jim Crow, anti-war movement, Vietnam is happening. You've got Richard Nixon's the president, as well as chaos. They don't, people don't want the world that's in front of them right now. And they're searching for some alternative and it comes along. What about love? What about this? Yeah, that's what I want. And then, you know, you're wrapped up in this thing. Yeah. You know, I talking about the pedophilia stuff. It's going to take this on a deep, deep tour because there's something I wanted to say last time I was on your show, which is that I am convinced that you saved at least one kid's life with something that you said the last time I was on, which is that we were talking about my own experiences as a survivor of childhood sexual assault. And you told a story about how when you were a kid, you were in a library and this like sick fuck pedophile guy like was trying to get you out of the library and a librarian stepped in and basically saved you from this guy. Do I have that? Yeah, absolutely. Okay. The reason that I think you saved at least one kid's life is this because, and again, speaking from first-hand experience, as a male survivor, especially of childhood sexual assault, you think like, how could I have let that happen to me? Why didn't I defend myself? Why didn't I fight the guy off? You know, even though intellectually you look at a seven, eight, nine-year-old boy, you're like, you got no chance against a grown man. Right. But for, you know, Joe Rogan to say like a librarian saved me from this happening to me. Right? You're a tough guy. Okay. I think right. Right now. Right now. Right now. Right. Right. Right. But, but I hope I'm articulating my point, which is that you know, guys, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and for a guy that's like suffering that and thinking like, why didn't, you know, it just helps when, when somebody in a position like yourself, you know, says like, you know, could have happened to me. Easily. You know, it almost is. I mean, I was on my way out the door. Right. And I think that if that librarian hadn't called out my name, I think about that all the time. You know, what would have happened to me? What, who I would have become, you know, it's, um, it's one of the darkest forces in, in the world, like this. And I don't understand why it's so prevalent. I just like, and I think, you know, I've equated it to vampires that it seems like one of things that happens to some of the people that get molested as they wind up doing it to others. Yeah. And that is a harsh truth. I mean, I try and do what I can to dispel the stereotype because, you know, that was one of the things that, you know, scared the shit out of me when I was a teenager is the idea that I was going to become a pedophile myself. Right. Right. Um, but yeah, it's unfortunate. So you know, it's that hurt people hurt people. Yeah, right. Yeah, there's truth behind it. It is with violence. It is with everything. With someone It's in it. You pedophilia, which, let's just call it what it is. Raping kids is just an incredibly destructive force in our culture and in all cultures. And I just like, it's the one kind of criminal. I think that I just had absolutely no sympathy for no or do I not know most people feel the same way. I mean, when you talk about like, um, one of my daughters is very much against the death penalty. And I think for good reason. And because we've had conversations about people that are unjustly accused and she knows that I've had many people on my podcast that spent a long time in jail for crimes that they didn't commit and the, and some of them were on death row. And they, they could have been executed. And I said, when we were talking about it, we said in a perfect scenario when you absolutely know that the law has got the right person and that this person has done something and then they have killed people whether it's a serial killer or whatever it is. Yeah, maybe the death penalty makes sense. But we don't have a perfect legal system. Right. But, and then the, the subject of child molesters came up and they were like, Oh, no, kill them all. Everybody's, you know, it's almost like an instinctual react. Yeah, it's an, especially my, my wife mothers, you know, they hear that and it's just like, that's the one. Like you, you have to kill them because they never fucking stop. No, they don't. They never stop. It's a weird sickness. It's a, it's just so strange that it's not a very, very rare uncommon thing. You know, that like exists, like in a handful of places in the world occasionally. Yeah. But then when you hear about something like the Catholic church, you know, there was a Pope Benedict when he got kicked out. There was a lot of people that didn't understand what was going on. And I was looking into it and you, you, you find out what that guy did. And one of the things that he did that's so evil is he would move people. So he would take a priest that was molesting kids and just move him to another unsuspecting place. And he went on to molest. So he would take a priest that was molesting kids and just move him to another unsuspecting place and He went on to molest one of these guys that they caught went on to molest 100 death kids It least 100 that they're that they're aware of and just go like and he knew that this guy was a pedophile and it's just The Catholic Church in particular is just like I went to Catholic school and nothing happened to me and but things did happen to People that I know that did go to Catholic school. It's just like is there another religion that is more connected like when you hear the term Catholic priest pedophile is right like if you if you were playing a game like Catholic priest pedophile You know like you would say that, you know if you're what is that charades? What's that game? when you know like you say you know Tough big runs fast football player. Yes, you know like you'd say Catholic priest pedophile, you know what I'm saying? It's like it was an open secret for so long, too. You know yeah, it's crazy I think a lot of that priest were probably drawn to the church for the access to kids I mean in church in ananda a new Vondav and built himself a little pedophile heaven up there, you know once he had the power So how did they? Did you talk to anybody From there that kind of reformed that place like how did they? Once they got rid of him well first of all he finally went to prison for murder For calm, you know murder for hire basically along with racketeering and like he was he was selling like counterfeit You know football hats and shit. I mean he's still in jail. I know he's dead. He's dead But he still has like within not within is con but within the larger sort of Christian a consciousness movement he still has He still has a falling and I went I went to his tomb that's in Vondav and India and Had you know like a translator kind of fixed it with me I had one camera guy and we sort of bullshit our way in and it was this creepy fucking place man. It was like this They sort of like almost Soviet block looking apartment. There's all half finished like there was his tomb and there were flowers and incense and photos of him and stuff and It's basically after he got out of prison He eventually as an old man and he went to India and Pakistan and like drew a following of like Pakistani and boys basically that are now men in their 20s and 30s and they occupy this sort of compound around his tomb and The one that we sort of bullshit away passed was starting to get like a little suspicious of what we were doing and of our story Which is like that we were just tourists basically that had sort of wondered by this Place and we're interested by it and all these dudes just started coming out of these they look like vacant buildings But they clearly weren't you know all these like follows are curtoned on and the translator's like it's time to go now time to go now Yeah, time to go now and so you know we boogie out of there Wow Yeah, but he still has like followers and frankly even within is Khan he still has sort of quiet supporters Jesus Yeah, yeah in holy hell they talk about this guy that they kicked out He's still on the loose and they they flew him to Hawaii and He started to call them Hawaii and in the documentary they show him in Hawaii with his devotees Taking him around open the door for him whole deal. Okay It's so strange the cult thing is so bizarre because it's so it's so common And it's it just seems like there's so many people that want to be led By someone who has the answers this most people are like you and I they're like try to do our best live our life Fuck up making mistakes try to figure out what makes you happy like what's this all about? What is life? What are we doing here? Yeah, and for some when someone comes along to I have the answers You're like oh guys get the answers. I need the fucking answers like what are the answers and yeah I will say you know I spent a lot of time with with Harry Christian in the through with Krishna consciousness devotees You know they're making that show and generally speaking they are Positive peaceful souls. They seem at peace with their place in the world in a way that you know I frankly found sort of compelling yeah and attractive You know so it's easy to see and maybe they do have the answers maybe this ancient like spiritual tradition is At least part of the answer It certainly can be an answer for some people if you are of the right mindset And if you're truly trying to be on that path, but the problem is it's so easy to be subverted It's like someone can come along and slowly kind of take over and Twist it through with any religion. Yeah. Yeah. I mean look at televangelists, right? I mean there's real Christians out there that are really great wonderful people that want to live by the Teachings of Christ and and live a better more Just and holy life and they really do want to live like that and then their psychos who want private jets and A giant arena to have all their followers and they want mansions and yeah, those guys are real and They they thrive. They're everywhere Well one of care to care to non does enforcer and hit man was this guy named Thomas Dresher whose Christian name was Tierta and He like drove the bus and there was a school bus that would not he wasn't it wasn't driving kids around But they bought a school bus to kind of take people from one part of the you know Commune to another or whatever But really why he was there and he was one of the dudes that like joined the he was in Vietnam Vietnam combat that I think I saw hardcore combat Vietnam came back Bent in the head Was trying to find the answers trying to find help probably for PTSD found the hard Christian is join But the first temple or two that he was at they were like Something a little off about this guy. So let's send him to kirtananda Kirtananda met this dude and was like oh, I got a purpose for you brother You know you're now in force of number one And so if you fucked up if like you weren't supposed to have a television or if you broke the rules or you defied Kirtananda anyway if you got some money from your family You didn't kick it to him Tier to came and paid you a visit Okay, and when and when kirtananda started whacking dudes basically it was tier to the did it you know he just But it just shoots you and yeah, he was he was smart He buried trowsy Dennis's body. He diverted a little creek and By damning it up and then buried the body and then took away the dam So the whole time so that the the the kama side cop Thomas Westfall he was like I was looking for that body Everywhere and never thought to look under the little river, you know did they bring cadaver dogs to try to search for I don't think they brought dogs eventually like What happened was and the reason that kirtananda why they finally got him is that tier to flip on that now they arrested Tier to Thomas dresser for murder because there was another Devotee that got killed in Los Angeles. That was also sort of outing kirtananda and his you know corruption whatnot and So they got dresser and once he was in Prison like kirtananda held a ceremony and like appointed him to this like high status within krishna consciousness And of course that was like a way to try and keep him quiet Right and he remained a believer But then there was this incident known as the winnebago incident where Kirtananda there's this was writing in a winnebago with this like I think was a little boy from like Pakistan or India and The like kirtan's jostled open and he was seen in full view by multiple witnesses like sodomizing this kid and Like too many people sought to cover it up right and word got to Thomas dresser in prison that this had happened and He heard from enough people who he trusted and believed that it this was true that he Immediately flipped on kirtananda and said like yep He paid me and ordered me to kill these guys and here's where you can find the box. So he didn't know that He didn't believe it. He didn't believe it. He didn't believe it. He was a true believer. You know He didn't want to believe it so it was only when he was you know He didn't firsthand witness it himself There's only when he was faced with like multiple people who he trusted who were telling him we saw this it's true You know and then to his credit I think he he he immediately flipped. You know we tried to we tried to do an interview with him, but um He We couldn't get in in the prison to get him to go on camera. So we do in the show. We do have audio interview excerpts Yeah, dresser Wow The one of the saddest things about Holy Hell is they talked to some of the devotees that had left and Now they're lost because they had essentially They they had left 20 years of their life With this guy and and now here they were 50 and like this one lady was like a dog walker now Right, she had just kind of lost no real purpose in life didn't you know her whole thing was Bullshit yeah her whole life was bullshit. Yeah, and some of the kids that grew up at New Vindavan and their cure to Nanda when it was It was legitimately occult by any definition Um, you know some of them are still followers of Christian consciousness some of them You know left it way behind right. Yeah, and have nothing good to say about that But some of them are still like followers of probably pod's teachings You know and they believe that kirtananda was an aberration. I think that's probably right. I think that's probably right too Yeah, I mean my friend who's really into the hard Christmas He's a very peaceful guy and the way he looks at it is like You know this is this is a way to live to live This is a possible way to live for some people that if done correctly and done with the right spirit and the right mindset Like really can be a beautiful blissful way of existing right and I just I like not only like I I buy into the idea of karma reincarnation that that Reads is true that feels true to me in reincarnation. Yeah. Yeah Really what what what reads this true apart reads this true? um Well Then we get into DMT. Okay. All right. I tried DMT One day it was in 2013 and I'm a one-and-done DMT guy don't need to do it again. Okay, so here's my DMT story Is that in 1999 I was super in the rave scene and I was in London at this three-day rave called the warp And it was the kind of party where it's like someone asked me the time you'd be like it's 9 30 and they'd be like am or pm You know Great party right three days near the tower of London literally underground and underground party literally underground They had DJ rooms and dance rooms but they also had These live performance rooms And I saw this performance artist called the techno pagan octopus messiah Okay, and he was he was describing his DMT experience and I hadn't heard about DMT and then and by the way It's his stuff is fantastic. I think he's the he's come the closest of anybody except Terrence McKenna And actually like capturing what the DMT experience is as a writer hmm outside his Performance with the rumors performing. There's this tent that just said deep deep meditation therapy I was like oh now I know what that means right and I watched people doing DMT I was already rolling on three or four hits of end of the May so I was like oh not tonight But if it ever comes my way, I'm gonna do it. I mean myself a promise that night I'm not gonna seek this out but if it ever comes my way and then it did and In 2014 I just went to see a buddy mind in Brooklyn I was working on a documentary out there and he was like you want to try this I was like okay before I change my mind. Let's do this and 15 minutes later I believed in reincarnation I believed in Carmen reincarnation So I'd say well I felt a lot better about death Yeah, I felt a lot better about death too after I did it But well what my experience was That I got you know a short glimpse that's sort of a user manual for the cosmos and in there was the knowledge that Reincarnation is real that the Buddhists have it right that after you die you go to the barto for 49 days Your soul is out there. You get a chance to kind of like assess the last life you led Before you take another spin on the carousel Learn what you can get rewarded for your good deeds suffer for your sins and then go back and I believe it But I also just like it, you know, I just like it. It feels true to me in a way that like the Evangelists or fundamentals Christian idea like you can just do a bunch of bad shit and then you know Promise yourself to Jesus and have a clean slate. Fuck that. I'm not buying that You know, yeah, but karma reincarnation. I'm buying it There's something there. I mean it's it's fascinating that that concept has existed for so long You know and even the concept of heaven that existed for so long right and angels and souls and and all those things I think we have a very limited ability to grasp reality and I think that limited ability is Biological it's it's kind of based upon our our primate origins and what we are as a thing as a biological entity we only we have essentially the tools that we need in order to survive and those tools are the ability to recognize danger and communicate and Establish community and purpose and all these different things, but When you have like real breakthrough psychedelic experiences to me it seems like it's allowing you A vision into all that exists not just what you're physically capable of seeing as a human being but This chemical gateway or whatever it is that that psychedelics Give you allows you to see that these things What I got out of it is that everything is connected every action every thought Your thoughts your life your words your your your deeds the way you approach things the way you respond to things that they're all connected in some very strange way and the living my life the more I follow that as thinking that everything is all connected the more my life has been more beautiful the more my life has been more rewarding and rich and more more pleasing more filled with love and community and It's something that I kind of need to like remind myself all the time because I think the biological entity has Certain like human reward systems that are built into it try to require resources to try to You know to try to Establish dominance to try to Succeed there's all these different things that as a human you know people or you know they want success They want all these different things and That those things can kind of because you could see the physical manifestation of that work that that can Overcome the idea that everything is connected and so that's I think why people cheat on their taxes or insider trade or Do all these different things fuck people over in business deals and they don't think that they're gonna experience any negative consequences of it Right, but I don't think I don't think anybody gets away free again. That's why I like the idea of Carmen reincarnation Yeah, you don't get away with something to it There's something and it's again going back to the Vedas like yeah, the oldest Spiritual you know organized system of spiritual beliefs known. Yeah for our species. That's core to it Well, we have reincarnation the most complicated organism We are the most complicated organism that we're currently aware of in terms of our ability to manipulate our environment Our ability to communicate our ability to create things. Yeah, but we don't have an operators manual Right, which is crazy. So we're essentially running on this primate software that Was really established it's almost like we have DOS or Windows 95 and we just keep refreshing You know we don't write there's no real new operating system And it's so filled with flaws that the human operating system is designed to ward off predators and fight off neighboring tribes and try to avoid starvation and to try to make sure that your genes pass on and that your enemies genes don't and To you know to exist in 2024 and modern Western world with all of our technology and all of our knowledge and all the information that we have available with this ancient Primate software. Yeah, it's so problematic. It's so fraught with peril. There's so so many things that can go wrong so many people that go sideways with Drug addiction and gambling addiction and sex addiction and this addiction and that addiction and and so much chaos and You know, fevery and violence and you know and deception and fraud and there's just so many things that exist that are negative but are tied to this concept of achieving and getting more Which is you know this this famine-based mentality this resource acquiring mentality That really is like the monkey stealing your sunglasses so it can get mango right? Really? No, no totally agree and I felt like with DMT. I got like a very short It was like I felt like there was this sentient generally benevolent force out there in the cosmos It was like okay. Look I'm gonna give you a lot of information You're not gonna be able to retain most of it, right? But you're ready here we go Yeah, and one of the things that I brought back that I still believe a decade later is that reincarnation is real That's how it works. Karma is real. That's how it works. What you do in this life affects your next one so and That also gives you like kind of that the users guide you're talking about about how to be a better person how to be a better species Yeah, I didn't get a reincarnation vibe I'm not a post the idea of reincarnation But I got a vibe that there's other things and there's other dimensions. There's other there's other experiences and there's maybe levels of existence and that this existence that we're experiencing right now as human beings is just very strange confusing almost like a puzzle that you are on this planet trying to solve and you can get distracted. Yeah, yeah You can get distracted by all sorts of things in this life, but the things that bring you happiness and love You have to kind of like sort those out and and choose those amongst the different options that the puzzle gives you Yeah You know this podcast psychedelic salon. Yeah, okay, sure. How the guy on Lorenzo? Yeah Lorenzo Back in the door into the Hagrid to he's great. Yeah, he is I've just recently got to know him and he asked me to give you a message because I guess two or three months ago You were amusing about whether or not he was still alive because he hadn't posted any new episodes Yeah, he is still alive. That's his message. Lorenzo's alright and after he heard that you'd raise that question. He's been posting. Oh, that's great Yeah, so they're making me name. Yeah, absolutely. So Lorenzo Lorenzo and I in the aforementioned techno pagan octopus Messiah are in the process of collaborating with some AI animation artists on a documentary about the Stone d'Ape theory I think it's gonna be dope. What are you seeing Dennis McKenna's? Yeah assessment of it Yeah, he broke it down on the podcast where he's explained to me the the actual Mechanisms that would be involved in still aside and accelerating the the human mind and You know the ability to form a form language and Concepts and creativity and all the different things that that McKenna they're dead turns talked about right But you know Dennis is like hardcore like fact-based scientists right yeah, yeah He's had several great guests on there talking about that theory, but I've been like there's about to be already There's it's showing signs, but there's about to be just a glut of AI animation Movies, but even in documentaries like I think AI animation is gonna replace you know Recreations, you know where they hire actors to recreate stuff. We did it in Christians. Yeah, we we re-created you know murder scenes Using actors and firearms and stuff Prop firearms, but I think but so I've been approached with I don't even know how many ideas for like do AI Animation docs. It has been like gimmick gimmick gimmick But this one really felt right like a I think that Terrence McKenna would have loved the idea of using AI animation to like you know Show the evolution of our species. Yeah as they pick the mushrooms out of the cash or anything stuff and also one idea with it We're toying with I think we'll go forward with now We're actually you know, I think we've got the technology actually dialed in Where we built this AI world this Terrence McKenna AI world where we can give it ideas and it'll spit back imagery to us that feels right is building some sort of like AI avatar of Terrence McKenna So the idea is that the doc the spine of the documentary will be any time Where because Lorenzo has incredible archives of Terrence McKenna, you know stuff that nobody else has yeah is everything and Anytime you're hearing Terrence McKenna's voice describing the stone date theory will take people through its step by step You'll be seeing AI animation of what he's describing So you hear in Terrence McKenna's voice, but seeing AI So people that don't know what the stone date theory is we should probably explain it to them for people have never heard that before and the concept is that at one point in evolution there was climate change and that these Rainforest tropical rainforest had receded into grasslands and that these primates had started experimenting with different food sources by flipping over Calpatties and looking for grubs and all these different things and one of the things that they would do is Probably test the mushrooms that were growing in the cow patties right and in many places where Silasab and exist these things are extremely prevalent like my friend Duncan who grew up in Asheville North Carolina Told me that mushrooms were so prevalent that the local ranchers had They started putting feed in with the cattle feed some sort of anti-fungal Thing to keep fungus from growing in tauce. Yeah, because so many kids are going on to the field And picking silasab and mushrooms is like they were everywhere everywhere, you know and So that the concept is that Low doses of silasab and increase visual acuity Make people more amorous so it probably heightened sexual arousal made people more likely to breed and made people More curious probably because of the increase in visual acuity made people better hunters Better, you know, there's there's studies that have been done. I forget what the scientist did was a hardcore You know non-psychadelic scientists who did Studies on edge detection with Patients right you know these stuff. Yeah, and it showed that people under the influence of silasab and can detect Deviants like so if you have two parallel lines and one slightly deviate from parallel the people on silasab and can predict it much quicker Can see it much quicker than the people non-on silasab, right? Which is fascinating and you'd be a much better hunter much better hunter and yeah much better at surviving being hunted And might also just be more tuned into things. Yeah, you're more aware of like I know a lot of people that you still sibed and when they play certain sports and they think that silasab and low doses Like low-dose. Yeah, low doses for playing pool and things like that. You just have a better Understanding of what's happening I I attest to it low micro doses for chess Yeah, yeah. Does it help you really? I think it does actually I can demonstrate that it does You know in my game ratings really absolutely interesting. Now. I don't know if I buy the stone date theory in the same way that I Did I fully buy into you know the concept of the barto and reincarnation and carnation all that but it's sure fucking fun to think about that Well, doesn't it I mean it mimics DMT like silasab and and dimethyl trip to mean a very closely related Yeah, you know I think I think it's broken down. I think I'm gonna fuck this up I think it's in and for far eloxie and and dimethyl trip to me It's like it's very close to what dimethyl trip to mean is and you know We also know the dimethyl trip to mean is indogenously produced You know it's produced in the human brain. We don't we understand why and you know that's a Rick Strossman who wrote that book DMT the spirit molecules talked about that and they've done a lot of great research at the Cottonwood research foundation trying to T And the other thing about the human the concept of the stone date theory is this bizarre fact in the history of humans that In the entire species like the record of species one of the biggest mysteries is The doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years And McKenna says that that coincides with this exact same time period Where the tropical rainforest were receding into grasslands and then they believed that these primates were Experimenting a new food sources So there's all these things that sort of line up with it and it makes it a fascinating idea But if you think about like if they found out that this thing gives them this feeling and they were you know They're repeatedly using it over and over and over again And then there there's offspring did it and their offspring did it and and and you're you know playing this out over a couple Million years. Mm-hmm. You could see how this would happen. Yeah. Also the development of language. Yeah. Yes. The glossa Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, thank you. Yeah, you know like high doses Yeah, yeah, it's a language center. So like I said, I'm not sure I buy it, but you know should be a fun movie to make something happen Yeah, yeah, it's very obvious. It's something happened that separated us from all the other primates Yeah, like in a radical way. Yeah, we don't look anything like that. Right. We have abilities in We have so many attributes that are far beyond any other primate and it kind of makes sense Yeah, and also there's you know, there's people that can achieve those states without psychedelics Which is fascinating and I've gone pretty close with with some breathing exercises and Especially breathing exercises in sensory deprivation. Mm-hmm. You can you can achieve some definite psychedelic states I haven't had the full visual effects that are available with DMT But boy, you definitely get to some bizarre place where if it was a drug it would be a very popular drug Well back to the Christian is that's what probabod was preaching in a lot of his early devotees were people that had taken a lot of acid or Masculine and pay-o-ty yeah and felt like they were getting glimpses of something but they couldn't like Understand it and he's like let me show you how to get there right without the drugs, right? And what was the problem pod using to try to get the meditation yeah, yeah, it's deep meditation. Yeah, I think I Think they're changing chanting of like ancient sacred mantras and yeah, yeah Well, that's the other thing that happens with DMT rituals that they play ekeros these ancient South American songs that Sort of you know enhance the experience like when you do DMT with Ekeros playing the DMT dances to the sound and it's very strange to watch It's a beautiful bizarre and you know, it's overwhelming like you can't it's hard to believe that it's really happening while it's happening and You know you gotta kind of let go and just like let it happen and experience it yeah because you're so blown away by it all It's hard to just not just go what the fuck like every five seconds Yeah, yeah, you got to kind of just take it in and accept it. Yeah I tried to get my dad to try DMT my dad died recently and About six months ago. I tried to get in the try DMT. I was like listen, you know until I tried this dad, you know, I was like same as you like basically Spock like cold logic reasoning, right? You know like that's my dad. Yeah, super smart like mathematical genius was my dad and He was like well it sounds interesting, but I guess if you're right I'll find out of my own cuz I was like this is kind of like the trailer smart like mathematical genius was my dad and he was like well it sounds interesting but I guess if you're right I'll find out of my own because I was like this is kind of like the trailer for the movie dad interesting I'll find out on my own yeah interesting so yeah he uh he died like two weeks ago while I was in Ukraine oh wow yeah what were you doing in Ukraine I was uh reporting I was working I wasn't filming but I was uh giving some research and I was in uh I was in a war zone I mean we'll hope fucking countries a war zone but I was in a war zone where like communications were dicey at best and I got a text message from my wife on signal it was like your dad's heart valve is failing rapidly is in the hospital he's probably got like 48 hours to live and the airspace over Ukraine's closed so there's no way that I could get from where I was in Ukraine and Anchorage Alaska to be with him and so I was just sending like text messages on signal to the nurses that they were and they were reading them to him wow yeah no and then I was able to record one voice memo like right as he was going because the last sense uh to go when you're dying is sense of hearing and they they played him like a like a message from me wow so but to answer your question but what was I doing in Ukraine um looking it looking into a possible documentary that there be said against the backdrop of the current war but that would be more about like what is actually the true nature of corruption in Ukraine and what has it been and what was it in the 90s you know yeah and what is it today and like how has the US State Department kind of fucked up again in the same way that we did in Vietnam in every war like Vietnam Afghanistan and Iraq by back in the wrong horses you know you know we've never not fucked up there's never been one whether it's Libya or Afghanistan Iraq there's not one where you could point to like we nailed that one right there's not one right there's not one right and you know when there was so much resistance to the concept that Ukraine was corrupt when we first started backing them you know that was what was fascinating to me because it was always talked about how corrupt Ukraine was it was always talked about and then all sudden this was there was this was a for boat and topic like no Russia is the aggressor and the invader and Ukraine or their angels and like wait a minute you know there's this is not that's not reality like well it's also that we would the US government be like okay we would we would sort of designate who is corrupt and who wasn't I mean look the US went through its own sort of oligarchy like Robert Barron phase you know in late 1800s I was like after we'd been a democracy for a hundred years it's not unfortunately it's kind of a step on the evolution of democracy is to have this phase where you're like you know things are super corrupt like I I spent some time at a at a orthodox monastery in Ukraine last month and I asked the sort of head of the monastery like what would you have to do to get rid of corruption in this country he's like well I'm a man of God you know you're speaking through and interpreting it's like I'm a man of God so I'm not advocating this but what you could do is you could take because the main problem Ukraine right now is I understand it is the judicial system they have what they they call telephone law which is basically like before a judge makes a ruling he gets a phone call telling him which way to rule you know and so he's this the head of the monastery he's like if you line up every every judge and shoot him and then and then and then all the judges or all the like government officials that come to their funerals shoot them and do that two or three times and then we might be able to start over like she was saying that's how systemic this is but I mean man of God's telling you this yeah that's a guy who's like reached the limits yeah yeah oh my god but I'll tell you my time in in Ukraine really changed my perspective on that war and I came back a real sort of hawk thinking that we should fully support Ukraine really in the war yeah why is that part of it was just being with the people who the Ukraine I just like the Ukrainians you know in a way that I've been to other former Soviet block countries and it's kind of like I won't name any of them but I just feel like I'm not sure you guys are really down with the freedom and democracy thing you know it seems like you've been so you're subjugated for a while and you don't just didn't get the same vibe like I think that Ukrainians are legitimately freedom loving people okay that have been like under the thumb of corrupt leadership for decades now yeah but um to just part of it was it was something very enthralling about being in a place where everyone is so unified like this country under attack being invaded by a hostile force now these are the Ukrainians who have stayed behind okay let's still have them I mean and just that in coming from America where everything is so splintered and divided now and to be in a place where everyone is so on the same page there is something very attractive about that well that is what happens when you get invaded do you remember what it was like in America after 9 11 right after 9 11 yeah it was the most united the country has ever been right it's a horrible thing to say right because it's not what you ever want to happen again to wake everybody up but it was the thing that was required to make people put American flags on their cars and it was it a lot of what I mean it was a horrible tragedy but in a lot of ways the reaction to it was very beautiful there was so many people that were so I was in New York City like just a few weeks or a few months after 9 11 everybody was friendly right crazy right it was everybody was just so blown away by the experience of being attacked and so just shaken out of it and so aware of how fortunate they were to not be one of those people who died and that we are legitimately all together and that there are forces out there that are evil and that we have to stay united and I hate to think that that's what's required to wake people up from this division but I was wondering like I wonder if maybe the division that we have in this country is because the fact that we're never attacked and because the fact that we we we we only experienced a few of the Pearl Harbor 9 11 there's only a few of these moments where we've had to wake up yeah yeah the illusion islands actually in Alaska were were attacked and occupied by Japanese forces in World War II a real little known fact yeah that was actually American territory I didn't know that but but I mean we fucking man I mean the Ukrainians they they had nuclear weapons in a 1994 the quote unquote West the US and the UK basically convinced them you know to give up their nukes in exchange for a guarantee that we would help them protect their sovereign territory right yeah yeah that was right after the fall yeah the Soviet Union yeah yeah yeah there's so many factors right there's the NATO encroaching on Russia's territory I mean in 2004 like NATO started handing out membership cards like fucking crackerjack prizes right Putin gets reelected in 2004 20 years ago and all of a sudden like all these former Soviet you know small territories are now NATO countries yeah hey you want to be NATO oh well great now they're like sign up for a mutual defense treaty with Lithuania right now nothing against Lithuanians but fuck man you know this is this is getting serious it's very serious what happens if he if he invades in NATO country like what are we going to do right you know because China's watching and I'll tell you you know I've been like under fire would be over dramatic but I have I've had quite a few Iranian fucking Shahid drones launched in my general direction recently it gives you another perspective on like you know Russia's support for Iran and vice versa I know like mutual enemy of ours like those are Iranian fucking drones being shot at us and I don't know you know Russia recently had Hamas like had a delegation from Hamas visit the Kremlin I mean put the fuck man really yeah yeah so anyway this is a fucking sketchy time it really is I mean it's it's it's it's to you know this to say like oh like world three is eminent it sounds doom there but it feels like it could go that way and are China you know they're they're looking at us that's the problem if we if we sort of like showed our ass and back down you know if if Putin keeps going is then China may just test that red line right what's I want yeah well I think they're preparing for that yeah at least when I've talked to people that understand you know I just I mean I think that the war and Ukraine could have been prevented I think that there was this false dichotomy where there were forces in the US government and this is part of the documentary I want to make is about that forced you there was like you either have to be you know a puppet of Russia or our puppet you have to either have to be NATO or go under there's no middle ground where in when in fact I think that you Ukraine could have been a bridge a peaceful bridge between Russia and the quote unquote West where maybe it could have joined the European Union economically free trade but not joined NATO right because that's what Putin was so adamant against and you understand I mean I think he's a war criminal fucking power mad you know asshole right but you can sort of see from his perspective if you look at a map and you start to see all these NATO countries around Russia you kind of see you know what motivates him well that's what people in the State Department had always said that was his red line his red line was Ukraine yeah yeah and then when they're trying to get Ukraine and join NATO it's like what are we doing right what are we doing we bring in about war war three and why and how much money is being spent right and where's that money going right yeah and who's who's got a vested interest in keeping that money flowing yeah that's where it gets scared right this that's that's what I'm looking into and I don't want to tip tip my hand too much but I think I've got pretty convincing evidence that the US Department of Justice has been used by the US State Department to further US foreign policy interests in Ukraine in ways that aren't really like right like bringing either bringing criminal charges against people you in the US but like Ukrainians like charging them with crimes in the US including some people that have never even set foot in the United States charging with crimes or getting them out of trouble like dropping criminal charges against them to sort of like and again it goes back to like our designating you're a good guy you're a bad guy you know you're corrupt you're not you're both just grabbing you know billions with both hands so it's so fucking scary time man it really is it's wild to me that Zelensky is the president too you have essentially a comedian who played president on television show and they're like we like you if they held if they held an election today he would not he would not be reelected no no no but then they support him it's interesting it's like you asked him do you support the president they say yes like were it war would you vote for him no why what was their opposition i think they miss managing the war you know and also i think they suspect that he's corrupt yeah and i think he probably is that but that doesn't but the fact that look the fact that fifty cents of every dollar that we send there you know this isn't actually how it goes down but even that was the case is going into somebody's pocket doesn't mean that we can just turn Ukraine over to Russia in my opinion i think that we should be backing them full on militarily not with us troops but given them what they need to fight because you know i talked a lot of special forces guys over there they're like basically like those Russian human waves of tax were just like more than these guys not even really combat we're just mowing these guys down until we run out of bullets and then we have to retreat you know those are the battles that's what Putin's able to do because he's got so many guys and he's also letting people out of jail yeah letting people out of jail and giving them you serve and your time is yeah your sentences rescinded well so people think of Russia and they think of Moscow and St. Petersburg but you look at that country on a map it's fucking massive there's so much territory east of the rural mountains it's just a bunch of villages what we call flyover country right well he's off Putin's offering deals like sign up where it's like you know more money than they make in a year per month A and then B if you're killed your family set up for life thinking by a house you know whatever yeah so it's very attractive offers for these really poor people from rural Russia and then they're using them just human cannon fodder 100% 100% it's just i just can't remember a time in my life where things that just seem so unhinged no no i asked my parents about that too because in my dad-free pass they were like no we don't remember even like water date Vietnam era you know they weren't really old enough to remember the Great Depression but even that was just sort of limited to the US I mean I know there global you know effects of that ricochets that but yeah it's it feels it feels like it could like it could go sideways on it you know in a hurry yeah yeah it does and then what does that look like that's what's terrifying what's terrifying is if you're willing to do like let's say what Israel's doing in Gaza if you're willing to almost eliminate a city just bomb the fuck out of a city and kill who knows how many innocence what is it what are the numbers it's at 30,000 I don't know what the numbers are what what's what's the line that keeps you from dropping a nuke that kills 300,000 what's the line like when it what went you know why why are we why do we have this idea that it won't accelerate to that when it has in the past it's just because it only did when it did once right in Japan in 1945 is that what it is I agree with I mean I agree with your assessment that danger 100% that's another reason why I think that we have to help Ukraine stop Putin now because if he keeps going into Ukraine and then he he he invades a NATO country and we decide that we've got to go up against him is there any evidence that he would do that that I would invade a NATO country I don't think he'll stop you know I think dude he's been in power for a long time for a leader Russia I think that he I mean I watch that Tucker Carlson interview right now and that history lesson that he delivered at the beginning everyone was like what the fuck is he talking about and Tucker just look baffled I was I I got it I thought I'm getting an insight into Putin's motivations in the way that he sees himself which is a historic figure he sees himself as someone who's going to restore a Russian Empire he like spends all day in the halls of the Kremlin with like you know portraits of Ivan the terrible and Catherine the Great right and I think that he's seeing himself as not the leader of you know a free country certainly but someone's who's going to restore a Russian Empire so no I absolutely do not think he will stop with Ukraine no way so then if he doesn't and then he invades a NATO country and we go up against him man those documents leaked recently from Russia that were showing what their lines were for when they would start using quote-unquote tactical nukes and you know I think he'd do it I think he'd do it I don't think he will what are the lines well they were whatever if they started to lose a certain percentage of troops I can't recall the specifics but they were like shockingly shockingly liberal when they would start to use tactical nukes and on the battlefield in Europe you know like if they started to have certain percentages of battlefield losses were not in the current situation but like as they as they go further into into Ukraine or or and you know or an award that came in Russian territory so I just think you know we should stop to shit now this shit being Putin is it possible I think it's possible I think it's possible to essentially let him have what's his jam oh yeah criteria for a potential nukewah response range from an enemy incursion on Russian territory to more specific triggers such as destruction of 20% of Russia's strategic ballistic missile sub missile submarines this is the first time we've seen documents like this reported in the public domain said Alexander how did you say that Kabweev your guess is a good way director of Carnegie Russia Eurasia Center in Berlin they show that the operational threshold for using nuclear weapons is pretty low if the desire result can't be achieved through conventional means Russia's tactical nuclear weapons which can be delivered by land or sea launched missiles from or from an aircraft are designed for limited battlefield use in Europe and Asia as opposed to a larger strategic weapons intended to target U.S. modern tactical warheads can still release significantly more energy than the weapons dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima in 1945 although the files date back 10 years or more experts claim they remain relevant to current Russian military doctrine the documents were shown to the FT by western sources so to answer your question I think the territory that Putin has taken you know and again also we like just like we didn't back them up after the security assurances that we gave we the U.S. gave Ukraine in 1994 2014 right there was that revolution in Ukraine and in response Putin invaded Crimea with the little green man the guys that didn't have any signal and the U.S. State Department went to and Ukraine was going to fight and the U.S. State Department went to Kiev and said well well well chill out chill out chill out just let him have Crimea we'll make sure he stops there that's not escalate things okay so we gave him our word a second time and then we broke it so to answer your question I think that that territory that that Putin has seized my impression from talking with a lot of Ukrainians in recent weeks has been that that they feel like Ukraine could still be Ukraine without that territory like the people like basically like you could have like a three-week period where people could either move there if they want to be Russians or they can leave if they want to be Ukrainians and then you could have a kind of a North Korea South Korea DMZ kind of situation I think that's probably the best possible outcome right now but even to do that again we've got to properly arm the Ukrainians so that they can stop Putin from moving further into their country and actually taking territory that they could not live without so do you think ultimately he plans on taking all of Ukraine yes 100% I think he's 100% I mean he was it was when I was in Kiev and I went to how close the fighting actually got to the capital city it was shocking how close it was like that town butcha where there was all those atrocities committed I mean there's this one I saw this one auto this like massive graveyards of like automobiles and what happened was people were trying to get out of this town as the Russian troops the Russian because they invaded from Belarus from the north and they came in and they're trying to go like lightning strike on Kiev and they got within I think 10 12 kilometers of the city and then they got stopped because the guys started blowing bridges special forces started blowing bridges and hitting them with javelins and stuff and they actually stopped them like incredibly brave fighting but there was this one just like a came across this just pile of just hundreds of blown up cars and I asked the locals about and some of them have been like painted now with you know sunflowers and you know Slavo crania glory you glory Ukraine and and artists are trying to make this less sort of macabre but what it was was when the Russians invaded two years ago like hundreds of families piled in their cars and there was one road out of town but it was a trap and the Russians cut it off on both sides and then methodically using tanks blew up these cars for the civilians just brutal shit I know there's like bullshit on all sides in all wars yeah but to see it first hand like that you know the talk to people that saw that happen was it's tough so yeah what is it like going over there like leaving America going over there to try I mean what was the craziest you just you can just walk in it was like it was like it's harder to go into tijuana than it is to go to Ukraine like you just like I went in through I came yeah I came out yes that's it wow I went in I came out through Poland and I went in through Romania and I just like all those cars yeah oh my god so I flew to Bucharest and then drove about 10 hours to the border and then just like walked across with my duffel bag and US passport it's really easy to get in just walked across yeah walked right across it's like five minutes did you have it set up already to talk to people I did I had set up set up security I had really good security these guys were like special forces guys a tank hunting team actually that had just rotated off the front after fighting for two years and where you know so basically like keeping me alive as a vacation for them but they were really and I got to be really good friends with this one dude especially the guy that was like because they worked in different ways it was a team but like there was one guy that was like attached to my hip he was just with me 24 seven uh whose name was Andre and I got to be really good buddies with this guy just using like Google translate you know even when the interpreter wasn't around just like really click with this guy anyway um but yeah I did have it set up before I had an interpreter you know driver and security and then I had you know conversations that I'd lined up but a lot of it was people had documents or people had information that the only way I was going to get these documents or that have them tell me this information was to go to Ukraine there's the only way they were gonna you know trust it trust me how much different was it than what you expected well it's it's I really back to my new love for Ukrainian people um in kiv like or Lviv which is which is a fantastic city it's in eastern Ukraine near the Polish border um you know it's like you wouldn't until the rockets and the Iranian Iranian drones start flying into the city you would know anything is going on people are out dressed nicely going to dinner going to bars going to clubs like they're out and about you know and also the air raid sirens go off and and then and there's this there's this app that I that I like jokingly texted my wife I was like this is the worst video game ever because it's this app that shows you what's incoming like what kind of missiles and how many and what kind of drones and how many and then as the air defense systems shoot them down they like blip off the screen you know so you can like see like this shit's coming your way and like how many other shooting down it's like the worst version of missile command because you can't actually do anything right but yet you're watching it and um in real time yeah yeah yeah yeah god so this is an app you can get free phone yeah yeah well the security guys had it I don't know if anybody has an app on their phone that alerts them when there's incoming missiles or drones right and you know that that app has not been compromised how do they go? Great question I don't know great question is this an app that's uh is it windows and you can get it you could yes you could get it on your phone right now and as a matter of fact before I went to Ukraine Ukraine I downloaded installed it and I thought it'd be geofenced but it was like the middle of the night in New Mexico and all of a sudden it's like air raid air raid missiles incoming you know like seek shelter so it's if if anybody wants to experience what it's like to be a Ukrainian right now you can download this app was it called uh let's take a look is it available for all phone but yeah anybody yes anybody can get it um I may have taken it off actually but I'm sure if you just like google like Ukrainian you know air raid app did you take it off is it hard to see an air raids? yes yeah I didn't want it that's uh I didn't want it to sound anymore so I mean you could you can pick which parts of the country you want it to alert you too but yeah I mean it was uh it was it was one day with the security guys were like it's not safe to drive from where we were to cave tomorrow so that's a bad news because every night we would have a go no go kind of meeting for the next day and um that was a one time that they were like no go no go too much it's going on it's not safe to drive you know eight hours to keep good news is it's snowing in the kapati and mountains so we're gonna go skiing and I was like what and so the next day we did we like drove five hours for the mountains and there's this full-on ski resort and there's just people like the hundreds of families out skiing and there's the fucking war going on and it's in it's like a day of a nationwide rate alert red alert which means that like missiles were hitting all over and so people are watching this app on their phone and you can see the stuff that's coming you know to the oblast which is like a state you know that we're in and as the stuff is being shot down like people are like cheering from the chair lifts oh my god yeah oh my god it's I mean it's just like that that fucking fuck you spirit that they have is I think impressive wow yeah yeah um I have a friend from Israel and uh I had he's a kickboxing coach my friend Shuki and when he was living in America he lives in Israel now but when he was living in America I went over his house for dinner and him and his wife they would be playing the bongos and dancing and and and I'm like you guys are like you have so much spirit like you're so filled with fun yeah and he's like my friend when you live in Israel he goes every day like you could die this is every day is party party have a good time enjoy your life yeah and it's like the same kind of thing unfortunately like post 9-11 like you need something horrible to happen for you to appreciate the good and appreciate peace and appreciate joy yeah and that's what's that's a crazy thought is that the thing that's going to cure what ails us is conflict and getting together and banding together to fight a common evil right it's just so bizarre or if we had like a war the world's kind of thing like a hostile like alien race attacked earth you remember when Ronald Reagan said that did you end yeah yeah it's like the UFO fanatics favorite speech when Ronald Reagan said if we were faced with a hostile threat from an alien world how click the we would put aside our differences yeah it's true I mean that's one of the things that astronauts always talk about when they go to the space station so you look down on the earth and you go oh my god what are we doing right what how we in conflict with each other over lines in the dirt imaginary lines in the dirt that we create for what like who's doing this and why we doing this we should all be together we're we're this one species that can communicate with each other attach this ball that's hurling through infinity and yet our territorial primate instincts have us engaged in this insane conflict that no one thinks is ever going to end if you asked anyone today can you achieve in our lifetime no war most people say that's not no law which is no so strange and tragic well it's also so crazy because it's a function of human beings in large numbers right because like if we were in this room together and you said could you imagine all three of us get along of course easily I couldn't imagine it's not getting along we can talk we'll figure things out we have resources yeah we'll be fine make it three million people make it 30 million make it 300 million now you got problems right and it's just and it seems to be always the same thing that you see when you have a cult you have leaders and the leaders don't necessarily have the best intentions for everyone they have the best intentions for themselves and for the people that are providing them with money and this is this is the trap that we're all stuck in everyone on earth all of us being led by groups that decide that they're in control of these massive numbers of people and they want control of the resources of these other territories and they want to do something to those people and they'll have people convinced this is your enemy you have to go kill them people that you've never met you have no issue with you don't know anything about them you've literally never seen them before you might not ever see them even when you're killing them and this is the thing that we don't believe could ever be stopped in our lifetime which is insane if you really start to think about it that way it sounds so insane like if you if you were approached by an alien lifeform that said what is the source of all this murder and killing and destruction like what is this it's like oh we're being led we're group and we're being led by the people that are in charge of this group that are very secretive and that are being influenced by massive amounts of money and the military industrial complex and they've got everyone convinced led by the people that are in charge of this group that are very secretive and that are being influenced by massive amounts of money and the military industrial complex. And they've got everyone convinced that you have to revert all of our resources into attacking this other group that is opposed to our way of life. They hate us for our freedom, whatever the fuck it is. And this is what we have to do now. They would be like, what is wrong with you fucking people? Like, what a bizarre, wounded, tainted species that you think like this. And not just think like this, but think it's impossible to imagine this not existing. This is the most insane venture that human beings can ever engage in. And you think it's impossible for that to not be the case. But almost all logical people, if you ask them, could you imagine no war in your lifetime? No. Not now. No. I mean, I just turned 53 and I think that like when I was a young man, I had a lot more optimism, right? And I don't think it was just a function of like we'd grown to be in young in the 90s, I think was like the best. It was like the time a piece in prosperity. Yeah. And it seemed like we could get to Star Trek, right? Like we could maybe get there. Even Star Trek cold-looking Klingons. Yeah, well, you know, you got to fight something. What is that? Why? It seems so crazy. I wonder if, I mean, this is really weird, but I wonder if that's where AI is leading us. I really genuinely do. I wonder if the limitations of our primate architecture will not allow us to escape this never-ending cycle of war. That maybe the only thing that will would be an intelligence that far exceeds our own and doesn't have the same limitations, motivations, human reward systems, all the things that hold us in these patterns. And that an artificial intelligence that is far superior to what we're capable of generating with our monkey minds, me the only thing that prevents us. Well, back to DMT, I think that intelligence is already out there. We don't have to build it with computers and then you're on Earth. You know, DMT is one con, do it to it. Yeah. Mushrooms or another. Medications and other. It's just a willingness to set aside the petty shit, which is also why a lot of people believe those things are illegal. Yeah. 100%. I mean, if you have everybody realizing that we're all one united, we'd kind of make some money on that. Yeah, there's no money on that. Well, maybe the problem is money in general, like the concept of money. You know, and I'm not a proponent of socialism because socialism always leads to communism, which leads to military dictatorships that are dictating, whether or not you can do this or that. And there's always groups of people that have massive resources and they keep everybody else subjugated. Yeah. And that's it's anybody that thinks that socialism and communism is the future. Show me where it works. Yeah. And still human beings. It's just like whether it's cults or militaries or anything. So it's there's human beings that have immense power that is unimaginable to the common person. Right. Dictating what the common people can't do. And the only way to enforce that is with force and with killing. It's the only way with jailing people, killing people, fear. It's the only way to get people to listen to you and to do what you want them to do. And I wonder if what we're doing with artificial intelligence is creating. I think we're, I think we're going to merge. That's what I think is going to happen. You know, I'm sure you've already seen this guy who they, the first neural link patient, have you seen this? Yeah. So this first guy who's paralyzed with neural link, he's now able to use a computer. And he can move curses around with his mind and he can play video games with his mind. And he's been doing this and he talks about it and it's like, this is incredible. This is amazing. And this is essentially the model T of, you know, this sort of human computer interface, biological interface, something that goes into your mind, into the brain itself and connects with it and allows you to use things. I get why that would help a dude like in his situation. But do you have any concerns about that? Like large scale? Of course. Yeah. I mean, concerns with everything that involves human beings. Because I don't think there's ever been a thing that involves human beings that doesn't get co-opted and corrupted. There's always something someone comes along that uses it and has power. And that's the scariest thing about someone achieving some sort of artificial general intelligence, some sort of super intelligence, especially something that's sentient and can figure out what we're doing wrong and also figure out what was done wrong to code it and make a better version of itself. And I think it's going to lead to a new life form. I'm almost positive of that. That's what all this stuff is doing. It's going to achieve. I mean, have you ever seen the head of Google where he was talking about how their AI has done things that they didn't expect? Like it learned a language like instantaneously that it wasn't programmed in and can translate that language now and communicating that language and they don't know how it did it. Well, hey guys, hit the fucking brakes. Like, what you don't know, you don't know what it's doing and you're just going to keep feeding it. Okay. Where do you think that goes? It's going to be better than us at everything. And it's going to realize that we're the cause of pollution. We're the cause of war. We're the cause of theft and rape and fraud and destruction and the control of resources. It's all human beings. Like we are the problem that we're trying to solve. If we're trying to solve that problem by creating something that won't have those problems, it just logically seems to me that that thing is going to realize that we're the issue. Part of me shares that fear. Part of me feels like a drowning man like, you know, maybe AI is the life preserver. Yeah. Part of me thinks that it's just going to be like the metaverse or Google glasses or whatever. It's just going to be like a passing fad. But oh, I don't think that. I don't think that at all. I think it's inevitable. I think we are. I've compared us to a caterpillar that we're a caterpillar that's building a cocoon. We don't even know why caterpillars. They don't know. I'm going to become a butterfly. It's going to be awesome. No, we don't know why we're doing all this. Why are we so thirsty for innovation? Why we so attached to wanting the newest latest, greatest technology? It almost seems like that motivation is tied into the creation of artificial intelligence. That if you looked at us, I always say that if you looked at us from above, if you were some other species that came and you were looking at human beings, you would say, well, what does this thing do? What does this species do? Well, the main thing it does, if you look at all the, there's all the wonderful things that are the music, all the wonderful things that it does for itself, food and culture and all these interesting things. So what does the species overall do? What creates things and it creates better things constantly. It's in a cycle of constant innovation and a lot of that innovation, almost all of it is tied to technology and artificial intelligence. So where does that go? Well, that goes to another life form. It creates a thing. It creates an artificially intelligent and artificial is not a good word either because I think it's digital intelligence. I don't think it's artificial intelligence. I think it's a computing based intelligence that's far superior to the biological based intelligence. And so my hope for us, because I am one of us, my hope is that we merge. My fear is that it supersedes us. My fear is that it surpasses us in every way and that it just gives us something that placates us that it controls us. Yeah. That's a good thing. Well, instead of killing us off, all you'd have to do is stop us from breeding. That's not hard to do. We're kind of doing that to ourselves. I mean, population level, in terms of like viability, they've dropped substantially over the last few decades, whether it's because of microplastics and our food that have diminished our reproductive cycles. And if you look at the number of births like in developing countries, like what happens, how many women are having miscarriages, how many women are infertile, the numbers keep going up and up and up. It seems like there's a current trend because of what we have done with our environment, what we have done with our food supply, what we have done with medicine and pharmaceutical drugs that's leading us to be less and less viable. And all you'd have to do is step in and provide human beings with something that gives them incentive to no longer breed, especially if it makes it very attractive to no longer breed. Keep them entertained, no longer breed. Provide them with robot sex dolls that are far superior to human beings. Someone who really gets them, or you just have a biological woman who yells at you. It's, you could clearly see how if you were a super intelligent species, a super intelligent thing that looked at us and said, well, what's the best way other than mass destruction of stopping these things from ruining the world? Well, just stop them from breeding. Just make these the last ones. Just severely limit the amount of reproduction that takes place. I would do it. That drowning man looking for a life preserver side of me kind of hopes that artificial intelligence or digital intelligence, I like that, by the way. Yeah, I think that's what it is. Digital intelligence, you know, that it could be that that again, back to back to DMT, I felt that that that sentient force, God, whatever you want to call it, was benign, was basically on my side. I'd like to think that perhaps that technology is being provided to us, that there is a bigger plan that we're just not dialed into, or that maybe it's a way to try and dial into that plan. I just want us to get to Star Trek, man. I just want to be, I think that the goal, I think the intent for our species is to get off the rock and explore space and piece together. Well, that would certainly be wonderful. Yeah. Yeah. That would be certainly preferable to destroying ourselves. What do you think is happening with all this UFO, UAP stuff? Do you ever think about that? Yeah, I've looked into, look, I don't know, a doc on that. Like several times could never quite, you know, get beyond what's already publicly available. I just think it's, the government's covering something up for sure. For sure. You know? Do you think they're covering up things that they've invented? I think that's probably the most, again, I would like to believe that what they're covering, I want to believe in the same way that I want to believe in the stone tape theory. Because I think it's fucking cool. Yeah. Because I want to believe that they're covering up contact with, you know, species from outer space. Yeah. Other intelligent life. What I suspect is really going on is that they're covering up shit that they're making that maybe has slipped the leash, you know, or that they, or that for whatever reason they're just trying to like keep completely secret. The stuff that has the maneuverability they can't be explained. Yeah. That's my thought too. I think both things though. I think we're probably being visited as well. And I think we might be being visited by something that is us from the future. I think, and might not even be us from the future, but being what happens when a species like us gets involved in digital intelligence and create something that transcends the biological limitations. And then you have these things. To me, one of the, one of the things is very bizarre is the archetype, the archetype gray alien, which is this big-headed thing with no muscle, no genitals. And it seems very humanoid in a way, which doesn't necessarily make sense. If you're dealing with different environments and we think about it, the massive variety of species that exist on the planet that we're aware of. There's only one human. There's only one bipedal hominid. That's it. It's us. Right? Why is this thing so much like us? This shitty design, walking around on two people. Why can't it fly? Like why does it have these spindly bodies? Well, human beings, as we're evolving, one of the things that's very clear is that we're becoming less physical. We're weaker and softer than previous generations of humans that we can observe. If you look at our testosterone levels compared to men from the 1950s, we're far lower on average. And if you go way back and you look at Australia, Pithicus and even Neanderthal, I mean, there's just super powerful physical specimens. There were definitely, Neanderthals like this, 5'7", 200 pound behemoth of a creature that was, you know, if you have a Neanderthal competing in the UFC, it would smash everybody. They're bones are bigger, they're far more powerful. If you keep going in that direction, what do you get to? You get to this thing that has almost no muscle. This thing that like it just has the ability to move around, it's probably communicating telepathically. It's probably using its telepathic energy to control those devices, those ships. That's one of the things that Bob Lazar said went in again, the Bob Lazar story is who knows, right? I believe the Bob Lazar story. I had him on the podcast, I talked to him for three hours, I had dinner with him. He doesn't seem like a guy who's lying. And one of the more bizarre aspects of his story is how many of the things that he talked about now we know are true. You know, in terms of the technology, in terms of what people have seen, 3D printing, there's all these different things like this ship that he went into, there's no seams. Like it's all like as if it's made out of one piece of something, which is 3D printing. I mean, that's what we're doing now. And that there's no instrumentation and that somehow, I know that these things are integrated somehow with their minds or with something where it's allowing them to pilot these things without digital instrumentation and buttons and switches. They're using some other wet method to control these things. And that's what he was supposedly brought in to try to back engineer, to try to say, what is this? How does it work? And he talked about the limitations of having science try to be practiced in a vacuum. And he was like, the metallurgist did not have contact with propulsion experts, the propulsion experts did not have contact with other groups that were studying these things. Everybody was very secretive and everybody was very isolated. He's like, that's not how science works and that's one of the reasons why they can never figure out how these things work. That you need to open this up to the global scientific community and have everybody examine these things and look at it. But the problem is the military applications. Like if you have something that can essentially use some new element and use this new element that's bombarded with radiation that allows you to manipulate gravity and move at insane speeds almost instantaneously to anywhere in the universe. You can't give that to the Chinese. You can't have someone else get a hold of it before us. You can have someone steal these techniques or these technologies. So what do you do? If you have this thing, if this thing has really been donated, which is like a lot of these people that work on them, they call them donations, if you really have these things, what do you do? How do you figure that out? I don't know. If we have been doing this since the 1980s, which was La Zara said it's been around far long than that, but when he was working on them was the 1980s, you could imagine that by now we might have figured out a way to get a drone going that uses these technologies and that these drones can appear and disappear, they can fly in the same rates of speed, they can hover stationary at 120 knot winds like they've observed. You could imagine that that's ours. I saw the Phoenix lights. Did you really? You were there? Yeah. I saw different people saw different things. What I saw was something the size of an imperial star destroyer from Star Wars that was like at a relatively low altitude moving over Phoenix. My housemate was like this, I mean, this is before we had phones, right? Before we had cameras. It was like we had a flip phone of anything. And he was like, dude, you got to get out here. And I came out the front of our house in Tempe and we just watched this thing. move across the sky. It was like what the fuck man? I believe in reincarnation because I came back from D&D thinking that I had a first-hand experience. I believe that there was something inexplicable in the sky over Phoenix that night because I fucking saw it. And it was massive and it was quiet. And then it was just gone. So what did it look like? It looked like a massive craft. It was like a lot of shapes, like an imperial star destroyer. But of that scale, there was more sort of like tubular shaped. And you could see more like, yeah, like a tube. And you could see variations in it. It wasn't like totally smooth. And you could see by the way that it was like blocking out the stars that you could see that there were like apparatus on it of some kind. And I have a thought that it was just a military aircraft where they thought they had a cloaking device. See, now that's what other people saw was these smaller things on the same night that were explained away as being some sort of military flares or weather balloons or some shit. That's not what I saw. On the same night, but I'm not the only one that saw this larger scale craft. So I always thought like, man, that could be a military ship. They thought they had some sort of cloaking device that fucked up. It frets out because that's kind of what it looked like. I could see it. And then I couldn't. You know? So it looked like a tube. Well, how big were you talking about? Like several football fields? Yes. Yes. Yeah. How many football fields? I would say like the size of a battleship. Okay. Huge. Not an aircraft carrier, but the size of the battleship. Like I would say three. What's bigger aircraft carrier battleship? Battleship I think is bigger. It's a destroyer. Whatever smaller than aircraft carrier. Whatever the ship is that smaller than aircraft carrier. So not as big as an aircraft carrier. Not as big as an aircraft carrier. What is a battleship? Like how big are battleship or destroyer? Whatever that next one is. I would say three football fields at least. It was huge. You could not miss it. And how hard you think it was above you? No more than 1,000 feet. Whoa. Yeah. No more as low altitude. It was like right over right over Tempe. I'm not the only one. No. No. I'm not the only one that's not. No. No, no. No, no. No, no. No, no. No, no. No, many, many people saw it. Yeah. I saw it was like whatever the explanation was. Yeah. There was something else in Sky that night too. So I loved to gamble. If I had to make a bet, I would still say it's human military technology that frets out. Wow. Many people said they saw something that was very triangle. No. This was not a triangle. So maybe there was more than one of these things. Totally possible. Remember when the governor did that press conference and came out with a guy on an alien suit and made a mock with the whole thing? Which is what they're tactic has been. But then that same governor came back after he left office and talked about it and said that he saw something and admitted it. Yeah. Was the governor's name? Five-seimington. Five-seimington. See if you can find an audio of a video of five-seimington saying what he actually saw on witnessing the Phoenix lights. I think later he talked about it. Unlike five-seimington, I was stoned. But I still know what I saw. I still know what I saw. And what's interesting is when he's trying to describe the shape and he puts it at a bigger size than I have it in my memory, I do remember talking with my friend. It was hard to describe what we just saw. It was like we didn't have a reference. It's like we're trying to... See if I can kind of circulate this. We're trying to find reference points. For something that really doesn't have one. Right. I guess. I kind of estimate the size. But it just... It was unlike anything I've ever seen before. Have you ever heard people describe what the Native Americans must have seen when those boats started showing up? No. Have they had never seen anything that large? It probably blew them away. You see the pinto and the Santa Maria and these massive boats from Europe that they were like, what the fuck is that? Well, let's hope that the beings aboard the craft is that's what they are. Have better intentions than the people at those boats. Yeah, right. Yeah. That's crazy that you actually saw it. Yeah. Wow. And you said it just disappeared? Yes. It wasn't like whoop or anything. There was no noise. It was just... There were some lights. Like you said, I remember there were some lights that were not stars that were part of this craft. Could you describe what those lights looked like? No, they were not colored. They were white or off white. Because I remember thinking like, are those stars? I was trying to actually see what is the shape and what is stars. Because that's how engaging how big it was. And I was like, no, those are attached to this thing. And then it was just... I just couldn't see it anymore. It was like the Northern Lights. Some from Alaska, right? So it was like the Northern Lights, they're there. And then they're not there. It was just like this ghostly thing and then they're gone. And it was like that. It was there. It was moving at a slow speed from my left to right. And then it was just I couldn't see it anymore. But it was like 20 seconds, at least. It wasn't like a glimpse of this thing. Wow. And how many lights? Half a dozen. Yeah. Somewhere around there. Yeah. Yeah. And I know people said that they saw a triangle. So then for a while they were seeing that's why he was probably talking about the B2 bomber, the stealth bomber, because they're kind of triangular. It was way bigger than one of those. And it was not that shape at all. You know, I struggle to come up with what shape it was, because it's the shape that I'm really seeing before. Yeah. So. Wow. And what was your initial thought? That that's an alien spacecraft? No. My initial thought was not an alien spacecraft. It was basically an initial thought which was just like what the fuck is that? And then once I talked about it, it's that same sort of like want to believe, actually, believe thing. We talked about several times a day. I want to believe it was an alien spacecraft. I believe it was probably, you know, US military technology gone awry. Real? Yeah. Do you think they have the capability to do that in the 1990s? Because what was the, what was the Phoenix lights? Yeah, it was mid 1990s. I think it was 96. I'd been 97, I'm not sure. As more time has gone on though, you're asking me what I thought in the moment. Yeah. As more time has gone on, I've like the needles move towards maybe that was actually an extraterrestrial craft. Yeah. Because there's so much to come out like we especially in the last five years, as you know, as you talked about here. Yeah. So it's just so strange that it all occurred in this one area and this one night. Right. That has to be a real paradigm shifting moment for you. But, listen, well, yeah. Well, I think I was, I got so caught up in the like, the government's trying to cover up its own fuck up, you know, like they're putting up it. And then there was the like, there was the smaller lights thing and the weather balloon, you know, but I did, I went on the record with the Phoenix New Times. I got, there's a guy named Tony Ortega there that wrote a piece about it right away. And I went on the record because I was like, maybe one of the last, you know, I wasn't the UFO enthusiast type, right? Right. In the community. I was a fairly well known writer in the greater Phoenix Metro at that time and not someone that would be normally associated with like being a quote unquote UFO crazy. So I went on the record with the article which running like, yes, I saw this no fucking way was a weather balloon or a flare or whatever they're saying. It was massive. So man, what I would give to see something like that. But you know, to your point about like, look at how people about the technology and they've just been kept quiet because of the military applications, like look at how people freaked out when that leaked about this new Russian space weapon right a couple weeks back or three weeks back, whatever. It's like an ability to disrupt like satellite communications and space like Russia that like somehow it leaked maybe deliberately out of Russia that they've got this tech far more advanced technology than we thought they had to a weapon that would be in space that could disrupt like communications and satellites and really focus up. And like it was it leaked and then there was this one congressman that like went public with it was like that we have a real problem right that this is like three as well as in Ukraine. So it was maybe three weeks ago. Imagine if it was something like on the scale of like a ship, the weaponized ship that could be cloaked like that or some of the technology or if we did have, as you said, this donated technology that's from an extraterrestrial intelligence that the US has been figuring out applications for you to have to keep that on lock because what if that leaked right now, what do you think Putin would do, you know, what the fuck knows what he would do if all of a sudden it leaked that we had these, you know, military capabilities that are far beyond what do you think we have? That's my thought about these things that they keep seeing because they always see them in areas where they do military tests, right? The Tiktak was off the coast of San Diego which is where all the military bases are and the things that Ryan Long had seen were all off the east coast and restricted airspace in space where they run, you know, fighter-just jet training and he said when they upgraded their technology in 2014, they upgraded their sensors and he said that's when we started seeing these things constantly all the time and they were getting visuals. They were seeing visual versions of these things and that it was a square, it was a sphere in a square or a square in a sphere, do you remember? So there was like this circular sphere and this black square that exists in this thing and it's hovering and it's hovering in very high speed winds and it's just station, stationary motionless and that these things are able to move, it just bizarre, rates of speed with no indication of a traditional propulsion system. No heat signature that shows that, you know, rocket propulsion, nothing, nothing that we can explain and if they had a drone that could do that, that's where they would test those things and what better way to test whether or not people could see them than to run them out there when people are using new jets with new capabilities. Can you see them? Okay, they see them and the fact that, you know, the Tiktak, when Commander David Freaver brought this information and reported it and they showed the videos to these admirals and they were non-plussed. They were like, mm-hmm. Okay. They just left the room. Right. Like, do they fucking know? How are they not, are they just like stone cold dudes who can just keep it together in the face of some alien technology? They know that we were being visited or is this, and the other thing was that when he, when Freaver communicated this stuff, these guys who are running these, these sensors, they were running the detection systems or saying, we're seeing these things all the time every couple of weeks, we're seeing them all over the place. Well, what the fuck is that? And this is also 2004. Did they have the ability of 2004 something to go from above 50,000 feet above sea level to 50 feet in less than a second? What is that? Like, what the fuck is that? And people try to, you know, argue it away or explain it away by saying, oh, it's a failure of the detection systems and the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the visuals, they have more than one fighter jet is seen it. They have video of this thing moving at a speed that would turn human beings into jelly. Mm-hmm. Like, there's a biological entity inside that thing and experiences that G-Force. You're talking about some fucking insane G-Force, like 1300 times what a human being can tolerate and just tish gone silent. No visual means of repulsion. insane g force like 1300 times what a human being can tolerate and just Gone silent no visual means of propulsion. No no windows What is that is that a drone? What is that and the witnesses have been reliable too like I mean I've been afraid yeah, I've been suspected that like the last 20 years Especially in the last five it feels like the witnesses the guys coming forward saying look I know what I saw Are more the ones that are associated with the government even commercial airline pilots have been on the FAA But especially military pilots, you know, they're being allowed to speak that it feels like the waters are being tested by the government for some reason Like you know, let this out a little bit We're gonna let the people that actually people may actually believe right a test to what they they saw and see how the public reacts That's right. Well, that would be what I would do if I was running the government if I wanted to hide the fact that we have these things I would say that these are off world crafts That's what I would say. I would say look these things are behaving in a way that we can't explain Well, I guess we're being visited And then go right back to whatever black ops thing that you guys are doing some Raytheon project I mean, I don't know what it is But um, I go back and forth all the time whether I think it's from another planet another galaxy and other dimension Or whether I'm not I think it's us Or many people think that they've always been here You know when you talked about the Vedas in the Vedas they talk about these things They talk about that. I mean, it's in the Bhagavad Gita. It's in there's it's in the ancient Hindu texts They talk about these these vymanas these crafts That Whatever these beings operate So in that case we just getting better at detecting them or are they showing themselves more often? Well in unique circumstances If someone sees something like this like you So you see this in 1990 whatever it is in Phoenix If you lived 5,000 years ago and you see this like what is that what does that sound like? What does that sound like to everybody? Sounds like you're out of your fucking mind and a small handful of people say it They tell stories people write it down just goes away If you need experiences Are very difficult to classify you know if you have an experience with a ghost The ghost shows up in this room and we all see it and it doesn't show up on camera and we swear We saw an apparition of fucking forest gump standing there. You know like what the fuck is that? Well, you're just left with a story You know if you can't measure it you can't write it down you can't even a video of it like what are you seeing? You're seeing grainy footage of something You know when you see I'm sure you've seen these Supposedly leaked images that fighter pilots have taken with cell phones from their aircrafts like what are they saying? What is that thing? What is that weird blurry looking metallic looking thing? Is that a mylar balloon that they're Mistaking for a spacecraft that doesn't seem likely Seems like they're a lot fucking smarter than that. They're not gonna think a child's birthday balloon that's floating around at 20,000 feet is an aircraft They're probably gonna realize it's a balloon. They probably seem balloons, you know, yeah I don't know in those videos too. It's the commentary. They kind of sells it like look at that thing. Move or whatever Yeah, like the go fast video. Look at it go Jesus Christ and these guys are trained pilots They're used to seeing things and they're seeing something that rotates This is the other thing about the crap that cone size with with Bob Lazar said it's moving like this and it turns sideways And Lazar said that's what it did that it would direct its generator whatever that gravity Generator is it would direct that towards the way that it wanted to go so it would literally turn sideways to move forward I mean Kenneth Arnold was talking about these things in the 1950s right so for sure in the 1950s We didn't have the capability to make something like that Something with no visible means of propulsion that's shaped like a saucer that flies silently through the air and you know Moves at a speed and has capabilities in terms of maneuverability that far exceeds a jet That we had back then. What does that mean? What is that? I mean they were seeing these things when they had we had propeller planes You know, what is that? I don't know but part of me feels stupid for even talking about it You know to me it's like why you wasting all your energy? You have so many things you have to do this fast and it is fascinating But it also it makes you feel like a fool and I think that's part of the strategy of all this stuff Well, really curling people that talked about UFOs has been part of the government strategy from the jump for sure That's a project blue book. That's a project. Right. So but the thing on the military installations of course The two theories are one is that there's some sort of extra terrestrial intelligence that's drawn to our military activity But what seems like the more rational explanation is as you said, that's where they test this year sure or You know if I was an intelligent species that's willing to donate these crafts like they claim That they kind of let these things land or crash and then they'll do it in a very strategic way Where they know that the military will be able to cordon off the area and You know isolate and you know stop people from talking about it and the idea that people in the military aren't able to keep seekers So that's nonsense. They're really good at keeping secrets. You know they're they they can keep secrets especially high-level people look if I had access like if If not Joe Biden he's too far gone, but if Obama called me in like during the his administration You want to see some shit? I don't know like I want to see some shit and he said don't tell anybody But like I won't tell anybody Maybe I tell my wife maybe I tell one of my friends But I wouldn't fucking go public and tell everybody if they're willing to show me this shit like that Look No one's gonna believe me anyway, right? And so I'm like what good does it do if I make myself look like a more on a B I now I can't have access to it anymore because I told them Because I told people about it because now they can trust me. I shut the fuck up Especially if I was in the military. I would shut the fuck up show me. You know you ever heard the story It's a widely disputed story But that Jackie Gleason and Nixon were drinking one day And Nixon was like you want to see some shit and Nixon took Jackie Gleason To one of the air force bases and showed him this UFO And Jackie Gleason was a UFO fanatic I don't know if you know this but Jackie Gleason actually had a home built in upstate New York that looked like a UFO And he had this home built after this supposed experience. No shit. Yeah, show the images of the home This is the home that Jackie Gleason had built I mean with the fuck Look at the outside of it though not not that one that one's kind of just a cool circular one but that that image Like what what the fuck are you doing Jackie? Why do you make it a UFO house in upstate New York? It seems a little odd take that image like look at that. I mean come on man What the fuck is that? Like a sci-fi movie prop though, you know Yes, like a cliche of a UFO right but that's apparently this is the folklore Yeah, that's what he saw and so he's like I don't know build a fucking house look like that You know it's fun It's fun, but it also has this feeling of futility. It's like a futile Thing like why we even talking about it. It's nonsense. It's fascinating But it just seems like it's almost seems like you're never gonna know You know, I think we talk about it because it gives us hope frankly Yeah, we want to believe it's true. Well, we certainly want to believe the stories that they hover over military bases and shut down nuclear weapons And you know my my comedy club is called the comedy mothership and you walk into the comedy club. There's a gigantic Artificial UFO that we had built so when you walk into it like as you walk in the front door There's this big Construction of a UFO that other beam that comes down and we use it as a projector to show who's coming soon on the on the big screen, but I named the the rooms fat man and little boy Because those are the bombs that we dropped and right after we dropped those bombs That's when all the UFO activity happened That's like there's a giant uptick in UFO activity after 1945 And in the UFO folklore It's like they realize that we have the ability to drop nukes And so then they start visiting and then they start shutting down nuclear weapons at bases And making the presence known at these military bases. So hey Keep it together bitches like we're watching. We don't want you to nuke this whole planet and ruin our little program and then our program is an accelerated engineering program that we've accelerated the evolution of human beings Through some sort of intervention and that this is why we're so different This isn't it's not with stone tape theory It's the humans are engineered by some superior life form to try to accelerate our evolution And bring us to this place and that they've helped us along the way But we're autonomous and we're allowed to do what we want to do and so we do Disgusting crazy shit like drop nuclear bombs from propeller planes by the way, right? propeller planes on cities and that once they did that they're like okay Slow the fuck down We're here Now whether they've always been here like in you know The Vedic texts or I mean even in the Bible in a Ezekiel's description of the wheel within a wheel and have you read that description? Pull up a Ezekiel's description Of what he saw this is one of the favorite descriptions from the Bible from the Old Testament about UFOs that people love to bring up because Ezekiel has this thing that he describes and it's the most bizarre depiction I looked I saw an immense dust storm come from the north an immense cloud with lightning flashing from it a huge ball of fire Glowing like bronze within the fire were were what looked like four creatures vibrant with life each had the form of a human being But each also had four faces and four wings Their legs were sturdy and straight as columns But their feet were hooded like those of a calf and sparkled with the fire like burnished bronze on all four sides under their wings They had human hands all four Had faces and wings and the wings touching one another They turned neither one way nor the other. They went straight forward Their faces looked like this in front of a human face on the right side the face of a lion on the left the face of an ox And in the back the face of an eagle so much for the faces The wings were spread out with the tips of one pair touching the creature on either side The other pair of wings covered its body each creature went straight ahead wherever the spirit went they went They didn't turn as they want The four creatures looked like blazing fire or fiery torches tongues of fire shot back and forth between the creatures and out of the fire Bolts of lightning the creatures flash back and forth like strikes of lightning as I watched the four creatures I saw something that looked like a wheel on the ground beside each of the four face creatures This is what the wheels looked like they were identical wheels sparkling like diamonds in the sun They looked like they were wheels within wheels like a gyroscope They went in any of the four directions. They faced but straight not veering off The rims were immense circled with eyes when the living creatures went the wheels went when the living creatures lifted off The wheels lifted off wherever the spirit went they went the wheels sticking right with them for the spirit of the living creature Creatures was in the wheels When the creatures went the wheels went when the creatures stopped the wheels stopped when the creatures lifted off the wheels lifted off Because the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels over the heads of the living creatures was something like a dome shimmering like the light like a sky full of cut glass vaulted over their heads under the dome one set of wings extended towards the other with another set of wings covering their bodies when they moved I heard their wings it was like the roar of a great waterfall like the voice of the strong god like the noise of a battlefield when they stopped they folded their wings and then as they stood with folded wings there was a voice above the dome over their heads above the dome there was something that looked like a throne sky blue like a sapphire with a human-like figure towering above the throne from what I could see from the waist up he looked like burnished bronze and from the waist down like a blazing fire brightness everywhere the way a rainbow springs out of a sky on a rainy day that's what it was like it turned out to be the glory of God like what the fuck man I mean to anybody that's done DMT or ayahuasca really tripped on psychedelics though you read that and it feels sort of familiar yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah the glory of God yeah the glory of these visions of these yeah beings and the fact that these things are like constantly changing their appearance yeah like that's the thing about the DMT experiences like it's not a stationary static experience it's like constantly changing and moving in front of you and to see something like that in the sky and the fact that it's so noteworthy that they wrote it down in the fucking Bible maybe he found some of those mushrooms yeah maybe well you know that's there was a university in Israel I think as a university of Jerusalem that theorized that the Moses experience of the burning bush was a DMT experience and that what would this like when you say Moses saw the burning bush well what what kind of bush would burn that would give you a psychedelic experience well the occasion tree the occasion tree which is very common to that area is rich with DMT and how do you how do you psychoactively acquire DMT you smoke it so your smoking this tree this burning bush and you're seeing God and God has brought you 10 commandments how to live life which sounds like a lot of what you experience in the DMT experience when you have that and you have these contact with the entities they kind of give you guidelines of how to live yeah it felt to me like a massive amount of information being downloaded but that it was guiding in nature yeah but very difficult to hold on to yeah like you're like what is it so like it's probably something you'd want to write down yeah like the 10 commandments yeah well again back to the Christians and probably that was his thing it was like you you can't hold on to it with psychedelics alone and you don't need psychedelics to get a hold of it in the first place what he was preaching and he probably recognized that the thing that the problem with taking psychedelics is that it's so accessible you just take it I mean it's the beautiful thing about it but it all you also could say without that could be a problem because then a bunch of people with no discipline would just start popping these things and having these experiences and having no sort of framework no moral framework no ethical framework no understanding of what what are you experiencing and what to do with this stuff no discipline right yeah but if you acquire it biologically if you acquire it endogiously through discipline then you you're on a path and through that path you can achieve this thing and you realize this is a very difficult thing to and that you have to stay on this path in order to get this enlightenment I could see how someone would say no listen that's on the way this is the way that you can do it with the with your own mind you don't need these things you know terence we can't have thought on that though very funny slot you said it reminds me of an ancient story of this monk had acquired a city of levitation it practiced this and it said to the Buddha when the Buddha came to town you know I've spent 20 years acquiring the city of levitation and I can I could walk across the water and the Buddha said yeah but the fairies only a nickel so that was mechanics take on it it's like why would you do all that stuff when you could just take the mushrooms but McKenna was you know McKenna was a brilliant man he wasn't some stoned hippie in the middle of upstate New York to trip and balls on mushrooms I think it has some you know it's helpful to have some sort of like processing after the experience right not just keep like repeating it trying to like right back to that space yeah also McKenna was you know he was a proponent of taking psychedelic drugs so he probably would want people to think that his way is the way you know he's only human right yeah I don't know but it's all look just the fact that the psychedelic experience is a real thing and when you do take that and you do have those experiences and you realize that it's a real thing and like how did I not know about this how was the most profound thing that's ever happened to me something that is a schedule one drug that's illegal for whatever reason that no one's explained to me accurately no one's ever explained it in a way that makes sense why is a thing that doesn't kill anybody that exists in the human mind that was the other thing that McKenna said about DMT it's illegal but everybody's holding you're right everybody has it you know if you want to test people for DMT well everybody's guilty everybody the most staunch conservative anti drug person is right now has DMT in their body all of them do everybody does it's literally like testing people for blood yeah you have blood of course you're alive yeah you have DMT you're alive yeah but it's illegal what this is a big it he says it sounds so insane and also the fact that it's naturally occurring not naturally just naturally occurring in the human mind but naturally occurring in nature and that there seems to be some sort of a mitigation strategy by the human body in order to keep you from tripping balls by consuming all the different plants that have DMT in it and that's mono aiming oxidase so mono aiming oxidase breaks it down in the gut so if you consume like grasses like full-arice grass it's very rich in DMT if a human being consumed that you're not going to trip because the mono aiming oxidase in the gut breaks it down so the strategy that they came up with with ayahuasca was to combine these psychedelic plants these plants that contain dimethyl trip to mean with other plants that contain harming which is a mono aiming oxidase inhibitor and that the two of these together were allow an orally active version of dimethyl trip to mean which is what it is you know with me I really felt like once was enough I know you have a different approach but made me everybody's different I mean once is enough because it's so fucking scary you don't want to do it again I get it but every time I've ever been troubled and I've done it I feel way better I'm like DMT specifically yeah I'm talking about you know DMT specifically yeah every time I've ever done it I'm like oh the god the things I concentrate on are so stupid yeah the things that worry me are so foolish I find out with MDMA I find MDMA to be very very useful as a research sure but yeah yeah yeah it also makes you realize like how insecure you are and how insecure most people with interactions with each other and when those barriers are down how wild the experience is of just not having any fear of human interaction yeah that's something I only did once and the problem that I had with it was after it was over I felt so drained but I didn't have any strategy for like taking you know some sort of a serotonin booster like 5hDP which is what people take that are like they really know what they're doing with that stuff they take 5hDP to boost up their serotonin while they're doing it so that after it's over they're not just crashed because the next day I was useless I remember I was in a coffee shop the next day and I was trying to read a magazine and I couldn't read I couldn't concentrate I literally couldn't read this magazine I was like oh my god I'm so dumb my brain feels like I felt the way I described it was like I had a dry sponge for a brain and normally it's wet filled with one now it's just like this oh there's a dopey dry sponge and was it worth it maybe but I had stuff to do that day right I had to show that night this was after doing what MDMA yeah you're an e-tard right you need to call it 90s you're an e-tard yeah that's what the experience yeah you do need to do the serotonin booster that is the key move but I just think it's bordering you know it's not bordering on criminal this fucking criminal that the government has kept MDMA therapy from like especially guys coming back from these fucking wars and at least you know yeah they're all fucked up with PTSD because I'm to does somebody who has PTSD not from combat but from childhood trauma MDMA is just it's just like a godsend literally from the gods the godsend and that it's that that shit has been kept from I mean in maps that organization maps is due in fantastic research with it and it seems like that you know it's it's on the path to legalization now finally you know yeah but there's so many guys that needed that so badly and including the people that are making it illegal unfortunately that's the problem it is that it's it's it's an experience it's being kept from us by people that haven't done it right right yeah there was another quote that it was attributed to McKenna the McKenna tried to attributed to somebody else they said it didn't say it but it was that LSD is something that causes severe psychotic experiences and people who haven't taken it nice I might have paraphrase that I think that but it's something along those lines right and you know we know for a fact that all that stuff was made illegal during the sweeping psychedelics act of 1970 that was designed to subvert the war movement and to the subvert the civil rights movement and to go after the Black Panthers and all these different people that were disrupting the the government's control over society and that the best way to do that is to make all drugs illegal and then go after those people and just throw water on the whole party yeah it worked it worked for decades and it like severely impacted art specifically music if you look at the music from the 60s all the way up to 1970 and then there's this conversion period of 1970 and then you look at the music of the 80s like what the fuck happened everybody what happened how do you go how do you go from Hendrix yeah you know to fucking whatever you know I don't want to make fun of any 80s bands but hair bands you know like what happened there what the fuck happened how did it get so dumb it may stop shipping started doing Coke yeah exactly yeah that's exactly what happened yeah and they just lost the plot for a little while it seems like the plots come back and I think the plots come back and I think you could kind of credit Lorenzo from psychedelics lawn with the distribution of all those old recordings of Alan Watts and McKenna and all those different psychedelic bards that were talking about these things that got people more curious and interested in them and then you know people realizing that we needed to do something for these soldiers that are coming back with PTSD and the civil side I've been ceremonies in ayahuasca and MDMA which is being used by maps maps has done an amazing job they really have and they've they've done it the right way where they're you know really promoting legalization in a very structured way yeah it just feels like it's taken so long but that's like what the government that's the only way that the government is going to accept yeah it's like multiple research trials yeah and even then I mean it really takes people leaving dying off it takes the old people going away the corrupt politicians that are in charge of deciding what is and is not legal they have to vanish and they slowly get phased out generation after generation and then the new people coming into play some of them have military experience some of them know people that have been really helped by MDMA therapy or ayahuasca or many of ayagan people that have like severe addictions to pills and all sorts of different opiates ayagan is like one of the greatest things that's ever been discovered to help heal people from these problems yeah yeah we're in a so many weird competing factors are all happening all together and they're all in this wild chaos that is the age of information the age of information and technology that's allowing people to have access to these things but also realize how crazy the world we live in is and then you know you have TikTok where people are just being distracted all day long and being confused and that's terrifying and it's crack and I feel more hopeful now Joe once we started talking about psychedelics again than it was when we were talking about war yeah well psychedelics might be the only thing that prevents war it might be the only thing that helps people I mean if we you can get large-scale use of psychedelics sanctioned and not just in America but worldwide I think it will have a tremendous impact on the way people view this experience because this is a small tiny finite experience that we're going through it seems like it takes forever but it I mean you're 53 I'm 56 it's like Jesus man we're more than halfway to the finish like it just happened it's like a blip and you're still we're all everyone me included we're all just trying to figure it out as we go along and hopefully you're better than you were yesterday at it yeah and sometimes you're not sometimes you fall down sometimes you get back up and you climb a little higher this time now you're now you're better than you were a year ago but boy it's fucking confusing you know I went to I went to college in University of California Santa Cruz it's no secret that Santa Cruz for a long time has been a center for psychedelics and there's a guy there even I think even if I could remember his name I'm not going to drop it but he got busted for making acid and I think it was around 911 he had the got this massive underground LSD lab like out in the middle of the country and it was a story that never really got picked up because everyone was distracted by a missile silo guy yeah I think so yeah and and his whole thing was like he was trying to make what he called planetary dose that was his thing I have to make enough acid for everyone on earth to take acid it's the only thing that's going to save humanity Wow and I kind of get it yeah at least I get the thinking I get the thinking too especially if you're really tripping yeah I know yeah just get everybody fucked up yeah there was people that had this theory that if you just dose the water supply in major cities that people would be forced to trip but you know like what dose I don't think that's probably a good idea no it's a terrible idea no the the correct idea is legalization and centers that are set up by ethical experts who really have experience in these things that can provide both counseling and medical services and allow people to do the correct dose safely under supervision and then counseling that gives them some sort of a framework as to what to do with this what what has happened what this means and how you can apply this to your life and if we could figure out how to do that in a structured way we probably could help an enormous amount of people absolutely the integration after that trip right yeah and that's taking back to christen is right because that's the series of have out but yeah but but legitimate there's a legitimate comment which is that that's what and that's what christian consciousness in a sense was offering was integration of the psychedelic experience yeah here's a framework for integrating everything you've been experiencing on acid and masculine right you know whatever whatever the hippie kids were into yeah they they were I mean I think problem applaud and the people that were legit were really trying to do that and they were really trying to spread this message and if you think about what they were able to do during the 60s you know with the help of george harris and me they they opened up a lot of people's minds to these ideas and probably changed a lot of lives and the directions of a lot of people's lives yeah for the better for the better yeah listen man I really appreciate your work you know sasquatch is incredible and this christian documentaries incredible too you're really awesome thanks brother appreciate you and if you do this you crane thing or if you ever do a UFO thing whatever you do come back okay love that again thank you very much all right oh so tell everybody it's available it's on peacock christians christian is yeah on peacock it's it's awesome thank you brother appreciate it bye everybody