the general good experience. Well you know one of the interesting things about Endogen's DMT and especially with his discovery in such high levels in the brain is that it may be the endometrics. It could be kind of regulating everything all of the time. What do you mean by that? Regulating everything all the time. It could be the way we interact with reality. Is through Endogen's DMT which is always at a steady level. Well the way I began wondering about that is because what is the purpose of Endogen's DMT? Why does the brain make DMT? Can you do a DMT test on a person's blood level? It's pretty hard. It's pretty hard. It's really low in blood. It's like billions of a gram per milliliter. Okay so you'd have to measure it in the actual brain itself. In the brain or spinal fluid maybe spinal fluid but most likely brain. When they start doing stuff like neural link where they're going to insert wires into your brain and you know you're going to have an app to control your brain to control your mood. I mean it seems like that would be one of the ways they would do it right? Well you'd need to find where in the brain the main source of DMT is and then put an electrode there and keep that going. Do you think it's limited to one specific area where it's developed? They're just beginning to unravel the whole role and location of Endogen's DMT. So when they know that it's in the liver and they know that it's in the lungs, the lungs to me sound interesting because of of hollotropic breathing. Because people have done breathing exercises and achieved states of altered states of consciousness. Yeah, that kind of makes sense, doesn't it? Well yeah but I think it's not working through the lungs because those more recent studies haven't really demonstrated DMT and lung. Yeah, I used to say it's made in lung. Everybody used to say it's made in lung but it seems like it's made in brain. Then all the other stuff you're just getting like a trickle down effect. Well, does it go through the whole body? Yeah, but it's metabolized so quickly. By the time it gets into the blood that you're drawing, the concentrations are pretty minimal. Wow. What a sneaky molecule. Well you have to wonder what it's doing right? What is it doing? What is Endogen? What's the function of it? You know there's the possibility we have at DMT neurotransmitter system like serotonin or dopamine. In which case what is it doing? Wow. So this is a really wild way to think about it because to this time I'd never even considered that. I always thought of it as being something that was responsible maybe for very vivid dreams or something that was responsible for near-death experiences or what happens to you when you die. The idea of a portal. But I never thought about it as being something that is regulating regular everyday reality. Well, you know one of the hallmarks of the DMT effect is that it feels more real than real. Yeah. And you study the function of endogenous neurotransmitters by giving drugs that modify the effect of that endogenous neurotransmitter. You know so we've got the SSR antidepressants and they affect serotonin although they may not all that much. But still that's been the working model for decades. And you know so because SRIs are useful for depression and anxiety you then can speculate that serotonin is responsible for mood or anxiety. So the hallmark of the DMT effect is it's more real than real. It feels more real than anything else. So it's tempting to speculate. But that again when I go back to that disembodied mind thought process of like thinking like what am I thinking when I'm over there? Since my body doesn't seem to be there and I'm there and it seems more real than real. Is that me just tricking myself into thinking that it's a different place? I mean how could you tell? How could I tell right? Yeah, I mean how would you know? I have one way of looking at it that I always describe. I always say to people I say if there was a thing that you could do like a door you could go through and that door would take you to another dimension. What you would communicate with some entity beyond your wildest imagination that's constantly visually changing and communicating with you telepathically. And knows everything about you sees all your bullshit and is trying to impart some ideas that will help you with your life. Because it's a godlike experience like you're experiencing like some sort of uber powerful entity somewhere uber intelligent entity something beyond any if we just looked at humans and thought of the evolution of human one day we'll get to this we're not going to get to that. That is a different it seems like it's so beyond the body it's so beyond the human monkey body. This is what I tell people I go if I could give if you would open a door and you would go there and you'd have that experience. You would you do it and most people like yes I would do it. If I gave you a drug that gave you that experience. You still have the exact same experience. It's the exact same experience. You've just decided it's not real and you've decided it's not real because you're putting into this category of hallucination. Like what does that even mean? What does that even mean? You're actually having that experience. I don't know what it is. I mean I like to play devil's advocate and I like to think that maybe I'm messing with my own head and maybe I'm just like it's like I'm like well through doing what. looking at it like maybe it's just my mineral chemistry going bonkers and you know interacting with my visual cortex could produce the hallucinations. But it doesn't feel that's what I'm trying to figure out. If you're bullshitting yourself when you're over there or if it's you really are over there. But what I tell people is it's the same experience. Yeah what difference does it make? Yeah. It's previously invisible and it contains information. A lot. Yeah and I think that's all you can say about it. It contains information about you right? Well it could only be happening to you. Yeah. It's not happening to somebody else. It's like it gives you advice. It can. But how do you judge the value of that advice? Yeah. Well what is the one of the things that happened to me I've talked about this ad and I'll see him unfortunately if you heard this before folks. But one of my experiences there was like a bunch of jokers like jesters or like jester hats and they were giving me the finger. They were going like this fuck you. And it made me realize I was taking myself too seriously. Like instantaneously I went oh I get it and they went like this. I went like I don't do that. Don't do that. But like saying fuck you to me it was so clear what they were doing. It was so clear it was like a little lesson like don't do that. Yeah it's interesting you don't do that that's like three syllables. Yeah. They correspond to a heartbeat. You know when I tripped on DMT the first time these beings came out of this waterfall and they said now do you see now do you see now do you see it was the same three beat thing. I love you they say I love you a lot. I love you and I think a corresponds to the heartbeat because it's in sync. You know the vocalizations in sync with the heartbeat. Yeah yeah. Yeah. The one time I did it in these entities were talking to me and saying I love you 600 million 500 thousand times. Like the whale a child would say I love you with like some crazy number seven billion zillions. I mean I think and every time they did that it would show a more beautiful image. Like every image like I love you 600 million 500 thousand times. I love you 700 million 400. Every time they did it it was just this bigger and bigger experience visually. The part where I was like crying I was like openly weeping. Oh yeah. The beauty is not just what I was seeing. It sounds beautiful. It was wild but it was that simple sort of there's just like a like they'll say simple things to you in a way that you're not really hearing it but you know what they're saying. Well it kind of penetrates you. Yeah. It's very weird. And it's very weird. Very weird. Yeah. You used to not talk about your personal experiences with it. I know I figured to hell with it. Yeah I think so. I think it's good that you did that because I remember when we first met you were reluctant to discuss it. You I mean you didn't really want to talk about it publicly or want people to know about it publicly. Yeah I figured that I had some legitimacy to maintain. A few years back I had this conversation with Dennis McKenna. You know like about your reputation. And or you know one's reputation he said I've just given up on my reputation. It's just you know so. Well when you talk as openly about psychedelics as Dennis he's the best guy to talk about it too. Because his he's got a really interesting way of discussing things you know and he's had so many personal experiences and he's so smart. And he's got this incredible vocabulary to just draw from and when he describes the actual impact of a psilocybin and psychedelic chemicals particularly in formation of language. He was describing the stone to ape theory. It's incredible. He listened to him to say it. Because the way he describes it like he actually understands what psilocybin and what all these various molecules are doing to different parts of the brain and why that would facilitate the development of language and compassion and connect the tribe more. Well I mean do you think it actually is information coming from the brain or do you think that the portal is being opened up and the information is coming from above? I think that's more likely. I think the more likely is that the brain is in antenna. You know it's one of the things that creative people will always tell you like someone sits down and writes a song. It just like came from the air. They're getting things from somewhere else almost. It's almost like you just got to get out of your own way. You got to put enough good juice out there in the world and take enough bad out and see the world from a clear perspective. At least in these brief moments of creativity and then things come to them. They're just sitting in front of the computer and pam. They got an idea for a book. Like where the fuck is all that coming from? It seems like people always want to say it's a muse. That's the Steven Pressfield analogy. He's got a great book about it. It's called the War of Art. All about inviting the muse into your life and being disciplined and sitting there at the computer every day and summoning it and treating it like it's an entity. And if you do that it works. This is what's crazy. People who are disciplined and also creative like they decide. I'm going to write this book. I'm going to sit down and I'm going to force myself every day. Like ideas come to them. Where the fuck are they coming from? Is it possible that the brain really is some sort of an antenna and that wisdom and love and all these different things? They're just all around us. We're just confused by our monkey bodies. Well, do you think we're getting that information from God? If that's what you want to call it, you know, the only problem I have with the word God, and it's not really a problem. But it's a recognition. Is it a loaded word? It's a loaded word. But so is love. Yes. So I think you just got to take the good with the bat. Well, that's Alex Grace position. Alex Grace says we have to take it back the same way we take back love and say God all the time. And that's what he does. Yeah, and that's the reason I think it's good to use. There were psychedelic instead of hallucinogen or anything like that. Yeah, I think so too. In the other hand, or anything like that. In the other hand, it's cool word. It's cool. It assumes a lot though. Yeah, it's like people that call weed cannabis. Yeah, I like to smoke a lot of cannabis. Like, okay, settle down buddy. Yeah, like the German Theogen, it refers to God, yeah. Theos. And it refers to n, which means that God exists within. And it has the word, you know, genin it, which means it's a drug, which is generating something like God. You know, so that assumes a lot. And there are people who could benefit from psychedelic experiences who might not cotton to those ideas and would avoid an in theogen, but might take a psychedelic. Yeah, I think psychedelic sounds manageable in the agenda sounds like you join in a cult. It's a bit cultish. Well, isn't everything a bit cultish? It seems like whatever anything, you know, really affects people in a lot of ways. There's always someone who looks to sort of take the reins and sort of dictate what the experience is and how to do it. And what the ritual should be and how you should, you know, manage it and it gets culty. It gets culty. But I think you could, you know, decultify it to some extent.