So this is a question about a topic that cannot be classified because it is illegal. But you have any reason to believe that the US government has hurt or killed anybody connected to these programs, American citizens. There were concerns, like I stated during the hearing of people that have exposed that to me. And of course I brought some of those officers to the Inspector General and tell the community Inspector General because I'm like, this is serious. And I'm like, here's here's the law enforcement people you want to talk to because I'm hands off if that's true. You need to look into it. But I think it was murder. Yes. And then physical harm. And I will say why won't get into the specifics because it's part of my open investigation, besides the administrative stuff. And I don't know. It's an unknown entity to me. I do not know who did this. But their displeasure in me was made known in my personal life. And that it affected my wife and I. And I had a report that to a certain counterintelligence element and a certain law enforcement element because right before I thought my whistleblower complaint, I felt that my life was in jeopardy. And that's what I was alluding to during the hearing. Because we'll just say if you when you come home and you see something, you know, you've made somebody unhappy. And to this day, I don't know who it was. I don't think it was a foreign but there is some element that I extremely angered. And I don't say that flippantly. I said it very seriously because I thought my life was in danger. You can't get into details because it's part of the investigation. It's part of the investigation. At some point, I'm happy to talk about it publicly. And also, as they say in the intelligence business, you don't acknowledge your tail. So I don't want to acknowledge some other things I've noticed that maybe. But it sounds like you believe you've been a surveilled enthrend. Oh, 100%. It was obvious to me. And, you know, I mean, it was blatant will just say what I observed. And it was so concerning. I had I am under the purporting into the authorities. And I asked my agency for certain protective measures. I can't get into that detail. But I was certainly petrified. And the at the same time that those things were happening to me personally, they were happening at the same time to a certain other public figure that is known to the world, we'll just say, and another former intelligence officer near my home as well. And it was some kind of planned multi person intimidation activity that was very disturbing. And obviously, but at that. But so I'm not doing this for fun. I'm serious. I'm doing this interview because this is protective for me. I don't want to be anonymous. So I'm not here for attention. I don't even, this is a nightmare to even be public. Right. You know, I, I'm used to working in a vault and briefing generals. This is not me. I'm not a public communicator, although I'm trying. And that's why I'm very good communicator. I appreciate it. But this is a serious subject with serious consequences. And I suffered a lot of serious consequences. So as you know, we've totally convinced me of your sincerity. There was a lot of whispering about your motives. This is an op. Why now? Why are we learning all? Yeah. People think that I'm a part of some CIA, SIO, or something like that. First of all, I've never signed any kind of paperwork to be a part of an operation that regard. Unfortunately, there isn't a plan. I'm not a part of a plan. I ended up becoming a leader of a faction of, you know, former government officials and current government officials that would like change in a legal way. And, you know, I encourage if there are people watching that have participated in those programs, there are multiple legal avenues such as going to the Arrow office, going through the ICIG like I did until just community inspector general or another cognizant inspector's general to legally provide this information. And they're also, illegal, but morally defensible avenues like coming on this show and I'd be delighted to host anyone who wants to tell the truth about what he's seen. And there's no justification for hiding this that that's my evaluation. So I'd be happy to to take that risk. Yeah, that person on. But it sounds like when people, so given your own experience, when people say to you, US government employees say to you, wow, someone was killed by the US government for talking about this or planning to talk about it. It sounds like you would have to take those claims seriously. I did. And I remember a very, very credible senior intelligence officer precisely make those allegations in front of senior officials on Capitol Hill. I was in the room. Elected officials. They're staff, I'll just say I don't want to get into details. Crazy. I mean, so it's at that point, if somebody says the US government killed an American citizen without a trial because he was going to tell the truth about something, that's kind of when everything stops. You can't have that in a free country. I mean, I think people are just paralyzed and fear because that's a reality. And I remember the certain professional staff members being very upset in the room. And I mean, they're rightly so, but like we need to do something about that because that's not good. And most of the people that even I interviewed, I'm like, do you want to go to the Inspector General with me? And they're like, we'll back you up, but we don't want to name on any complaints because they were just living in fear. So like for my whole life, that you know, I never even thought you were supposed to reel until fairly recently. Me either four years ago, I asked me four or five years ago if I thought you were supposed to reel, I would have laughed. But the conventional explanation for the US government among those who believed it was hiding these facts. The explanation for why was the government just want to so panic, disoriented weakness in the face of its adversaries, etc, etc. Those explanations do not account for the behavior describing. Yeah, if they're hiding something real that implicates them and they're talking to these entities, whatever they are. And I believe in the basis of evidence that the US government has made contact and has had continuous or at least sporadic, but over period of years contact, you don't need to not or shake your head. But that is my belief based on people. Like what is that? Yeah, if there's certainly, you know, a relationship that was cultivated with non human intelligences, hypothetically, I guess, you know, to play off of what you just said, good or bad, it's almost like we were afraid after 9, 11, dirty bombs, terrorists. Okay, well, that's nature. That's life. You didn't yang in the universe. If there is malevolent, non human intelligences, okay, well, that's a fact of life. You don't hide it because what if the US populace one needs to be prepared for something something? Well, hypothetically, and it's also not their right to hide it because they don't own the government. The public does actually exactly. And it's just I understand the reasons at first, but like you said, I think it's just the moral decay and the decay and leadership. And once again, well, we don't want to admit we did all this stuff yourself. But also if the US government has had contact with these entities. And again, it is my informed belief that the US government has had contact. What are they talking about? What is that? Hey, I would like to know too. I mean, I grew up watching Star Trek. So, I mean, I say that kind of, you know, whimsically, but like, well, great. I mean, of my generation under 40, that's like, we're not shocked. That's cool. Like a Gen Zer, whose 18 would want to study physics if they found out this stuff was real. Yes. Like this is how you boost STEM in this country for goodness sakes. I mean, this is like the most exciting. Yes, a little scary, but overall, it's exciting. I mean, nothing's happened. You know, we're still living. I'm able to talk about this and nothing's happening, you know, to the, you know, the world, if you will. So, it's, I think it's exciting for young people. And I think it's the right time to do this. Going back in history, I mean, there, you know, there are all sorts of mysteries about history that we, you know, which can't explain even now. But it sounds like it would not be surprising to learn that people 3,000 years ago had contact with these. Yeah. I mean, you look at the works of Jacques Valet, a famous researcher. His character was portrayed in as the French character in Close the Counters of the Third Kind. It's even Spielberg. That guy exists. His name is Jacques and he has a PhD and he's a smart scientist, but looked at this and there's a couple books, like passport to Magolienne, some other stuff and probably butchering the name, where he looked into antiquity. This phenomenon. So, when people say, oh, it's probably adversarial technology, etc. We've been seeing the same stuff since antiquity. And this should also potentially enforce stories in theological texts, say the Bible or whatever that people actually saw, Ezekiel, Ezekiel's wheels as timber shed has expalves publicly. Maybe that actually happened. Now, unfortunately, you're bursting maybe a worldview or a bubble for some people, but it actually ultimately might enforce people's belief systems because stories in the religious texts weren't fable, allegory or whatever. They happened. And I'm not saying all of them did, but there might be evidence if we were openly and honestly studying the subject in more detail. Amazing. Last question, small question, but there clearly some connection between nuclear weapons, nuclear energy and the sightings of these things. I mean, they've been seen around the US military installations with nuclear. So what is that? Yeah, you wonder if the nuclear testing was almost like a beacon. Anybody observing from far distance like, whoa, the monkey has discovered 10 to the six tons of TNT energy extraction. They're close. Maybe they're only an order of magnitude, a way of energy distraction to develop technology that maybe they have, hypothetically. And it might have been just like a lighthouse that we turned it on and now they became more interested. And it might be also a symptom of what we call collection bias. We're modern society. We were more calibrated to look for that kind of stuff because there was like sci-fi movies in the 30s and 40s and maybe people were looking up more maybe. But certainly there is some kind of nuclear connection. What does it mean? I don't know. They're obviously performing some kind of reconnaissance and surveillance of us as it relates to not only our nuclear weapons and nuclear facilities. If anybody wants to read a book called UFOs in Nukes by Robert Hastings, he spent 40 plus years looking at interviewing Air Force Missile Ears, other credible witnesses and very famous incident in 1967. Bob Salis, right? Shut down the base. Shut down the Nukes. And we should take those observers seriously. They're trained. They have clearances. They have their jobs in the line in that regard. And so there is a nuclear connection. I encourage people to read that book. But what does it mean? I don't even know. No idea. Well, you're a brave man. And I'll be honest. I didn't know what to think because there's a lot of whispering about you. But I think you're totally sincere.