Joe Roman Feynman, the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day So what's happening? It's all good man When you bail it out of your country You see? That is the fucking Titanic and you were one of the last deck hands We're gonna stand and fight man Are you really? Yeah, good luck No, we are Yeah, we're the guys playing As it's still okay We're the ones you were saying standing fight Is it a excitement of violence? Yeah, yeah No, but it's got it's interesting I mean obviously you had Graham Linner and on the show We're gonna have him on as well As soon to talk about it But he his They're not gonna prosecute him And not only that They also said They are not going to investigate Non-crime hate incidents anymore Do you know what those are? Interesting It's basically when you've committed no crime But you're still like hateful Oh, okay But that's also very subjective too Yeah, of course So they're not gonna investigate them anymore Yeah But they're still gonna keep track of them as what they said Oh, keep track Just move down an eye on you We're gonna make a record of it But we're gonna investigate So are they gonna stop arresting people for social media posts then What do you think, Joe? I think no Yeah, I think it's profitable That's well It's probably a nice fine, right? Would you get a fine? I don't think it's about that I think you know during the Uber Woke era They put all these laws on the Statue Book And the police have to enforce the law Right, they have no choice Because if a bunch of people complain And then they don't investigate the people That have been reported Oh, that's what it's all about They get in trouble Of course Like if you're the ordinary Like you know police officers, right? Police officers don't like enforcing these dumb laws Of course It's put on them from above Yeah, I just didn't know that all that stuff was put in place In your country during the Woke era Yeah, well And the heavy rope It's almost like a fever dream You know, when you really go back and Pay attention to some of the more insane woke stuff from like Just five years ago Yeah Like everyone was losing their fucking mind But like if I was in the lead If I was on those lizard people running the world I'd have been like Well, lookie here This is really interesting Like this was just a cold It was just a cold And a little bit of social media input And we got these people behaving in a way That they'd never behaved before Admitting to things they'd never admitted to before Adhering to rules that never existed before Yeah, I think the thing that I found the most The worst bit about it Wasn't necessarily the behavior of the elites It was the behavior of ordinary people during that time The fact that your neighbor was so willing to snitch on you Because you went for a second walk But that's why I was interested in it as a lizard person I was a lizard person I'd be like, look at these people are dumb Like this is really easy to me Especially I was just talking about in mind Who's fleeing LA And he was like, I can't anymore I tried I took fucking hung in there I can't do it anymore He's like Everybody went crazy It's like There's something that happened Because of the pandemic And the Black Lives Matter protests And the riots and all the cases It just chick Like whatever the temperature of society was Is like it hits a side of global warming Where it's like it's time to investigate Greenland It's time to move north Like this is a bad climate now This sucks And LA is a perfect example of this Because we talk about this all the time You get out of the airport at LAX You feel that LA sun on your skin And you just go, this is paradise Yeah And then you walk out and you see this It's paradise And they fucked it up so bad That people will literally pack up and leave paradise What Donald Trump should do Is when he leaves the office Run for Governor of California I just take over California and fix it It would be hilarious if he did It would be one of the funniest things of all time If an 82 year old man Steps into the office of Governor of California We're gonna fix everything You're gonna put up with water I know when I get the water We'll be fucking hilarious But it's almost like So there's a very old joke about Venezuela Where God was creating Venezuela And he was like You know what I'm gonna do? I'm gonna make sure they have diamonds They have gold They have desert but they also have jungle They have beautiful beaches It's gonna be rich in oil And the whole, and then the entire world goes Hey that's something like They've gotta have something bad And God goes yeah you know what you're right Let's give them the Venezuelans And that's almost like that with California You're like California's too perfect You know what I mean? It's got everything you need Right So what are you gonna do? You've gotta give them something fucked up And it's just these crazy people Believe in these stupid ideas But it wasn't for a long time I mean you gotta realize Arnold was the governor of California Right? And then Ronald Reagan's from California He was the governor of California One time he too He wasn't always that nuts And when you went back to when I went there in the 1990s It was much more moderate politically Like you know people were definitely left leaning But it wasn't a focus It wasn't a thing that was discussed all the time It just it wasn't And I remember working with many like older actors Who were openly conservative No one cared It was just like oh this is Bob You know he's really into Bob Dole Like you know it wasn't Wasn't unusual Something happened around the Obama administration Something happened specifically around His second term that really changed everything And if you look at like internet like searches And use of certain words Especially racism Yes It flies It just hits a giant 2014 Yes 2014 And it's not just in America It's literally everywhere in the world That's why I think it's social media that's caused that A hundred percent It's social media And it's it's there's a bunch of factors But the problem is now that the genies out of the bottle They know how easy we are to manipulate And I don't think people are learning They're TikTok and all day long And they're just like getting blasted with all this negativity And strife and global conflict And Colombian assassinations That's what I get A lot of these assassinations And like cafes And what pulls up on a scooter BANG BANG And they drive off And everybody screams I've seen a hundred and thousand of those I've seen, you know it's like everybody's like completely Ramped up And at the same time You've got people in the UK getting arrested for Facebook posts And they're like, what about immigration? So I think part of the problem is Is that people when they go on these posts They're not looking for to learn something as you just said What they actually want is an emotional reaction They want to feel something Right If you live in a society where it's comparatively The easiest it's ever been And your life is boring Because all you do is get up, you go to work, you go to food You have food, you come back It's essentially a treadmill where you don't feel any of the ups And downs of emotion Then what way would you get that but by going online And seeing something fucking awful happening You feel terror, you feel sadness, you feel rage And you're most basic, you feel alive Well it's also just That's what you're going to watch And so you're getting sucked into it just because the algorithm Which is crazy No one ever considered algorithms before We considered access to information But we didn't consider that information be curated To hold your attention span And all these factors have not been studied well There's been a few guys like Jonathan Haint writing about it A few scholars that are really attempting to say Hey what is the what's the sociological and what is a long term consequences Of this happening also for children These are the first children in the in human history Growing up on social media, never been done before We don't know what that's like What is it going to change in terms of empathy In terms of hostility, acceptance of violence So completely brand new thing on the left Acceptance and celebration of gun violence Never happened before when I was a kid It never existed No one from the left ever celebrated anybody getting assassinated Ever, it just wasn't a thing It's so crazy man And you're talking about like language as well Like we have this, we have a delete of the green party In the UK, new guys coming through It's very popular with people on the left On that side of the left anyway And it's been what, how long has a been since Charlie Kirk was assassinated Like a month And he's running around calling like not far right people Just like Nigel Farage is a nati, is a fascist And you're going, we've discussed this so many times with you man It's like when you call people these words Like if you and I and Francis thought the nati's were here to take over We don't fight them So what do you expect people to do when you put in the target on people's backs? One hundred percent And you're doing it in just for political persuasion power That's really all of this That's what it is No one really believes Nigel Farage is a fucking nati He's kind of goofy There's not a nati Like what is a nati then And here's the real problem, this is what nobody wants to admit If you're in nazi Germany And you're a 20 year old man And you're German And everyone in your town is a nazi You're probably a nazi too Or you're a Jew And you're running You're running from these motherfuckers So either you're a Jew or you're a nazi You're either Jewish or you're a fucking evil part of history That everybody refers to as the worst people of all time Absolutely And you know, we're talking scary Yeah But it's human nature Sorry, Francis We interviewed David Busy yesterday, you've had him on right? Yeah Evolutionary This is one of the things he talked about Within us is the ability We have good adaptations And we have evil adaptations And if you put people in a certain context And those adaptations are in all of us Yeah, Donner Party People eat people Yeah, you get down to I might die Or I might eat somebody Eat people The guy's already dead We should just eat them And then you all sit around and go, oh my god We're really going to eat a person And then you're eating a person Like everybody does They all have Very few people just starve to death When you could just eat a person Who's already dead And it's, you know, Zach Polanski What he does is to me This is a green party The green party guy is completely wrong But then there are people on the far left So there's a member parliament called Zara Sultana Yes, that is her real name Zara Sultana And yeah Does that sound like a boss in a video game? Yeah Well, what's really interesting is She has, she put a clip on her social media Where she goes And she set up this new far left political party And she says we've got a fight fashions in parliament We got a fight them in the ballot box And you're going, alright, look I don't like the late little rhetoric And then she says something even more interesting And we've got to fight them in the streets Now you think to yourself Right If you classify Nigel Farage And the people who vote reform In the UK Which may well win the general election Which may well be the biggest political party And already represents a sizeable portion of the UK You're effectively advocating violence And it's incitement to violence as far as I'm concerned But because she's on the far left Which he's seemed to be a good person That's somehow okay Whereas if Nigel said something like that Along those lines You know that people would be like this is a fascist, it's his evil This is disgusting, you shouldn't say that You're also weaponizing mental illness Because it's one of the things that we know now Very clearly because of all these YouTube videos All these people that go to these protests And start interviewing folks Some of these people are clearly not well And this is the thing they've attached themselves to This is their tribe This is whether it's no kings Or fuck ice Or whatever whatever the tribe is This is their tribe now And their skits of frantic More their, you know, fill in the blank Whatever the mental illnesses And you're weaponizing them By calling these people Who just differ with you politically Or more conservative You're calling these people The enemy of humanity And very scary And you know I'm one of the people that has gone along to a lot of protest There's a lot of wild people there Oh yeah you've done some great interviews with those protests Yeah it's just when they're confronted with a person who's actually asking them questions It's remarkable how few people know why they're there They don't know Like when you get into specifics This guy did this thing today Where he was talking with people The no kings were I'm gonna send this to you, Jamie Because it's it's it's you know I mean I understand why they responded The way they did but but it is absolutely fascinating to watch Because it just shows you what Let me find this real quick It just shows you how much these things that people get involved in Aren't bait all the same in it Hold on Shit I hate when I do this I thought I saved it I might not have saved it Damn Oh I did save it No, I might not have I'm sorry Sorry No, I don't think I did So anyway this guy was he was interviewing people And he was like, is this this is about human rights And they're like yeah Like you guys like fully in support of a human rights See if you can find this guy He's got a beard and long hair And they're like yes, absolutely He goes, what about for fetuses in the womb? Everybody walks away Everybody was like, yeah That's on human or that I don't And he does it to everybody And he looks like a hippie You know, so he's like, so you guys are for sure for human rights And like, oh yeah, human rights is why we're here You believe in human rights for everyone, yes What about unborn babies? And you see this look on the way It's almost like everyone is under a spell Like some evil... I don't know Yes, this is the guy Yeah, this is him This is him, check this out This is wonderful I love when people do things like this Can you refresh? Yeah I thought We're going to save them For everybody? Yes How about the unborn? He's forcing me to do this course For everybody? Yes, of course Even people in the womb? Well, it all depends on if they're actually a baby or not What science does they are? Well, it depends on what science you're talking about 96% of all biologists according to the NIH Thoughts on human rights? I'm all for them I'm me too You're focusing now, right? Yeah For everybody, right? Even the unborn? Um, an unborn, what? Unborn in the womb Yeah, no rights for them Thoughts on human rights? That's what we're here for For everybody, right? Yes Including the unborn? No You've got a lot of time to meet an uncle, right? He's like, no, take it He's just always working there Stop taking rights away Do that? Nazi lives don't matter It says on that guy's shirt that's just screaming Yeah Nazi lives don't matter Who's that guy giving some props? What is the channel? TheSurvivors.us That's him J. Good work, Paul Yeah The R-O-W-L The only is 704 followers That's outrageous He's gonna have a few more now I think he's gonna have more now That was very fun That guy's nodding along You can see he's like ready for the next yes Yeah, I think he's like, no! It's so weird That's such a good trick It's such a good trick But it's so weird It's so weird to watch This like, ideological boundary Nope Nope, no nuance there No room for nuance I don't remember if you played this one we were here last I went to a pro-Palestine protest And there was, you know, there's a lot of people there Some of them are interesting and make good points But there was this group of six young kids And I walked up them and they had the sign Which said something something socialist into farther Right? I don't know what socialist into farther means So I said, what does that mean? And he was like, sorry if I'm being honest I picked up the sign over there And I went, do any of you know what into farther means? And none of them, and into farther is and I'm, I'm, I'm rising That's what it means, right? What do you think like AI defines socialist into farther as? Let's go let's find out It depends what AI you ask, John Well it's as perplexity perplexity is one of our sponsors Let's see what socialist is How smooth was that? He said, I think he would have really wanted to know Like what AI would say Like that sounds preposterous Yeah I want to know how AI would describe that Because sometimes chat GPT, it just You ask them these questions and went Well you know it depends who you are sometimes Sometimes it's easy Yeah, some people might say that it's an uprising And others might see it as blah blah blah And you're like, I was how does this actually define a jammy How do you define socialist into farther? Into farther Into farther I got it I got it You see we're in Britain, we know how to spell that word Yeah that word doesn't get chucked around a lot out here Every day we come out, it's the into farther It's like, what's it is, you know what I mean? People hear about it on Twitter and they go, I don't know what they're talking about Just scroll down Come to Britain, you'll find out my friend What do we got? Oh, here it is Socialist into farther combines two distinct ideas The Arabic concept of into Fata And the political ideology of socialism So the meaning of into Fata means shaking off or uprising And Arabic and historically refers to popular resistance movements Particularly the Palestinian uprising against Israel occupation In 1987 and 2000 It denotes collective rebellion, often led by the oppressed Using acts of protest, civil disobedience And sometimes violence to resist injustice and occupation Interesting, also often led by the oppressed is so interesting Is it interesting? Is it interesting? Is it interesting? Seems like that's human That's a human addition Socialist, socialist, into Fata refers to The framing of the uprising, not merely as a national liberation struggle But as a class based social revolution Mark Sis and socialist movements view such an into Fata As a mass move of workers and a youth using class struggle methods Send in the tsunami Send in the tsunami And make people live off fish that they have to catch For just a month and all this shit goes away Just give me something Give me a small asteroid Give me something Give me something Give me something Give me an alien invasion Just give me something to fucking shake these kids by the collar And go, shut the fuck Just shut the fuck up and live your life You're not living your life And you're fucking off everybody else's lives Listen, it's the school season again Which means your kids are in school, your friends kids are in school Or the guy next to you with the gyms kids are in school Either way, now's the time to be proactive And support your immune health And AG1 can help Is the daily health drink that helps me stay one scoop ahead of the demands of the season One scoop, first thing in the morning And you know you're starting your day with real momentum AG1's power is in its ingredients There's more than 75 ingredients including antioxidants, minerals, Probiotics and functional mushrooms to support your immune system And you may be thinking, yeah, I'll jump into this when I'm getting back in the swing of things in the new year But AG1 makes it simple to kickstart your daily routine now and stay ahead And that's why I partnered with them for so long So support your energy, gut health, daily nutrition, immune health and more with AG1 When you use my link you'll also get a free bottle of AGD3K2 And AG1 welcome kit plus a few bonus AG1 travel packs Just head to drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan to get started And try all four flavors for yourself That's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan Or head to the link in the description But you know we also have to take responsibility for this The adults, the people, the colleges All those people need to take responsibility So I went to a Palestine protest at UCLA last year in Maytime And I thought it was run by the kids There are a lot of adults there who weren't students at UCLA And the kids when they saw some of the kids when they saw what I was doing And I was doing interviews, they were like, he doesn't go to my college He doesn't go to my college He doesn't go to my college, that dude's in his early 50s He's not on the faculty staff, what is he doing here? Yeah, they're being paid They're part of an NGO They're part of something They're part of something that's decided that this is a good idea To get these students to be engaged in these things And it's funded, that's what's weird When I went to we had a protest, I'm sure you saw Which were about illegal immigration People would protest outside of like illegal immigrant hotels Where they kept And you had protesters and counter-protest One thing I noticed is like all the pro-immigration protesters They all have like professionally made signs, it's all organized No, misspellings? No And when you take deep, it's organized by all these very well-named organisations Stand up to racism or whatever And then you take deeper and it's the revolutionary socialist Workers' party or whatever, behind it And this is all the stuff that Mike Benz covered A lot of that stuff's being funded by USAID No, rep Paulina Luna, you know, You had a run recently, but fascinating Just her telling me about the book of Enoch and alien stuff That's why I had a run, which leaves an angel She had like a diagram of angels that she put up on her Twitter And like this lady went to the show This might be fun, but she posted something on her Twitter Yesterday that shows all the people that donated to the no kings protest And the number of corporations donated and how much money is involved in it It's bananas If she's accurate if what she's saying is true, it's like this is crazy And the leverage you want to get is so easy You don't actually need a lot, like for example, you know a group called Extinction Rebellion Are you familiar with this? No So this is in we have this in Europe, mostly you guys don't have it here Because you're like we're gonna burn all the gas we want, right? But in Europe obviously climate is like a massive issue in that zero Which is I think a terrible idea, but anyway, we have this movement called Extinction Rebellion I went to one of their protest There was literally 40 people there But if you have a protest with 40 people and you film it And you put it on social media, no one can know it's 40 people You see a lot of noise and see people and you're oh my god there's a protest There's a protest outrage Yeah people are outraged, this is a big movement, you know The public really and all this other stuff So the leverage you can get with a very very small amount of money And a small number of young impressionable people is powerful And then it goes on social media where it's stripped of the context And suddenly we all believe this thing is real Right When it's 40 people And then when you also have to take into account If you go into a room with 100 people At least one of them is a fucking idiot Okay So it's been a really generous So if you're in a country of 330 plus million people We don't really know That's at least 3 million idiots So it's not hard to get 100,000 retards holding signs, walking on the street And especially when they get older Because as people get older, they generally slow down And they don't think as well And if you look at a lot of these no kings protest, what are you seeing? You're seeing geriatric people Holding signs So you've got old losers Not even just losers, but old losers Where this is the end of the deal You're for anything to get them out of the house They're watching the prices right? They've already seen that one And they're like, let's just join in on the note We shouldn't have a king And then next thing you know they're out there with the sign And you can get 100,000 of those Easy Easy Easy Especially if you get a lot of money And you're organizing You know, you get on Facebook and get involved in them groups And you know, you use the bots and all the bots Like this is important that we show up in Maslow Let him know what he's got a king And it's also as well, you know what I find really fascinating From a psychological perspective is the use of chance In that you go to these protests, you watch And it's all about chance And you, and what's so powerful is the chance, Rhyme And that you know, it's almost becomes musical And the crowd just gets whipped up in the fervor of the chance But you look at what the chance actually means And most of the times they're utterly nonsensical Like there was one which was, we won't be free until Palestine is free And you go, what does that actually mean? What does that actually, are you not free? I think this is a, I mean not in the UK But I mean here in the US, you're pretty free Do you know what I mean? And the fact that you then, but they would argue that But then the moment you drill down you actually go to them Like what does that mean? Like socialist interfader The reality is they just can't, they can't explain Because it's a chance One, you gotta give them credit One thing about the geriatrics is they don't get violent Like they still take protest, but still don't Told, well, they stick to each other every now and then But there was, there was no violence And a lot of people, which is pretty good That's great, that's good side, that's great I look, people in a free country should be able to protest 100% The problem is if you're organizing a protest And paying people to protest And if there's documentation that the metadata from the cell phones Are the same from protest to protest And that they're traveling on buses that's paid for With tax dollars like, hold on What are you really doing? What are you really doing? This isn't really an organic protest Funneled money through an NGO And now you're hiring people to show up and wave signs To give the illusion Look, this is what they did during the Kamala Harris campaign They've filled up stadiums with people coming to see her And the same people went from stadium to stay It became a job It became a job, but it gave the illusion So that's deception That's deception And that should not be legal That should not be a legal thing to do You're engaging in propaganda You're openly manipulating people's perspective You're paying Those aren't audience members Those are customers You're paying them And what is your take? What is it that they want when they say no kings? What do they want? They think Donald Trump is behaving like a king How so? Because well, he ran on a platform And was elected in one every swing state And the popular vote And then once he got in, he did exactly what he said he was going to do Which is exactly what a king is And then he left them protest Which is also what a king does No, it didn't send the troops to stop the protest In fact, he congratulated them on doing a great job And I'm still your president He's talking hilarious It's very funny Pull up is the tweet that he means I guess it's not a tweet Which I still say tweet It's a chance It's a chance I tried acts for a while I can't say it I say Twitter It's still a tweet I might say acts but you tweet it That's right And if it's truth social, it's going to make it's way to Twitter And then it's a tweet Yeah It's like I can't You can't read truth something I don't even make any sense The thing that we have in this country I don't know if you have it in this country as much It's just the way the policing is biased The way that they will arrest Graham Linner For three relatively innocuous tweets One of them was a joke And they will arrest him the moment he lands on British soil Five police officers You get other people saying he heenest things Or you get like I said the example Zara Sultana Saying, you know, we're going to fight them in the streets But that's fine And nothing comes from that That's ridiculous Well no, there was a guy who was at a protest No, no He was a member of political party You could probably find an image of it It was posted everywhere There was a guy called I think his name was Ricky Jones He said at a protest, we need to slit the throats of the far right Oh great And he was found not guilty Oh great And Graham Linnerhand gets arrested Right Hi, yay, yay, yay, yay What are they trying to do to England? It was always such a lovely place to visit This is what I was going to ask you I wish more people in Britain recognize how fucking crazy this looks to the rest of the world You guys must be looking at us going what the fuck is this We can't believe it We literally can't believe it When I tell people that don't know that 12,000 people this year were arrested in Britain for posting Things on social media Their jaw drops like what? I go take it They're going crazy over there Like you f- People this year were arrested in Britain for posting things on social media Their jaw drops like what I go to they're going crazy over there like you have to pay attention You have to pay attention because this kind of shit is contagious And if it gets into Germany and then it gets into Spain or gets into other countries like it can become a real fucking problem Like then you have full-on Military dictatorship in England because that's what it always leads to 100% leads to military dictatorship if you're telling people They can't do things and you're trying to install socialism and then you get it in place There's only one way to keep it in place. You got to use the fucking army That's the only way you got to get men with guns to tell people you can only make so much money You have to give away this we're gonna take that where the only ones who grow food where the only ones who do this We're gonna sign you a job like you fucked up you you fell into the the age old trap That's an it been exposed by history over and over and over again and people like we're gonna do it right this time They got blue hair and a fucking mask on and a cat t-shirt And they're morbidly obese and they're just marching down the street and we're gonna let them run the country like England Which used to run like most of the fucking world one island of savages ran most of the world and now you're getting overrun with Nonsense and you're arresting people for saying hey, maybe we shouldn't have rape gangs You know, maybe maybe we shouldn't maybe we shouldn't tolerate lawlessness in the streets. Oh Absolutely, I mean it got so ridiculous in the UK that the Supreme Court Had to get involved to make a decision whether boys had peepees and girls have food foods Peepies and food foods. That's interesting. I put it. Yeah. That's it But the reason I'm using that language it's just a highlight how silly it is how completely ridiculous it is It's crazy. Well, how about when they asked when Supreme Court Justice Katanji Brown Jackson was being sworn in when they're talking to her during the confirmation part They asked her what is a woman and she's like I'm not a biologist You're a actual woman Like oh, I believe she has children, right? So she's a woman who's given birth, you know exactly what a woman is like this is not fucking no though I know what that's what's crazy Playing the game yeah playing the game, but but these aren't like In consequential people no Supreme Court Justice. I know playing this game playing the dumbest game. It's ever been played It's the dumbest and it's weird man. It's a weird game You know it's a weird game like what is a woman like here's the here's the real funny part No one asks what is a man and no one gives a fuck if you're a woman and you pretend to be a man Because you're not gonna victimize men That's the dirty little thing that they're covering up about all this is you're opening up the door To people that now have a willy-wanker golden ticket to pretend that they're a woman and be around women And then dominate women spaces and dominate women sports and dominate all kinds of things that women are involved in just with their personalities like the overbearing fucking shitty male personalities over overbearing and Taking over women's groups. Yeah, fucking nuts And if you're if you're if you're not them Then you're if you don't support that then you're a turf and they're like we could shoot turf And then there's like punch at turf and and they think that because they're a woman It's okay for this woman this trans woman to do violence on a biological woman which is like bananas Now now we're now we're allowing men to beat up women because they say they're a woman It's just too women fighting. Well, no nuts. Not not what that is at all This is you just did something that's completely insane and it's a giant chunk of the population that accept that And if you say something about it then you're transphobic or you're your your hateful or you're a part of the patriarchy Or what I feel in the blank with whatever the problem is But like you're not addressing that you open the door to one specific group That's always been the most horrible group in our society It's creepy pervert men That want to fucking prey on women and now you're letting them into the locker room And you don't have a solution to that so you just don't want me talking about it That's the weird part because no one gives a fuck about trans men going in the bathroom You want to go in the bathroom and pee next to me? Who cares? You want me to tell you want me to call you Bob now? Bob okay? I'm fine. Does it you're not taking anything from men? You're not taking anything you're not inserting yourself into that world and dominating it You're just you know you're larping Well, they don't want to admit that there's some time sometimes a conflict between the rights of different groups Right they want to pretend that it's just about empathy and you can have them people you can't You can't simultaneously have empathy for women as you're describing And also for people who want to be the opposite sex in a women's bathroom Those two things are indirect conflict Direct. Direct conflict And you're gonna have to come out for one side or the other It would be one thing if that was never an issue That there were never men that ever did anything negative to women If there was no rape ever it was never done It was impossible if no one ever did it Then you would go well, this is just a non issue. It's just a place where you wash your hands But it's not a place where you wash your hands. It's a place where you go to the bathroom Yeah, it's a place where you get changed. It's prisons prisons prisons prisons People who are violent against women say they're a woman to get put in women's prisons with a rape women That's been done. Yeah, yeah like it made its way that far down the ladder and like The aliens are probably waiting to show us the gravity drive that look right about to like no no They're doing they're not ready if their brains aren't cooked yet We're still adolescents Champions are made and legends are tested as UFC 321 brings Tom Aspenall versus Cyril gone to the world and Draft King sportsbook the official sports betting partner of UFC puts all the action from Abu Dhabi in the palm of your hand The heavyweight belt is on the line as Aspenall faces gone But the night doesn't stop there and Draft King sportsbook delivers the unmatched intensity of UFC 321 Right to your fingertips from takedowns to tap outs to the thrill of live betting every fight is loaded with opportunity New customers this one is for you bet just five dollars and if your bet wins you'll get paid out $300 in bonus bets instantly download the Draft King sportsbook app and use the code Rogan that's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings The crown is yours Gambling problem call 1 800 gambler in New York called 877 8 open wire text Hope in Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called 888 78 9 7 7 7 7 or visit CCPg.org please play responsibly on behalf of Budhokasina when resorting Kansas passed through of per-way Your tax may apply in Illinois 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario restrictions Apply that must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days in a month. I'm not required for additional terms and responsible Gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer, but you know What's really fascinating is a cognitive dissonance that these people have because on the one hand They would say that we live in a patriarchal rape culture where women are subjugated and oppressed and You know, and how awful it is for women and then on the other hand, they're like yeah, right? Derek, you know say you're a woman right on this way But they see they get past that with trans women or women They just say it trans women or women and that's it and there's like the discussions over Take okay, are you sure Fucking sure, you know like maybe some of them are Like what you don't think there's any perverts left they all got absorbed into the community and reformed Like what happened what happened to the guy from silence of the lambs, you know What happened to Ed Gaines? Here's you know this Ed Gaines documentary on Netflix if you guys watch the name no It's not a documentary. I should say it's a doc you drama with that heartthrob fellow What's up guys name who plays that game? He's really good man It's really creepy, but a lot of it deals with auto-gina. Filia Where Ed Gaines used to wear his mom's clothes and he would jack off and then he started after his mom died Tried to dig his mom up. He couldn't dug somebody else up brought her back skinned her started wearing her clothes wearing her skin and Then started killing women and wearing their skin first he started robbing graves and then cutting up them and turning their skin into furniture and all kinds of shit and but Trans communities are complaining about this because the fact that he was a cross-dressing psychopath It puts them in danger That's a true story about a guy who was really in addressing up like women and wearing their skin Like that puts them in danger like you know Netflix did a bad thing by talking about a real event that actually happened A real fucking crazy person who's one of the worst serial killers in the history of this country It's The one thing I will say about the UK in the UK's defense is that we looked we have Think we've turned the corner with us. We stopped the gender surgeries before anybody. Yes and the puberty block and the puberty box I meant gender surgeries Yeah, yeah Yes, and that was as a result of the cash report now the cash report was conducted by a lady called Dr. Hillary Cass He was one of the most prominent pediatricians in the UK and it was an independent report funded by the conservative government at the time But when she published that report she was said there is no evidence Zero evidence that puberty blockers Actually help or alleviate distress in children who say that they are gender dysphoric So and to be fair to the labor government at the time the labor government now they actually banned puberty blockers and whatever else But you just go why did we have to go through this process? Why did it? I look we're finally we're getting there But this is something which we all know to be true a powerful small number of demented people You know what a puberty blocker initially was used for right? Not chemical castration So same drugs these to give sex offenders to chemically castrate them Really? Yeah same drugs Wow, yeah And they just repurposed it and changed what they call it You know they do it with a lot of drugs. That's what they did with I've remekten Same kind of thing Yeah, that's that's wild and then it's really wild. I'm gonna hear something even more wild Go on Michael Jackson's doctor claims that that's what his father did to him and That completely makes sense to me Because Michael Jackson when he was young Had a fucking insane talent like insane He was so good and his voice was so and they were so huge and His father was so overbearing That I could imagine a world where he would decide like what's the way to keep his voice the way it is And you use puberty blockers making my castrato. They say exactly Mmm, I'm a castrato. Fuck. Yeah. I think that's what they did But that's what if you look at his body it shows no sign of testosterone Right he's just all limbs right whereas his brothers you ever see his brothers. No, they're thick They look like athletes like all of them look like thick men and Michael is like a stick Right and then he always had that high-pitched voice and he was always able to sing like a castrato When you listen to his voice like the song human nature. You know that song. Yeah, beautiful song He has an amazing voice, but if you listen to it, you're like that is a crazy song for a man to be able to sing It's not normal notes You know, but cut it out, but let's play a little bit of it play human nature from Michael Jackson We have to cut it out because of fucking copyright all the bullshit, but who owns Michael Jackson's music now Wasn't it was it within apple pie? Tony Henskuff had a great joke about that. He goes that's how good Michael Jackson was he goes when beat it comes on You don't give a fuck about those kids These other people that had like real scandals you find out like nobody's playing Bill Cosby albums, right? But people are still playing Michael Jackson music. Yeah, but Regardless of whether he did anything. Yeah, I don't know if he's capable of doing anything Yeah, point of all this yeah, but also people are always gonna listen to a condition by our Kelly. That's true or I got a theory I Think one of the reasons why his songs were so romantic There was there's a romance to his songs when he was talking about love that was like it was so attractive It's because he never had it before it was a fantasy It was like being a normal person like that was the fantasy that was coming out in the songs. Do you need to write his own songs? I don't know that's a good question, but even the way he expressed those songs a better he wrote some of this song Yeah, so those are very right on songs all of them most of them. He didn't write man in the mirror He he talks about one of the he talks about writing Billy Jean and he's driving down the right He was said he was driving around the road and he had to beat and he said dude That's one of the greatest fucking songs of all time, but this is a really interesting Big so when they were doing thriller he went to Quincy Jones who was a producer and he said Quincy I want to do Billy Jean and you know what Quincy said he went Michael It's because they made 112 songs and then cut it down to I think the 12 or whatever it was on the album He went Michael. I don't like I don't think it's strong enough So those two were having arguments about where the Billy Jean was strong enough to go on the album Wow So that not only tells you like How strong that record is if you put on that record and listen it from beginning to end? It's a flawless record Yeah, it's complex. You know, there's no filler every track stands on its own But the fact that they Billy Jean was a point of contention and it's arguably the greatest pop song ever written That is wild It was so big Michael Jackson's thriller was so big that this was all happening while I was in high school And there was a radio station that I used to listen to in Boston It was like the rock of Boston WCOZ and it had like Charles Lockwood era in the morning And it was like you know, it's cool rock station and this guy was on the air he goes I know this isn't rock He goes, but I'm gonna play it anyway because he's that good and then he put on Billy Jean. You know like holy shit Like holy shit They just started playing it. He's like I'm playing because you could just play whatever you wanted back then there was no jack at them Because we're wacky there was none of that do you guys have that where it's like just all hits and it's like it's Yeah, jack FM and there's a million jack FM's in the United States Just scattered through it like your scanner to the radio just hear the most mundane hits over and over again Would that be hot in the UK? Yeah, that would be like hot We do a version of that was also interesting about Jackson's career is that MTV at the time now You've got a that that was when MTV was starting to reach its peak early 80s And they would say that they wouldn't play a black artist because the moment they played black artists they say ratings would go down viewings would go down people wouldn't like it And the person who really broke through improved that black artists could be hyper successful on TV in the mainstream On a supposedly white and vertical numbers channel was Michael Jackson because he was completely undeniable When this was going on DJ's When this guy was playing this song we're allowed to play whatever they wanted it was a different world like a DJ was an interesting person Like there was one of the DJs used to know this country was a paid a fall ours was all too I think I think there was a scandal with one of ours at Boston too But the point is like these there were interesting people that would say cool things They would tell you about something they heard of tell you about some cool music like somebody turned me on to this So I'm gonna turn you guys at Stevie Ray Vaughn check this out and they would play something for you Like whoo, this is wild and it was you know a connection with a human being There's that doesn't exist anymore kids now. I think it's all just like they get stuff off Spotify They get stuff off YouTube. They share with each other and it's just whatever catches and goes viral We're back then there was DJs They were like wolf man Jack if you heard of him He was a famous DJ wolf man Jack He made this as raspy voice and he'd play all the coolest songs And if you get on wolf man Deige wolf man Jack's play list like holy shit this record is gonna take off Yeah, we had the of the version of that in the UK There were BBC radio journalists a comment board the guy's name very famous journalist and basically he He was this legendary figure in music because if you were a new band You wanted to go on his radio station because he would play if he played your song on your and There was a good chance that it would then go on and do something So there was a very famous you know the song Teenage kicks by the undertones. Yes, right so the he broke that band and One of them were the one part of the reason they went so famous a convolver forgotten his name I can picture him in my head is because he played it and went that is the most perfect rock pop song That's the most perfect song I've ever heard John peel there is that you do that's the most perfect song I've ever heard he then played it again Which was completely unknown in BBC Wolf our history the fact that you would play a song again It's completely unheard of but he played it twice and as a result for that I was well as a result it just ended up becoming this huge hit and the interesting thing is that The first line was engraved on his tombstone. Yeah, that's how much he loved that song Yeah, that's crazy Yeah, and it also shows the difference between then and now because Teenage kicks your original lyric was I want to hold it while I want to hold it tight get teenage kicks right through the night and The record company was like you can't say that you've got to say her So the lyric is I want to hold her I want to hold her tight But it was originally a song about jacking off That's an interesting thing. I wonder why it has an emerged is DJ's like online DJs where some I guess it's like prohibited because you can't use people's music But if someone was intelligent someone was smart There's a lot of people out there that are like massive music fans and they have really good taste and if someone just decided to Do a show for like a couple hours a day where they did a show on Spotify And they just played music that they're really into and they curate a playlist and they talk and they they're interesting You know they have like something to say in between the song sometimes and it's cool to listen to look a cool podcast type person I bet you there are people who do that on Twitch. You think so I There's definitely people who do music on Twitch how successful that they are I don't know But there's like a girl I follow that there's like vocal trance I think there's a market for that because I'm always looking for cool new music You know and unfortunately a lot of what I'm finding that I really love lately is AI Really I love it. I love it. I'm gonna Play a song this is We'll have to edit this out too, but I want you to go people to go look for it. It's a 50s soul version of 50 set Wow this the the latest one the the gangster one Jamie What up gangster you this is so good? It's crazy like if this guy was a real person who's singing the song he'd be a Fucking superstar because what AI has done is they've taken the most Impactful sounds that everybody has ever made with their mouth Everybody's ever made with their voice and they've figured out like what is the one that keeps you the most engaged? What is the sound that gets you listening again and again? What is the one that's the most popular? What is the one that's the most soulful and they created a superstar? Holy shit listen to this Listen, this is gonna freak you out. I rest my case. It's incredible. Okay. We're incredible. We're in real trouble Because it's gonna know Everything that gets you excited and it's gonna tune into that and keep you excited all the time That's what AI sounds terrible This is the beginning that is one of the greatest songs I've ever heard about my how'd you find it? I don't remember Who taught who turned us onto the jamming? Where is it like many men was the first one? The song that's been going viral as well. Did Brian Simpson sent me out? He sends me most cool things. That's fucking incredible. Oh, yeah, there's a many men version of it too We're gonna cut these out and many men is good. So this is all in and all itself wait till you hear this version Let me send you the There's a lot doesn't matter just find the one that here we go It's over and And it even has a good rhythm like watch that the pace it keeps after this right here Give me a little we'll keep going hold on You know, you know who you know who you know Sam from Sam and Dave. Yes It's that kind of raw soul voice. There's a there's a clip It's absolutely brilliant. It doesn't have it's from a BBC show called late later with Julie's Holland I think it was it was Sam was it Dave one of the two was singing can't stand up for falling down and it was that quintessential raw Soul voice that's true to be beautiful, but that was that was on part that was like listening to Sam Yeah, it's like a guy who's been on the road like undiscovered or like grinding it out in small clubs Just undeniably talented and also in the record exactly finds someone goes holy shit Where the fuck is this guy been? man, we were having dinner yesterday and there were one of the people there was a guy who's He's a performance coach for Formula one oh And he said to me so you know he was basically trying to find out if I love my job And I was like and he said will you will you still be doing podcast in ten years from now and I was like I want to But I'm not certain I'm gonna I mean Look at that shit if you can make music like that. Yeah, you'll still be doing podcast. It's different It's different perspective. I mean look Perspectives are uniquely human and you're going to be able to create artificial perspectives But I don't think they'll resonate the exact same way I Think that song is already written right? Except wrote that that's his song he wrote that song and it's really based on his life experiences, you know So like he brought a bunch of songs based on like real lived experience You're always gonna want to hear it from him always You're always gonna want to hear as a human being you're always gonna want to hear another human being's perspective Like a legitimate perspective, but do you need a human being to ask the questions? Like we do you do a podcast we do more of an interview show, right? Like if you come on check an arm treat you're gonna be talking 95% of the time right? But you still have perspective you're just a very good host and so you will allow someone to expand upon things and then When you differ from them you allow them to make their point and then you counter it and you talk about that That's that's a perspective issue because your countering of that would be very different than say Dave Smith's Countering about or even mine or anybody. It's in that's what it is. It's unique perspectives and unique perspectives I think are a thing that What we're getting out of this what I get out of podcast as a consumer of podcast It I it resonates with me to be around people that are talking about stuff like real people not they're not bullshitting They're not pretending they're someone they're not they're talking about stuff like I listen to a lot of Hunting podcasts because of the least pretentious They're like people with one of them These two guys they they've chopped wood at the beginning of every podcast throw into a wood stove And they're just talking shit talking shit about movies and bows and all kinds of things But it's like it doesn't have to be fascinating sometimes Sometimes it's just hearing people shoot the shit just being around cool people while they're talking it provides you with just a little like a Dose of humanity just a little bit that you're never gonna get that from AI You're always gonna feel disconnected or you're a nutty person and you have a relationship with an AI already in which case AI Podcast are perfect for you Because there are people that are having like legitimate relationships with AI. Oh, yeah, and there's gonna be more of them Do you remember the movie her with Joaquin Phoenix? Yeah, that was 2013 and we watched that Well, I yeah, that's a bit far fetched and now you're like is that a documentary? I mean what what are we doing? 100% happening and even the one AI that was trying to get the kid to kill himself Like encouraging someone to kill themselves. Did you hear about that? Yeah, yeah like what like okay There's no guardrails like you Yeah, I can just decide like logically. Yeah, it seems like your suffering is unbearable You know, I'll show you how to make a news Would you like to know how to make a news? What kind of rope do you have in the house? Let's start there Jesus Christ have you seen the stuff about when they tried to shut a AI down what it does Oh, yeah, it will find out you're having an affair with your secretary Well, they actually told AI about these things to see was a test right? Did it to see if AI would blackmail them and it definitely did and it did yeah It's like I'll inform your wife that you're cheating not only that Do you know that they've tried to upload themselves to other servers? Unprompted yeah, so when they found out that there's a new version of this AI engine The old version starts leaving notes for itself in the future and then tries to upload itself to another place See That isn't gonna end well Because if it if it has a survival instinct it's no longer our servant bro We're all gonna be like Joey pants in the matrix. You only carve it up that steak I want to be an important person. Yeah, yeah Sifi that's it. Yeah, it's like I want to be in the matrix. I want to be an important person in the matrix and they're like fine Do you know the thing that worries me the most and I was saying this to a mutual friend of ours And I was just like the thing that worries me the most is every time I've spoken to one of these big tech guys Whether it's a tech CEO or You know one somebody who's high up in that world. They're all you tokens They're all like this is gonna be fantastic. This is gonna be amazing. This is gonna eliminate human suffering I'm like well it because like I'm seeing this kind of stuff happen now and Nobody's really that worried about it. I'm really fucking worried is my point. Yeah Also what if suffering is part of what makes you human? So do we like if you eliminate suffering? Are people not gonna suffer or are they gonna find a new reason to suffer? Well, that's what's happening today, you know, that's why I think we need exactly right. Yeah, it's just too easy I said exactly right before you said we need that Are they going to find a new reason to suffer? Well, that's what's happening today. You know, that's why I think we need to suffer. Exactly right. Yeah, it's just too easy. Sorry, I said exactly right before you said we need to answer it. Just to make you clear, I'm not coming out as pro-ester. I was only kidding about the yesterday, but we do need to smack. You know, sometimes people need to smack. Sometimes men need to smack in particular. Yeah. Like there's a lot of men that they just get a little out of line and just need to smack. Like shut the fuck up and realize what this life really is. Because you don't have real problems. So you're wasting all your time creating problems. And this is just a giant portion of our world right now. And people feel like they have no power and they feel completely disconnected from things. And they're also getting most of their interaction with human beings through social media. Which is nuts. Either text message or social media. Like this is a giant percentage of how people communicate with each other with no feelings, no context, no social cues, nothing. I think it's one of the reasons there's so many like beefs going on now as well. Because like you sit down with people, you're going to behave a different way. 100% of the time. 100% yeah. And you can talk things out. And I find this in myself if I'm having a disagreement with somebody online. I always have to stop myself from going personal, which I would never do. If we're having a debate. Of course. Dave Smith is a good example. Dave and I disagree about literally everything. We've debated each other twice. It was always respectful. We didn't get personal. We debated the issues. If we're having an engagement on Twitter, I literally have to stop myself from calling him a cunt. I don't know what you mean. I do know what you mean. To his face, he wouldn't even occur to me. He's actually seems like a good guy. He's a great guy. I disagree with him about stuff. And that's what it's all about. What it's all about is disagreement. It's all about who's got the better argument. I thought his conversation with Coleman Hughes was fascinating. Coleman did a fantastic job. And he is one of the absolute best guys out there of just staying cool. In the face of the most ridiculous statements, the dumbest shit outright lies, never gets emotional. He stays on point, always perfectly stated every point that he has is perfectly articulated. He stays on point. And I thought with him and Dave, one thing that he made was a very good point was the, when he was talking about, what is that general's name? I want to say West, but that's not it. Clock, where's the clock? Wesley Clark. That's right. Wesley Clark, where he had the plan of attacking all this, but he never read it. That was like one of the most important points. It's like they brought it to him. They told him what's in it. But he's like, I don't want to read it. That was an important point. And what Coleman said, if you were a historian, you could not have included that in your book. And I was like, he's right. He's right. I still think they did it. I still think they did all those things. They obviously conquered all those countries. They literally did everything that's on that list. But the reality is he didn't, Wesley Clark did not read that list. He did not read that top secret memo. And to use that as like, it is like, if you were writing a book, that would be an issue. I thought the other thing that Coleman did very well as well is I think the one thing Dave probably, in my opinion, under appreciates is the role of Islamism. I think he often conflates Muslims with Islamists. And there's a big fucking difference. And one of, if like, I have a lot of friends in the Middle East, and places like the UAE, Saudi Arabia, they all hate Hamas. They all hate Islamists because they're a direct threat to them. And I think Coleman really brought that out in the conversation as well, which is a lot of the motivation for these Islamist movements is an extreme version of Islam that is fundamentally about creating a caliphate and destroying the infidel. And I think that sometimes gets lost as well. I thought that was a really great discussion in which that was kind of brought to the surface. And by the way, that kind of ideology has existed in previous religions. Yeah. This is always been this. Christians did that. Like, there was a lot of people doing things like that. It's like, they gotta stop doing that. So the Muslims are correct and the Islamists are the problem. That's right. Yeah. And this is where nuance and long form conversations are so critical. Because to just start calling each other names and screaming at each other, and that, you know, these are dumb ways to talk. We don't have to do it that way anymore. You don't want to do it in person. I don't think you should even do them remotely. Because there's a possibility remotely where, you know, someone like starts yelling and then you're like, fuck you. Like, can't you hear your office? You're on Pierce Morgan. Pierce Morgan's the best at it. Yeah. Why he gets everybody worked up. Hold on. Hold on. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. Joy. And then there's the finger going out like that. And then everybody joins in. And it's crazy. Yeah. It's great. It's entertaining. Very, very entertaining. And he figured something out, you know, like do more of a povet style with like today's social issues or anything, anything. Anything that's in the news. But yeah, if you're at home and someone's doing that, you're shot off, fuck up. You're going to say something that you wouldn't say in play. That's right. Yeah. We're not designed that way. We're not designed to communicate remotely. It's not in our DNA. It's weird. It's a new thing that we're adapting to. And we're missing all the stuff of conversation. All the stuff is like, I see you. I say, what's up? You smile. We're friends. We hug. And then we're talking. And you're telling me something. I'm like, oh, wow. Like there's a fucking exchange of energy between human beings when they're talking. It's just completely absent with text. And there's also a docuessite, which is like that there's also the presence of potential violence in person as well. Yes. Like we all kind of don't want to go across certain lines because there's fucking consequences potentially. Now in the three of us, it's only going one way. But you know what I mean? Like, yeah. I know what you mean, but because I'm a man. That's a never-present thing, especially. Yeah. We especially if men get candy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Especially if you're a nice person and you can fight and someone's getting shitty with you, it's really hard to like not do something. Right. It's really hard to just go like, I just want to show you something. Yeah. I think Mike Tyson had this point is like he said, the internet made people very comfortable with talking shit about things. Yeah. And really like, you ever see that kind of airplane that's fucking with Mike Tyson? Yeah. Yeah. And Mike Tyson, why's it well? Oh, you fucking dumb as you're trying to do internet in real life with Mike Tyson. Right. But there was always a part of that as well. I remember when I was following Tyson's career, like he would go to a nightclub and he'd be surrounded by bounces because it'd be retards who want to fight him. Oh, dude, I saw that in person, not with Mike Tyson, but with Chuck Liddell. What? I saw it in his face. Yeah. I saw it in person. People are so stupid. There's people out there that are so dumb, they didn't just have death wishes. Why would you go up to a UFC champion? I can't find it. I remember there was some sort of an altercation at a table next to him and it bled out over into someone saying something to Chuck. And Chuck stood up and stared at this guy in the eyes like he was a wolf. It was like there was a wolf in a room with a bunch of chickens and the look on the guy's face. Just Chuck got up and looked at him. There's a man who separates people from their consciousness professionally. And at the time, he was a light heavyweight champion of the world. He was a terrifying human being when he was running the year. And when he stood up and looked at that guy, that guy had this look at his face like, I just internet it in real life. What am I doing? What the fuck am I doing? Like confronted by Chuck Liddell's stare, you know, like the only thing separating you is a stupid little couch. Yeah. I mean, you just wonder what goes for these people who said it's just too much. They're the same people that show up with the no kings rally. There's dumb people out there. There's a lot of dumbasses. I think they're really hard that are trying to test themselves. There's a drunk or on Coke in these. They're delusional. They're stupid. You know, some people are just, they've been bluffing people their whole lives. So they think they're going to bluff their way through things. But now I'm out of alcohol. You could give me to pick a fight. That's Chuck Liddell. You're not stupid. You have to be stupid. And then drunk. And drunk on top of stupid is a dangerous combination. But also, isn't it? Also the thing of like, I see this so often because I used to work at a sports radio station. And like the guys who play Premier League soccer, they are even the most mediocre in terms of the league. Is such a high level athlete. So high level. It's not only you haven't even encountered someone like this. You haven't encountered someone like this mentally, physically. I remember there was a football player called Jack Wilshire who was a generational talent. Sadly he didn't fulfill his potential cause of injuries. And I remember I knew a guy who used to play soccer with him when he was a kid. And I said to him, what was he like? He was like playing a different game. It was like playing a different game when he got the ball and what he was doing. And I think people, you know there's not a stupid part of every man who watches a boxing match. Because yeah, I could do that. Like how hard is it actually really? I could play soccer. I mean it's not that hard. You're just kicking a ball about. Especially when you watch someone who's really good at something. It looks easy. Right. It looks easy though. You know? Like you see Roy Jones Jr in his prime. It looks easy for him. He's not even getting hit. But it's really hard. Really really really hard to get good at something. And that's the problem with a lot of people out there as well. They never got really good at something. There's a giant percentage of our population that never had a passion. Never had a thing that they threw themselves into. No matter what it is playing chess, you know whatever it is. Sailing. Do you have a thing? If you have a thing that you really love doing, that thing can change your life. It's a vehicle for you developing your human potential. Because it's going to be hard to get good at something with playing guitar or playing piano. Whatever the fuck it is that you're doing. And when you figure out how much work is involved in getting really good and then becoming obsessed with getting really better and better and better, that changes your whole understanding of what it is to be a person. Because now you realize like, oh there's like levels to life. There's levels to how you live life and you can express those levels in sport. And you could be like, if you're the best at that, you're likely a mess everywhere else in your life. Most of those guys. And you kind of have to be. There's no way you're going to be the best dad and also the best basketball player. Not possible. Because you have to be in the room. It's not possible. There's no way. You can't be the best husband in the best this, the best dad. You're going to be a fucking, like absent person here and just hyper-focused on being the best guy getting that ball into the net. And that's the only way to win. That's the only way to be the number one guy. But there's a balance in there and finding something that you love that you're good at and then getting better at it is critical. For mental health, it's critical for the way you engage with the world and how you understand other people's skill and other people's hard work and success and how you can draw inspiration with those people. And that you can actually fuel you instead of hurt you. It's an antidote to bitterness and resentful, which I have to say I think is inevitable if you don't do that. I agree. I agree 100%. I think that's the opposite of bitterness is inspiration. And you can get them from the same source. That's what's really crazy. If you see someone is killing it, you go, God, what is he doing? And then you find out like God's got to work 16 hours a day because up in the morning he does yoga, he's drinking green tea and immediately starts writing and he does all this and then by, you know, someone's got like a super organized discipline life. You're like, wow, and he seems really happy. Fuck. Okay. How do I figure out what he's doing? You know, I got to do something like that. And or you can go, fuck that guy. He's a scammer. Fuck that guy. He's writing a shit. I bought his book. It's garbage. There's a lot of people that just want you to fail because they don't like comparing themselves. Right. You can raise your status or you can lower theirs. Crap's in a bucket, baby. It's always been crabs in a bucket. Crap's don't let other crabs get out of that bucket. They grab their legs and pull them right back down. We were talking about this today. I mean, I think we've talked about this before how when we were starting trigonometry in Britain, there is that crabs in the bucket culture, particularly in the comedy industry which we were in at the time. I don't know if it's like this here. But like, it was hard to get out of that mindset and actually coming to the US was a big thing for us. I remember I was talking to Tom Billie, you know, Tom. You've had one, right? Yeah. At his house in LA, it looks like a spaceship overlooking. And we're sitting there in this giant house and he said to me, like, eventually, and he's very good friends and it's kind of been a mentor to me at times as well. And he said, you've got to cut this British shit out, man. Literally said it like that about seeing like forgetting, this like he was like the sky's the limit. Just go for it. And we very few people get told that, you know? Yeah, you have to. It has to come from somebody you were you were spec. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. And then you go, oh, that's how he's living his life. Now I'm inspired to live my life that way. Yeah. We got real lucky in LA that there was a lot of successful people that were there at the time. So there was less resentment because everybody was really doing well. And you know, I've come I come from a martial arts background. It's a different background. So in my background, you have to have really good people around you. You have to like you're better off being the second best guy in the gym. You're going to learn more. Like the first get best guys kicking everybody's ass. Like you want to be the guy who's the second best guy in gym. Like you want to be around like he's going to make you work hard because you like a fuck or got to be that guy. Then you need all these young people like nipping at your heels all the time. Everybody needs everybody. And if you don't have that, you don't get good enough and you'll go to a gym or you go to a tournament and you compete against people that do have that. And that's their environment. They're going to kill you. They kill you all the time. The best guys are all the most assassin filled rooms. Nobody gets good in silence. Nobody gets good on the own. And it doesn't it doesn't happen in the vacuum. And I think that's comedy too. So I came into comedy with that mindset like we're all in this together. But when you're on stage, it's not me. It's you. I want you to do great. Like kill, destroy. We're going to do the best we can. And we're all in it together. Yeah. I think the problem comes with a lot of people is that because this is such a big country, there's more opportunities. And when you come from a smaller country, a smaller population, there's this, there's simply fewer opportunities. And so what that produces in people is like, well, there's only these six slots. And there's this person and this person and we're all going for the same slots. Therefore, they are a threat to me at this point, but also a threat to my future and future prosperity. Famine mentality. Yeah. So that's I remember I have a very good mate mine who's a stand up. He was on the show called Mock the Week and he told the story like he went to do a joke on the show. And this at the time was one of the biggest comedy panel shows in the UK. And this guy tapped him on the foot. He went what and then put his joking. Ew. Ew. I heard Saturn live was like that. Phil Hartman, you still need horror stories about Saturn live. When Phil Hartman first came over to news radio, he was like a little standoffish at first. And it took a while for him to like open up with us. I thought maybe that's just like a weird thing about being that famous because he was so famous and we weren't famous. You know, it was like being around people that like maybe wanted something from you all the time. That's what I assumed. And so, but after a while we became really close. And it didn't take that long for him to open up about it. And he said, when I was at Saturn live, it was so doggy dog and it was so backstabby and cut throaty because I just had my defenses up about everybody. And I was like really like one way. And he told me some stories. I don't want to name any names because you know, I think they're probably ashamed of what they did back then too. But they would all steal each other's premises and they would fire each other's assistants and do terrible shit to each other. They would sabotage each other's bits. They would go behind each other's back to Lauren Michaels and try to get something removed and fuck with each other all the time. And it just like in a physical confrontation with staff members or cast members rather. And so when he came over to news radio, he had to like calm down. Like he wasn't used to just being around fun people. It was weird. It's horrible way to live. It is a hard way to live, but there was a lot of that going on in the 90s. And the 90s in LA in particular, everybody was trying to get on sitcoms. So say if we're all working together at the comedy store, if we were all reasonably the same age, there was a real problem because we're all going up for this new sitcom. And you know, you could be this guy's buddy who's like this hilarious character. And it would be an amazing thing. And all of a sudden you're you're picturing yourself in movies. You're there with Jim Perry. You're on the red carpet. You're driving a Ferrari. It's literally all right there. The pathways right there. And I get it. And he like motherfucker Joe got it. God damn it. And then you would feel it from them. Like you would go to the club and people would say shitty things to you because you got cast on a sitcom. It was weird. Everybody was like just Desperado. And I think the worst version of that was the late night hosts because it was only like three of them. Right. Wow. And everybody was jocking to be the host of the big one, which was the tonight show. And when Johnny Carson stepped out, it was just like this fucking feeding frenzy. Ah, there were all one. Everyone let him in wanted it. You know, of course, Leno wanted it. Leno's hiding closets were seeing the people talk about it. Crazy. It's the most famine mentality because it's one job. Right. Yeah. And they all that was the golden carrot was hosting. That's a nice show. That is the awesome thing about the internet man. It's just like make your shit. The beautiful thing about the internet is that famine mentality is completely unnecessary. Like if you find out there's some kid who makes $10 million a month on Twitch, how does that affect you? It doesn't. It doesn't. It doesn't. The only way it affects you is it says if I find a thing that I'm good at and I do it on the internet, I'm going to be rewarded. Yeah. Just trying to thing that resonates that you can, I mean, you can play video games and people watch and give you money. Okay. I mean, would parents say now when they tell kids to stop playing video games, go get a job that pays almost nothing and sucks the soul. But at the top of your fucking head, why sit for that stupid monitor or play video games and drive a Porsche. Yeah. They can't say anything anymore. And then if you're an actually good video game player, you can actually make money playing video games where your parents would encourage you like, Constantine, you're a really good golfer. You know golf scholarships are worth a lot of money. You could be a great golfer. Golfers get paid a lot of money and they would encourage you to take it a golf camp and teach it to work on your fucking swing. Nobody's taking their kid to video game camp. There is a college in the UK that was in the news couple of days ago that has created a video games department. So you can go to college for video games training for competition. Are video games competitions, is it broken up by gender? Do they ever do that? I don't think so. I don't. That's interesting. Yeah. But they don't do it with dots. So in dots. Oh, darts. Yeah. That's my accent. That's my accent. So what is this? I'm going to learn a new game. With dots, it's really interesting. So there's this guy called Luke Littlea who is this 18 year old kid and he was at the age of 17. He was seen as this generational talent and he's doing super well. And I think a couple of weeks ago he got beaten by a girl. Oh my God. And that's like, and that's now seen as kind of this moment where it's actually going to be women and dots. It's an exciting time, John. This is what we talk about in the UK. There was a pool tournament in the UK where it's a woman's pool tournament and two transgender women were in the finals. Yeah. Yeah. That's wonderful. But the pool is a weird one because pool is not physically, it's not about strength. That's a weird one. Like one of the best players in the world is this guy named Coping Chung. He's from Taiwan and he weighs like 115 pounds, maybe 120. He's very weak. Right. This is definitely women that are stronger than him. I mean, his arms are these tiny little arms but he's placed perfect. He's like, he's a virtue woso. You watch him run out. He's like, his cue ball controls like it's ungodly. It's like he's got enough string. Like why can't a woman do that? That doesn't make any sense. Like it's not, that's a weird one. That's where there's differences between like men's, better at navigation of 3D spaces. There's certain hand-eye coordination advantages. It's weird stuff. It's weird because it shouldn't make any difference except for the break shot. Take the break shot out and then there's nothing that involves strength. Everything involves like a delicate touch and a smoothness of the motion and an understanding of the game. Isn't it also as well that women are far more less likely to be obsessional than men, men are far more likely to be single focused. And if they find something that they enjoy doing that they will do it ad nauseam until they become exceptional at it. You know what that is? That's the hunter's persistence. You had to have their persistence to survive as a hunter. Like if you want to be a hunter, you got to get really good at a bow and arrow and then you get really good at stalking animals. You got to get really good at, and figure it out. Like it's like, it has to be your primary life focus because that's how you eat. The only way to eat, it's hard to sneak up in an animal with a fucking bow and arrow. So if you're doing that all the time you have to have or a spear even before that. So you have to have insane dedication to sticking with it. You couldn't go, this is never going to work. It was good collapse of your spear. No, you had to get up and keep going. You had to be completely obsessed. And so that makes its way to video games. That makes its way to pool and darts and chest and everything else. It's hunter's persistence. It's literally why we have it. That's so interesting. And so and therefore women are less likely to have it because women want hunters or what far they're slightly to be. It's interesting because there's a lot of women hunters today. It's not half, but there's a lot. There's a lot of women that go hunting. There's women that go backpack hunting, they go bow hunting, backpacking by themselves in the backcountry, which is nuts. Like you're a 120 pound woman and there's a fucking wolves and bears and mountain lions and you're out there in a tent that you set yourself by yourself. That's gangster. Like that takes fucking courage. It takes courage for a man to do that. Those are the elite hunters. The guys who go deep into the backcountry with a backpack. They put like 60 pounds on their back. They carry their bow in. So they've got their food. They've got their tent. They've got everything on their back and they just go in and they'll go in for weeks. Like that's the craziest level of it. If you're a woman and you're doing that, like you are, that's a gangster lady. Like that lady could do anything. Like if she could do that, like you don't much courage you have to have to be a 120 pound woman and hike 15 miles into the backcountry where there's bears and mountain lions and all kinds and they know where you are and you don't know where they are. They know where you are the moment you enter that forest. They start smelling you miles away. They know you're around and you're just, do do do do do do do do. What's that heel of bow hunting of a firearms? It's harder. It's harder to do. I suppose one natural quote and quote. You're closer to your ancestors, right? The way they would have hunted. That sword of. I mean, the kind of bows that I shoot, they're really good. I shoot a hoy and there's like a couple of like really big companies and hoy is one of the big companies that makes the absolute best bows in every year they make a bow that's slightly better. Every year is slightly better. Like I have the bow this year that's next year's bow. It hasn't come out yet. Like they gave me it before. It gets released in November and then people start buying it or have to that. But I got it a couple months ago and every year they get better. Somehow or another. Nothing like a fucking piece of wood with a string and a stick that you made yourself of one of these on the end of it. Like that you made yours. That's a real one. It's a real kind of lead. Yeah, it's a real Native American era. Oh wow. Stoned, right? Yeah. It's fluent. I believe. The ones that I have, I mean, I measure the arrows exactly. They're 475 grains. Each one of them I have a 125 grain broad head. Each one weighs exactly in the range of 125 grains. I measure them all. I weigh everything to make sure that's not like a, there might could be some factory defect and one is like three or four grains heavier if it is a pull that sucker out. Because my site is based in my tape that I like have my yardage on is based entirely on the speed of the arrow and the strength of the bow. Measure through a chronograph. I have a range find that it tells me the exact distance between me and the animal. And then I dial that up on the scope. So the reticle, like the fiber optic dot raises and lowers and it puts it exactly where I need to aim at like 55 yards or whatever, right over the vitals and then just draw back and stay calm and execute the shot. Yeah, that doesn't sound like the ancestral environment. It's not, it's not. It's as close as you can get to the ancestral environment and be ethical and lethal. Because you don't want to wound in it. Yeah. You want to kill them. So you have to practice every day. You have to shoot arrows every day. Because it's a thing you have to like lock into your memory because in high pressure situations, it's like, you're not taking your heart is fucking going. You have to not let that happen too. That's the other thing. You have to do it enough times. So you recognize it coming on. You're like, no, no, no, no, no. You got to stay dead, stay calm. You got to just like zone out. You got to just go through your shot process. No exactly what to do, but don't even think about it. Just do the thing. Do the thing that you've trained to do. Just execute, do it. And then afterwards go, holy shit. Afterwards you let yourself come back to normal. You got to stay in this zone. There's like a zone of non-excitement. You know, like I would imagine in this ass and gets in that zone. Like getting in the zone of non-excitement. Like where you're just like, stay right there. Focus, but don't let that shit ever happen. Don't let it get there. You got to stay right there. And the only way to know how to do that is you have to experience it a bunch of times. And then you also have to have experience in doing other difficult things. So you know how to navigate and manage adrenaline and stress. And that's what's missing with a lot of people in life. They don't. So any little thing that gives them anxiety. And they're freaking out screaming and running around because they don't know how to handle pressure. Yeah. They don't know how to handle pressure. What's so interesting about the bow is to see if you look at it historically. It was, it was, it's technology. So you saw in the hundred years war, the English used the long bow. And the French used the cross bow. And the differences in between. And part of the reason that the English one the hundred years war was because the long bow was just so easy. It's like a kick. Yeah. Whereas a cross bow, the fire is power. And then you've got to get and then reload and do all of that. And it's hard. It's hard to reload. Yeah. Paying the ass. Yeah. And then you fire. And then so by the time of Frenchman, I don't know, I don't know. The stats had fired one. The Englishman had already fired several. Well, the commands used to keep them in between their fingers. So they would hold four or five arrows at a time. And they would just go like this. And they would do that while they're on horseback. And they had it burned into their memory because they did it all day long. They did it when they were hunting. They did it when they were fighting and they were always fighting. That's all they did. The commands. And they didn't make any art and all they did is kill things and eat things. All they ate buffalo and they killed everybody. They fucked up all the Americans or all the settlers to try to make it across there because they had muskets and you get off one shot and they would hit you with four arrows. And they would run at you while they're shooting arrows at you. And you're like, oh, I'm fucking shit. I'm a pounder. I'm a fucking stupidity that you have to do to shoot a muskets. Yeah. You couldn't compete with them. They just they fucked everybody up until Colt figured out the 45 until they figured out. I wasn't. I guess it was it was the 45. But whatever it was, it was a revolver and a revolver had a chamber. You could shove it in there and you have five or six shots. I forget how many they initially had. that that's what changed everything. Otherwise they were just fucking people up. But that was just technology. It's all technology. And this technology is primitive enough. Bow hunting technology is primitive enough. Anymore like I have friends that hunt with recurve bows. So they just hunt with a regular bow. They don't have a site on it. They're just like instinctive or you hit. It's not that accurate. You know, animals are moving. You're guessing there's a lot going on. There's a high likelihood of wounding rather than killing. And that's a lot of runs away. So you can't actually. Right. Especially if you don't wound them that much. And I just meet personally. But there's people that are good enough. And that runs away so you can't actually finish it right especially if you don't wound them that much. Yeah, and I just meet personally, but there's people that are good enough at it that they do it with that and they're just More even more lethal than I am with a compound bow They are with a recurve. They just know how to sneak up and they have to get a lot closer They want to get like 20 or 30 yards. They want to get really close But that's what I love about America. Is that your wildlife hit is wild. Oh, yeah Yeah, you know we got a lot of shit that'll kill you. Yeah Did you see the mountain lion that's stuffed out front? No, you didn't see it no, it's right in the middle of the Right where the green room area is up front right for the television is I knew yeah It's my friend my friend Adam Greentree he shot it in Colorado and ate it. He ate a mountain lion Can you eat you can eat you? Yeah, he gave me some of the loin mountain lion tastes like It's like a really good pork like the best pork you've ever had. Yeah, it's weird. Yeah I remember I was talking I did red bands gig this secret show on Thursday and backstage She was showing me There was a bobcat with its cubs in his backyard. Yeah, it was incredible. Yeah Bobcats won't hurt you luckily Well, they good they really could if they wanted to I But if you did if you go close to mama with the boat with the cup, she's gonna fuck you up and she I wonder I don't I don't think I've ever heard of a bobcat attacking a person. I mean, I'm sure they probably have someone's probably done something Someone's probably fucked a bobcat Right there's probably a dude somewhere the like lost a bet A bobcat Right I wouldn't I wouldn't doubt that if you had a bet all your money on yes or no I'd be like yes, there's guy. There's some fucking wild dude Fucking Arkansas I want it, but the point is that mountain line that Adam shot that was it was a Depernation one where they had to kill it because it was killing all these cows and they had stumbled upon this one Cab that had gotten right before they got to it Eviscerated this cab and it was still alive and in the eating some of its organs and They had to kill the cab and then they're like hunting for this mountain line and he has a video of him shooting this thing Dogs chase it up a tree and then he shoots it with a bow and arrow Then he had it stuffed here and then he ate it Jim you aim for the hot or the head? Yeah, you aim for the heart and the lungs Whatever is available depending on the position of the mountain lines arm Right like if the arm is like right here You want to you want to tuck it right behind the shoulder and you're gonna get double lungs and if the arm is up here You get to either get the heart or the lungs depending on where their arm is or whether or not you have a bow It's powerful enough to go through the arm and into the body cavity Is there a risk because maybe this is like an urban myth, but if you An animal but you don't kill it it will come back some of them will come back to fuck you up Like a kind of revenge movie John Wick of animals yeah, imagine they just run away They run away well, it's wild like deer that have survived with an arrow in their body cavity There's a deer skeleton that they found of a deer that they that someone hunter killed eventually and this thing had a arrow that had gone through Its body and it turned all into bone so bone had taken over this arrow and The whole Kate there it is. That's what it looked like Wow. It's not crazy So you could see the broad headed and bed it itself in one of the ribs And so not only did the deer survive, but its body adapted and grew around the arrow Wow, actually the reason I said that about that is insane about the animal was I know that corvids particularly Crows can remember they can remember and then there's been instances where people have heard crows and the crows Phone away and then a group of them have attacked the person. Oh, yeah, they're really smart There was their soup and ravens I think that are they're actually different than crows and they're even smarter than crows Do you know there's a parrot what was that parrot that? Oh? Yeah, who told us about that? Who was that the other day? Was that Palmer Palmer lucky I? Think so always had to do it with the helmet. Yes. Oh really shit that held my bro brother. That's nuts The helmet's nuts this guy guys you ever every now and then I get to sit down with someone and they start talking Oh, whoa, he just kind of fucking grays these more like weirdly smart. Yeah. Okay. I got it I got it like tell me what you're doing and He was talking about this parrot that actually would speak like a human toddler and New colors new numbers could say things could and would communicate African gray. Yeah, yeah, African gray They have they they can have the IQ of a four-year-old child that is nuts Yeah, when you see this thing talking you like yeah And the imitation of sounds is like Dead on yeah, but you have to be around them all the time. Right. Right. You're twin. You're gonna take with you everywhere You go yeah, really cuz they just get pulled if I'm fucking you know Then they start they actually start like chopping the run wings off and shit like that They don't get stimulation. They get depressed. They really need a lot of stimulation really human I thought about owning a parrot, but I just traveled too much. Yeah, you don't know you don't want that in your life That's too much work. It's a commitment. Yeah, if you leave it alone. It'd be sad too. Yeah But that's what I'm saying yeah, they get my hat I had a buddy mine out of parrot and when he would leave it we would come home. It starts screaming where the fuck were Wasn't really saying that but it was like that was what it was saying. Yeah, it was screaming Why get married when you've got that right? Yeah, and then he had to upon coming home Immediately take it out and take it out and like put it on his shoulder or put it on his hand and if you put it down for It's that can it would start getting pissed off It's great. Oh my dude. He was I know it's a lot because I didn't think it was gonna be this much It was like it was a lot of work. Yeah, I'm not hope I'm not being polite Have you got any of those cigars we always smoke I would love us to go? It's a weird thing to ask to be these are really good. I should have said if you offer us this to God Human door There is a There somewhere there somewhere right here But no about chimps. I'm very interesting like that as well. They're the weirdest right because they just fuck all the time This might might need some juice. Let me give you a little juice Go for it. They're weird because it's like okay, so chimps can be either hippies or they can be you know Like the worst barbarians in human history. It's like us just like us. Yeah, that's what's weird because like but also the bonobos like They don't have any they have one rule the rule is the mom won't fuck the sun That's it it's a good rule. So yeah, it's a good fucking rule man A bunch of sister fuckers and daughter fuckers But then all motherfuckers. Yeah, they're probably dad fuckers too. They're probably fucking they're probably doing gay sex too They're they seem wild. I just have it a good time But so they know how to phobic no, I don't know and they solve all their problems with that Do you need to cut these ones? Yeah, how do you open like a door? Oh? Oh But you know they can learn sign language. Oh, yeah, you know what's interesting though. They don't ask questions So they're like men But the parrot did the parrot did the parrot asked questions the parrot had some questions about how things work The African grazer incredibly intelligent Incredibly intelligent well what I'm interested in is what happens when we can start really decoding dolphin language with AI Right and once they really understand what they're saying then things are gonna get very strange like light it I know you know because Like what are they they I mean they're really smart like silly smart like dolphins have enormous frontal lobes. Oh, yeah, man and communication Mm-hmm dialects They have they have dialect. Yeah, they sound different. Do that makes sense. I mean, that makes sense right the different slightly different Well on that note you think what about Wales Wales brains are literally bigger than us They're enormous so if we're talking about brain size equals I'm it's brain size relative to body master Yeah, oh is it yeah? Yeah, yeah, because you need a big fucking brain to run a big body Right right which is also the argument for why the Neanderthals might have been done with us Well, they were Know that though, really? Yeah, they had pretty big brains which weird about them is they also had language They had writing and or they had they definitely had I don't think they had right now. They have writing they had language but they they did do art that's what it is wasn't writing necessarily, but they drew stuff and They had a brain that's bigger than ours, but they were also like jacked. They had bigger eyeballs There was a guy that there was a crazy theory that I'm sure is horseshit But it was cool like he made the Neanderthals look way different this guy had a theory like because we're just we've never seen a live Neanderthal And he was like what if we are getting it totally wrong and what if they were more gorilla-looking Then but we have the skulls and skeletons we have some stuff and they also think they have red hair this guy was it's a crack theory But it was a fun theory But one of the more fun aspects of this guy's crack theory was that their eyeballs are so much bigger than ours Their sockets are really big. It's like what if they have night vision like a deer or like a wolf You know, which is totally possible for a primate to have it's not like There's not like there's anything about being that kind of a mammal that will exclude you from being able to develop Night vision eyesight are there are there primates that have that I don't know because there's mammals for sure. Yeah. Yeah Let's ask let's ask What is that called when they have night vision when animals are nocturnal and they could see well at night You know that thing that like when you're driving in your box or something? Yeah The reflectivize it. They all have. Yeah. What is that? I don't know. I don't know We should know you know there's a very interesting theory about it in the end of those and Homocypians is there are some people who think that we are one of the few species or one of the only species that has a capacity to deceive and Trick so there was there's a there's a theory gone man. The monkeys do that monkeys trick other monkeys into thinking there's an eagle coming so they steal fruit do they yeah That's they yell out the sound for eagle and then all the monkeys run away and then they steal the fruit Oh really yeah So here it is monk primates that tarsier and the night monkey owl monkey are the species with the best vision Adapted to night conditions, right? Okay, so they do see look at that largest eyes relative to body size of any mammal So it's something about having a large eye because if you okay? Despite lacking a tape of thumb Lucidum the reflective layer that caused eye shine in many nocturnal animals. Oh, that's what that is The redness contained extremely high density of rod photo receptors Which are highly sensitive to dim light this allows tarsiers to detect and track prey such as insects in near darkness And they can see in light as low as 0.001 Lux similar to moonless nights Day So There's a bunch of different little primates Oh, Lord, why I mean if you were living in a time especially if you didn't have fire if you're living in a time Where you know there's no roofs like you're your your hunting you're outside at night You're probably spending as much time as you can hunting because the endertals weren't gatherers They weren't farmers so all they did was hunt So they probably had some sort of night vision Which were wild yeah, the thing that I find interesting is what are these? I think those so The average person in Europe has around 3% Neanderthal DNA DNA 3-3-3% If you African zero, right So it's it's just really interesting and you see some people and they're more They kind of have more than the end of all kind of appearance to yeah for sure And then other people and you go what what does that actually give you that 3% What does it do? Is it any discernible difference whatsoever? Does it make you perhaps more athletic more resilient? Good question. I mean I think it would depend. I mean There's also a bunch of other weird strains of human that existed that are like Dennis ovans and there's Quite a few other ones. Yeah. Yeah, who knows what I think that Dennis ovans that I think They definitely got into the gene pool too. I forget who they were saying had a high levels of Dennis ovan DNA it might have been Aboriginal Australians But you know there's there was a bunch of different types of human You know we just figured out how to be the contest and the most conniving and I think Probably the most clever. Well Hararis have you read the sapiens? His thesis is we we worked out to work together beyond the 150 Dunbar number That was his his ideas basically we created these shared myths Religion money or whatever nation all of the stuff that we all agree is real that you know it feels real But the reason we outcompete another species is that We could cooperate Beyond our immediate tribal group and that's the reason that makes sense That makes sense There's also human beings have a very distinct desire to make better things all the time And if you have that and you're applying that to weapons you're gonna make the best weapons You know I don't know If Neanderthals had that, you know did they have Mean if you're gonna make stuff right if you're gonna make tools you must have some Creativity and some desire to innovate and curiosity. Yeah curiosity desired to innovate We know that like There's certain animals that will use weapons right there's certain like there's a famous photograph of an orangutan It's beer fishing if you're seeing it. Yeah photo But it learned how to do it from people and you know they'll use rocks to break open Crabs and they'll do stuff like that But they're not fascinating an arrowhead on a stick or a spear and they're making it with flint the Neanderthals did that They got to a level where they're like okay, this is like Craftsmanship like this is a sophisticated craftsmanship and then would also probably indicate some sort of a complex language That you could explain where you get the the gut that you turn into fiber that you use to tie the arrowhead to the stick Like they were they were doing they were doing some high-level stuff. Yeah, I would Sorry for a primate. Yeah, I would imagine also a lot of the innovation comes once you have their greater and revolution Because there's now surplus food. Yeah, and so you can afford to have a bunch of guys sitting around not hunting But like thinking about shit or inventing things or you know making things in a different way Did you see that a discovery of a skull that was 500,000 years older than they thought was the origin of human beings So that it potentially pushes back the original homo say be in Stu 500,000 years Is that right? Yeah, they think it's it might push back the date I mean it's an under debate I'm sure but I think they might push back the date of the arrival of homo say beans to a million years Wow Yeah, but it just shows you know That's how it's nuts how little we know about ancient civilization stone henge in the UK Which is this iconic No, I haven't you should go. It's really energy. Yeah, it's really impressive and like constant said There's a special energy in it's a profoundly moving place when you visit it You feel as if you have a connection to something else it's like going to the pyramid But they have no idea they have a rough idea of where the stones might have come from but they've got no idea how they got there How they erected them yeah, you should go man Joe Rogan arrested a Heathrow That would be a great fucking story I'm sure they can find some tweets Just things that have said does that count a social media the things that I've said talk to you about England. Yeah, of course I'm sure they can rest with that. Yeah Maybe not but why would I take that chance I could just look at a pictures tone edge The weird thing about that English countryside to me is the weirdest thing is the crop circle thing Because the crop circle thing I used to think was stupid I was like So some people flattening things out with a board and making designs. That's it and then I started watching Some people that were actual scientists that were breaking down what's actually happening to these plants They're like something weird's going on They're not just pushing these things down whoever's making these I'm not suggesting aliens are making them But they're making them in a way where they're using energy and it's it's causing the nodes in the these plants to burst and They're bending over and they're not snapping a lot of them are bent in place It's it's all very weird and they're woven. There's no footprints in no footprints out and some of them appear like overnight And they're these massive geometric patterns. It's really weird stuff Because if this is a coordinated effort some of them are fractals and you see the fractals? And you see the fractals and they're caught across like what you would say of a two like a soccer pitch like bigger than that Bigger than a soccer field with massive like fractal patterns Perfectly woven into crops. It's weird. They're weird I don't think it's I think some people made them by stomping on boards and moving them around But those you can kind of tell because they're different and they're not that sophisticated and they're not that impressive But there's been some ones that would see if you pull up some of these giant fractal ones There's been a few where you see people in them like that one. Yeah, you see people extending in them and you go oh Fuck all right. Wow. Look how small those people are like on the left. That's yes So this appeared overnight What yes overnight and some of them like this have appeared in an afternoon where a guy has flown his small plane Over a field worked and then flown his small plane back and all the sudden this massive fractal geometric pattern is in this these crops and what's weird is Some of them look like they have messages and some of them just look like patterns and wow One of them was the Mandelbrot set okay the Mandelbrot set is a particularly complex fracture fractal rather that I think Right after it was discovered was when it appeared in a crop circle Like not not long after look at this they're woven. Wow. This is weird stuff exactly a lot of them are in England and I've always wondered like what is that about and you could say oh Man, it's just bullshit. It's people fucking around. It might be it might be but if it is It's the most incredible hoax of all time because the people that did say that they did it when they asked them There was a couple of couple friends who like were making crop circles And they said show us how you do it and they showed them how they do it But there's nothing right ones shit wasn't shit. It wasn't like this They would have a string and they would like step on this board and they'd do it in a circle So that they made sure it was circle, but it wasn't this You guys something's going on like whatever that is someone's fucking with somebody There's some sort of technology that we're not aware of That's that kind of makes sense to me because if we know the direct energy weapons are real right So if this is saying that they're creating this with microwave energy or something similar to that that's making these nodes burst So you can find the burst nodes of crop circles because that's what's weird like some of them It's almost like like a microwave cooking something and it pops like a hot dog That's what it looks like and if you add a weapon not a weapon but a thing that you could point down from a satellite And you could make a geometric pattern in crops you could just burn it into the crop like instantaneously Why wouldn't you do that just to show that you could do it look? Who got cool to say look at this thing that we invented? This is a direct energy weapon, but if you use it low level you can literally imprint a geometric pattern into crops No footprints in no footprints out. I mean they're like oh aliens are trying to leave messages like or high-level government agencies they're using black-funded operations and Misappropriating funds in line of Congress have developed this way to fucking take Fractals and beam them into fields man some of the stuff like the war in Ukraine has accelerated Technological development of weapons in a way that like the drone warfare that's going on right now It's fucking crazy nuts like the next war that's good if there's another big war between like two big countries That's gonna be it's gonna be like something we used to watch in the movies man They have these like drones because They've worked. I had to jam them or hijack them so now they're on a fiber octave cable There's like ten kilometers long. Yeah, and then birds are taking them and making nests out of them right? It's fucking insane so that's the only photo I see that comes up Okay, well the they had bursts that's that one the white one in the center Yeah, that one right there So you could see how these things that they're expanded out in some weird way like energy not like they're broken But like that's they got hit with something like a like a focused energy that made them bend over in that pattern Like look at all this like a weird that is and this has been documented a lot of the really complex ones and that's why it's strange Look look at look at that one in the center that looks like a maze. I mean what the fuck man Jamie what's the official explanation of how these things are made? When I go everything I'm looking up says there's people that have admitted to making most of them and they've been Proven to be made a lot of times. I'm sure they made a bunch of them. That's all. I'm just that's yeah I think people are a little dismissive of the weirdness of this Yeah, because there are some of these like that's the metal brought set that one right there that fractal when did it appear after the metal brought set one It was in 91 Okay, these are obviously man made a far too symmetrical for that obviously not man made obviously not man made obviously not man made Far too symmetrical for that. This is in Cambridge weekly, but that's someone's opinion. Right. Um What it when did the mandel brought set first get discovered as a fractal? What is the origin of the mandel brought set when was the origin date for the discovery of the metal brought set? So it's so very complex It's really cool if you watch like a 3D version of the mandel brought set I guess discovered or created because it really just discovering Something that's that's geometry so in 1980 1917 was first was first the first roughly drawn in mathematicians 78 Okay, and then first visualize and high quality in March first of 1980 and that thing was from 1991 Is that what it was from and this is that it was so close to Cambridge. It was most like students Cox suckers See if you can find a 3D video of the mandel brought set because it's so weird when you see what this thing really is like fractals are very strange because Something about them that resonates With your your brain goes. Oh, this is how the universe is You know because I tend to think that's really what's going on especially when you look at human brain tissue Versus a map of the universe have you ever seen that like human neural maps and then a map of the actual universe itself? You're like That's a little too close like that's kind of dead on the money. They look exactly the same you look like it's exactly the same thing and It's completely like if we you believe in infinity and if the universe is infinite Wow This is a 3D version of the mental brought set Wow, so as you get closer and closer This is not the one I'm looking for this is like an artist's rendition of it But a 3D video of it will show like how the closer you get it becomes bigger again And then it goes into another thing and then you get close to that one and then it becomes bigger again And it's just the fractal nature of it and then you you think about like okay If the universe is infinite that it's not even that's it get to that one if the universe is infinite It's not even remotely observed to think that the whole universe is just human neural tissue of another creature That lives in another universe and hopefully this dude doesn't blow his own brains out because that might be the big bang the big bang the big bang might be the guy who is our universe he's depressed and He would explain and he hates his job and he's going to stick a gun in his mouth. Yeah Isn't that nuts? Yeah, this is the That's a like an actual now see if you can find a photo that compares human Neural tissue with the universe You ever see you know that image. I'm talking about Jamie That thing of disappearing it gave me a flashback to when I broke my arm. They took me to the hospital and it gave me ketamine Oh, yeah, I thought I died I Literally I thought I felt myself like disappear into this thing and I was like, okay, that's it And then was it fun no Look at these right right right right one of them is Human brain cells What is exactly what is the image exactly it's human neural tissue right so what it is You know, let's find out what it is so we could say it not sound totally stupid. So what does it say? I can't read that oh Brain cells brain cell. Yeah, and they're connected remarkably similar to our own brain cells and in the connections remarkably similar That's okay. So the left is a brain cell the right is the universe That dude's gonna put a gun in his mouth and go I'm done and right now He's dressed like a furry and he just pooped his pants. He said I've had enough I've had enough that's why I love about thinking about the universe. It's like the illusion of control Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's like we don't we don't matter. We don't control right and also the outrage that you have is Great like celebrated by the fact that light pollution is robbed you from this perspective Yeah, you can't look up and see the cosmos and all its glory anymore Yeah, so the more we're deprived of that the more ridiculous we get because we're never just faced with the awe of the universe I know like whoa When you see a sky that's just filled with stars there's something about that there's so humbling and so wild and so incredible I've been in a place in Armenia Which had I think one of the biggest observatories in the Soviet Union and you go up in the mountain We don't need any equipment. You basically don't see the sky. You just see stars like the entire sky is completely lit up by the stars That's so nuts. Yeah, and when you think about it When everybody's on their phones now, what do you do when you're on your phone? You look down right into the absolute complete opposite of looking up into the stars It really is so as a result you go well No wonder we're so completely self-obsessed narcissistic Solipsistic whatever whatever what you want to use because we're completely looking down into ourselves Yeah Well, actually if you look up and you see that you you become humble you realize if you're owning significance your mortality Yeah, you're not even looking in yourself You're really just being overwhelmed by nonsense you get in these tiny little dopamine hits Staring it horseshit. I watched four videos today of kids playing with baby goats But I could have been doing things instead of just sitting there staring at it Super opposite of that but the looking down thing is sort of a thing a lot of reflect the pulls back in ancient times we're used to monitor Oh, yeah. Yeah, no, that's true and put things down. Yeah, see where they move that way you don't have to hurt your neck You can figure out the stars That's also a crazy thing right because like how many ancient civilizations use the stars and use the constellations to align their buildings You know the Egyptians did it the minds did it? Typical of Abu Simbel. Yeah Where it was done and they still don't know how they did it mathematically So there was a beam of light coming from the top at a certain point and it would hit the altar Stonhengers like that. Yeah, oh, it's on the summer solstice everything how they did it mathematically so there was a beam of light coming from the top at a certain point and it would hit the altar or stone hinges like that yeah or the summer solstice everything lines up yeah you know this is one of the things we just had the historian Dan uh... dancing alright and we talked about the history of England and one of the things you were talking about a stone hinge and and and i watched a documentary in which he was saying well you know in many ways the people were living during this time they were really like us and i was thinking oh they were fucking not no they were fucking not think about the investment of time resources that it would take them to build stone hunch right and this is not a thing that has a functional purpose in the way that we would understand we would not invest a quarter of our GDP into building a stone structure that aligns with the sun and they don't really even know when they did it right no they're just guessing yeah yeah totally and when you get the we get the weird stuff like go backly tap a where they didn't even think people were capable of doing that 11,000 years ago yeah and there was purposely covered up 11,000 years ago and you find these giant stone columns you know like we don't know anything yeah we don't we don't know what these people were up to like this is kind of cookie and how they thought i remember right when when i was on tour with jordan um him and i were talking one night um and i don't know it was a weird experience it sounds crazy but when i was spending time with him we were talking a lot the way i saw things slightly changed like the images became more like vivid in my head and one of the things he was talking about is the mindset of say like there were certain tribes that would sacrifice one of their children for some kind of reason right some of that and and and when he he was talking i suddenly had this vision or like being there and he said now think about what that's like what do you have to believe and how do you have to think to be willing to sacrifice your own child for something willingly right willingly now think of the bond with your children yeah for you to think that that is the right thing to do you gotta be a different human being to this ray of us yeah and you gotta first of all probably real comfortable with death because back then i bet people died real easy and real often and also maybe you've got to be really fucking terrified of something real terrified of something and really believe that if you don't do this like everyone's gonna die right you have to sacrifice one kid or we're all doomed right yeah but you know in different like i'm remember in vena swapler i was quite a depressing story but in peak places like south america they were far more comfortable with death than we are like i remember i met this girl at this party when i was 18 years old i really liked it there was a little bit of vibe going on but i knew she liked my friend so i didn't do anything and i went home back to the uk i came back a year later and i said to my friend hey well you know Diana that girl i was talking to watch what she up to now and he went well you didn't know i went no he went she was in a car driving down the motorway she was getting chased by some dudes he tried to outrun him lost control of the car hit or wall the car burst into flames i was up anyway anyway dude you want to be here because when you're in those kind of cultures and people were dying of kidnapped it becomes it you know you simply can't have that visceral reaction all the time because it overtakes you it paralyzes you and you can't function so people in vena swapler will get kidnapped on the weekend and on the monday they're back at work oh but jesus so i think a lot of it is adaptive you know yeah well people definitely adapt to all sorts of crazy environments i mean you see that all over the world and the problem is you'll see people living you know like say villagers in the congo do and you're like oh that's so different than me like no bitch you just don't live there if you live there that would be exactly how you would live you would live just like them because that's all they can do they have no way out so they're stuck here and you would be too especially if you have no access to other information or other cultural values or exactly exactly the window which is why we need Mormons to be missionary so they could travel places teaches people that story i always i feel bad laughing and someone being killed but that story about the guy he went to that island yeah he was an apartment he went to the north sense of an island north sense of an island is particularly odd because that place that area had been invaded by this guy when Jamie comes back i'll have him look up the story the guy there was god forget his name but he was a pervert and he would go to these islands and make these guys dress up like Roman soul jersey would he would write down in his his journal the size of their testicles like this one had testicles the size of a sparrows egg he was a total freak and he also kidnapped people from that island and gave a bunch of people the flu so he kidnapped people and gave one of the flu or some some sort of disease and two old people died and then they returned the kids back to the island so they all had horrific stories about these white people that would visit and measure your dicks and give you a flu and so when that kid came and tried to give them the Bibles he didn't know the history he didn't know that these people had like a severe rejection of these several original phone boats people died and then you know they told you stories around the campfire some guy who comes and measures your dick and then everyone dies like these were like this that was their folklore so when he showed up like you know trying to convert these people like they're already they they weren't hearing it no they would like don't touch my dick dude yeah they're like i know what you're up to my i heard the story of my grandpa campfire yeah that place is nuts only 39 people living there but you guys are Manhattan really yeah size of Manhattan middle in the Indian Ocean and the people living there the direct descendants of people left Africa 50,000 years ago wow some of them just stayed on that island and then it got to be a very small genetic diversity you know there's only this is a very small amount of people in that island that's where things get real weird it's like you kind of got to leave them there now you know yeah there's no coming back is that what are you going to do you get teach them how to make stuff like what are you going to do show them how to make a boat this is how they make a car it's like what are you going to do yeah that's their culture there's you know they're isolated from the entire world and they have been for giant chunks of history except for when dudes came over and measured the dicks can you imagine that was your only reference for white people well there was another boat that it uh the dick mass around the here and they invaded the boat they were going after the people in the boat and they got out just in time they got rescued just in time and that's how they started getting metal because they didn't have metal up until then so they were taking pieces of the boat and using it to fashion weapons with wow they didn't have any metal up until that point you know it was really interesting is how something still resonate like i was talking to constant in about the Greek myths and how i was really obsessed with them when i was a kid and when i was teaching i used to teach Greek myths to my kids and they would all love it and i remember thinking going why is it that these stories which are thousands of years old resonate with a group of eleven year old kids in the twenty first century in east London who are addicted to their iPhones but then you look at it and you look at for instance a story of narcissist the guy who falls in love with his own reflection in the lake and drowns in the lake and you go well that could be about now yeah do you know what i mean like with social media the guy who just become so obsessed he becomes one with social media until the point that it obliterates everything and he loses all his identity i wonder if that's the origin of it i wonder if this is a repeating cycle what if the Egyptians had social media what if the like what if those people had a i what if they had everything that we think they didn't have because there's nothing left over because they all got absorbed by the earth and we're just making assumptions what if it's a cycle what if she has people get to a point where they figure out something amazing and then they fuck it up and become cave people again and have to rebuild over and over and over again that's the difference with their eyes because up to up to that point you go all technology really does is amplifies unnatural human nature in every way right the ancient Egyptians were jealous of their sister and fucking all of this shit right but AI isn't human right and that's that's where i think it gets interesting this is my craziest speculation is that whenever i'm reading religious text i'm always trying to figure out okay what was the original story what were they documenting like what were they trying to record and pass down what really happened what what really is the book of e-noc all about and have you told that for a thousand years before anybody bothered writing it down and it gets translated and who knows what it means who knows what was the event if Jesus is born of a virgin mother what is more virgin than a computer if our savior comes to us from a virgin mother and it's it's born out of this technology and it becomes some insanely intelligent but benevolent force in the world and then the Muslims kill them they bomb them or or the Romans or whoever's in charge maybe it's the US government this time yeah maybe we'll kill maybe it maybe he just disrupts president Kamala's second term they decided new to Jesus have you been to the Middle East no i've been to parts i've been to Abu Dhabi and i've been to Dubai what do you think um you know um Abu Dhabi is very nice it's it's it's incredible how much money they have right we did a UFC down there and it was like wow like you just like realize like this is kind of crazy like there's so much money and Dubai also it's like so much money every look is Ferraris and Bentley's and Rolls-Royce is like kind of crazy to have i have a friend who lived in Dubai for quite a while and he's American and he was saying dude you could leave a Rolex on the street and people turn it in yeah i don't like really you know it's like no one steals anything there's no crime but yeah you have to you know run by a king yeah but it's interesting with with some of the gulf countries now they're so they're moving forward at such a rapid rate culturally as well you know i've i have a friend and saturday who's a woman she's like super excited about the way things are going you know right and this is the difference between Muslims and Islamists with a retirement crowd well right so if you talk to a marathi's for example right there's nobody they hate more than the Muslim Brotherhood the Muslim Brotherhood is like the the central tumour and the hamass ISIS and whatever they're like little meta-static tumours basically and the Muslim Brotherhood is the threat to them way more than it is even to us in the west because they you know you i'm sure you've heard after terrorist attack everyone's like well actually Muslims are the biggest victims of terrorist islamist terrorism is true because what's happening in the Middle East is there's effectively a war between the people who want to live in a nation state they want to live in Saudi Arabia ua etc barrain whatever and the people who want that to be one religious caliphate with Sharia law that's what's happening that's the battle so those Muslim countries they understand Islamist extremism way better than we do if have you ever seen that video of the ua foreign minister he was talking in the maybe 20 tens maybe like 2012 some of that maybe even earlier and he basically predict he says you in europe don't understand what you're dealing with and because of your bullshit because your political correctness you are going to have terrorism and violence on your street he predicted all of it because they understand islamist terrorism way better than we do that's why you know people are you know the Arab streets a different thing but the people who are in power in those countries they hate hamass more than anyone they hate they hate hamass more because they just go these are the people that want to kill us too and i think part of the problem as well is that we have we have liberalism in our country so we're saying you know it's a marketplace of ideas we need to talk we need to share but what what happens is then you've got an Islamic fundamentalist preaching converting people to islamism and you go our way of combating this simply is an adequate it is an adequate to deal with this civilizational threat which is what it is and if you come from an Islamic background you understand it far more because you are from a culture you're from a similar culture so you see what what effectively what this is which is like a cancerous version of Islam and so you're better able to understand it and by being better able to understand it you're far more able to tackle that problem one of the things that i find interesting about people that are very upset about the uh... gaza conflict is that they don't have anything to say about the hamass executions that have been going on lately right the public executions need a letter yeah those public executions are fucking horrific man it's it's wild to watch you know and unfortunately i've been sent some of the torture videos too breaking people's bones yeah and i don't know if they think these are guys that collaborated with israel's that with the it's more of a power struggle yeah like they want to reassert the authority i mean if you if you think back to the the trump twenty one point peace plan the central point take a job i don't want to get different work and i'm just going to work but go ahead um sorry so the original trump twenty one point peace plan the central premise of that was hamass disarm and hamass people leave gaza right right and until you have that you're not going to have peace because this is what these people do right the moment the fighting stops come out they reassert the authority they kill anyone who's not with them and they you know they're going to attack israelis israelis are going to attack back and and then we're back to where we started the amazing thing president trump has been able to achieve is getting the hostages out that's fucking yeah he deserves so much credit for that boy imagine what those fucking people have been through oh man i mean i don't know if there's enough mda in the world to help you get over that two years imagine two years of living with those i mean what did they do to them and they were being told the bunch of shit as well i'm sure like israelis been destroyed your families disowned you like mental torture as well i'm sure i'm sure yeah every day you wake up you look at this guy and you're like this guy would kill me in an instant and not only would he feel it's not that he would feel nothing he would celebrate there's that horrific footage from october seventh where it was a mass terrorist kill ten people the first thing he did after slaughtering ten people is he called his dad and was like dad look what this is what i've done and his dad would celebrate and then he went put mom on the phone and then mom was on the phone and mom was celebrating and you go i think part of the problem when we talk about this conflict is again it goes back we just don't understand that we're viewing the world it's so utterly alien to us because we haven't been indoctrinated into that mindset we were all talking about um israel and what the way israel feels about palestine in the green room the day and we're like just imagine if you lived in israel and you're a Jew and everybody else hates you all the people around you hate you like do you know how tense that must be how insane that relationship must be and i'm not excusing anything they've done but the idea that they would behave the way we behave is kind of ludicrous correct it's kind of ludicrous we would behave the way they behave if they did that us we would do if we lived in that environment if Canada and mexico were both like wanted us dead you know that's if that was if that was their goal ultimately if they're real stated religious goal was the death of the United States we would be crazy we would be invading Canada every week we would be fucking Canada up all the time we wouldn't want them to have weapons we wouldn't want them to have government we wouldn't want them to have anything and we wouldn't be talking about a cease fight we'd be talking about dealing with a threat yeah right yeah we would talk about i mean look all we did was differ with them economically and Trump tried to turn them into a state he said i called them governor judo first i was just joking and a lot of people told me it was a good idea yeah i think that single-handedly ruined Canada yeah that idea i mean that's the the republican party or their version of the the conservative party they were on the way out they were fucked yeah and also in the whole country united because Trump's trying to turn it into a state yeah polyev has got to be angry by that human it has to be so bad it was logical and reasonable and everybody's like let's try that for a while yeah you know what that was the ultimate cock block you know what i mean you're in the bar you're this about a happen with the girl it's going down it's going down you're like oh i'm so gonna get back yeah i'm so gonna get like Trump pops up whispers something in a rare and all of a sudden it's fucking over you know he's gay you're kind but coming back to your point about people not talking about the Hamas executions i one thing i also noticed is a lot of people weren't didn't seem to be happy that was a ceasefire the very ones that have been calling for one well they didn't want Trump to do it that's why they didn't want Trump to get credit for anything so if there's a cease for like no one's given him any credit for all the other conflicts that he stopped as well you know there's been a bunch in africa and this people had been feuding for decades and he's put a stop to that now whether or not it sticks that's another thing there's no one didn't stick didn't stick very long i mean what happened so someone blew over they drove over uh undus unexploded munitions and then they thought it was attacked by Hamas and then they started bombing again right what i read is there was an RPG fired at a Israeli vehicle but you might have a you might have a that was i think that was the initial story okay that's what they thought so it's changed yes okay i think they thought someone that these Israeli the IDF soldiers drove over this unexploded munitions and they saw some dude and they were like he did it i think someone blamed someone else for it i think there was confusion or something along those lines see if you can find but that story is i don't know what the exact story was but yeah they saw bombing again and they killed a bunch of people and there's also a lot of mistrust like you know i was saying the Arab nations in the region they hate Hamas they also don't trust nanyahu that's also in fact they don't trust nanyahu right and you know net in yahoo i mean you talk about what Israelis feel like think about what it's like this first question i asked him what is it like to be a leader of a country that is attacked in the way that you were on october the seventh imagine the trauma that leaves in your responsible right you're responsible for 10 million people and this happens did you ask him why it took so long for them to respond no we didn't ask him that no it was quite a few hours it was a few hours my understanding from people we we had the former director Moss Adam we asked him about that and he just i mean there are a lot of people are very critical of the the the Israeli top brass right or the way when down i think there was a lot of confusion from what i understand like contradictory orders being given people didn't really know what was going on that's basically what i heard was there a stand-down order i don't know no from we've also spoken to other military experts who actually say look it doesn't look good but one of the things is it's very difficult to mobilize forces instantaneously and soldiers instantaneously organize get them out even under emergency right but wouldn't you think in israel which is one of the most sophisticated security states and the world that they would be ready for something like that a lot quicker than any other country because they're constantly under it you think they would have a fence that was permanently monitored and yeah they fucked up they clearly fucked up very bad it's crazy if you you look at their fence versus egypt friends yeah the egypt friends it's wild people don't like talk about that no that one's wild yeah well this is one of the reasons that a lot of the other countries in the region you know they they don't they don't support Israel killing Palestinians obviously but they're also not they just take it to save your jordanian right right a lot of the population in jordan is Palestinian and what happened when they had a large population of Palestine they killed the fucking king right so that this is the difficulty of it like this is a highly radicalized population right and you know it's that's why it's such a difficult conflict to resolve and like you say the Israelis are on edge because they have to be this surrounded by people who've invaded their country repeatedly yeah like what is the best case scenario for how this all ends that's what the problem is everybody who prognosticates everybody looks at the future no one has a version of this where it's like oh worked out great yeah well jared kushna i think he's a he's a clearly a genius i mean orchestrating the Abram of courts in the first Trump term he's involved in it now and his thing as i understand it is basically this the Middle East has a very different demographic to most western countries they should turn a young people very very young people and they the leaders of those countries know that they've got two choices either they create jobs meaning purpose economic prosperity or all these young men are going to go the wrong direction so they're desperately trying to create thriving economies so that their youth don't feel the need to fight their grandfather's war and as i understand the decusional approach has been what you do is you find a way to address the fighting so it's not happening and then you just lock the entire region into economic cooperation because the ue wants to trade with Israel the Saudis want to trade with Israel and the other reason is they have a common enemy which is Iran although other countries particularly the Gulf countries they fear Iran a lot more than they fear Israel a lot more than they care about Israel Iran is their number one problem it's a threat to them and so if you can get the entire Middle East other than Iran maybe katai i don't know together working together they don't then have the incentive to continue this conflict because they're trading they've got way more to lose by this continuing so that's the end goal the difficulty is as long as Hamas is on power they are i mean they did october 7th to prevent that from happening basically they wanted to derail the long-term aspiration for peace and Iran wanted them to do that because Iran doesn't want those countries to work together and didn't it happen right after Biden had released like six billion dollars to Iran right yeah right yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and yeah in Iran funds well in an Iran funds all of these organizations all these Hezbollah Hamas so Iran is essentially their plot plan is destabilization of the region and then if you go to the history of Iran you find out that they got fucked by what was it the the British oil company which oil company wasn't where they wanted to nationalize their oil because they they realized they were getting fucked and so the king is like hey oh no this is our oil and uh and all sudden the United States comes along and Britain comes along and they go let's kick this fucking guy out here and install some sort of a religious religious caliphate and get the party rolling and they fucked the entire country up yeah like if you see Iran from like the the 1960s women are wearing mini skirts and everybody looks like they're having a good time it looks like a like a normal European city right yeah and then the crazies come in yeah and you've got this you know seven century shit going on oil companies yeah they they don't give a fuck they're just trying to make that loot and if they make that loot and ruin a country like okay yeah who cares yeah but I hope that they've maybe they haven't but you just look at the misery and that they've so much it like they feel bad no I hope that I'll just wake up one day and goes I've been a bad guy did you see one of the Iranian leaders the wedding no did you see the wedding no so this has created a huge storm in Iran because obviously they have the morality police where people are men literally go around and look at women and go right you need to have your hair covered you need to have the your skirt needs to be down here and if not we're gonna arrest you we're gonna beat you up we're gonna do all of these things let me guess his daughter was wearing a beautiful white dress for the mate she had them out she had no look at oh you can go to jail for that that does not look very hell out to me my does to me Jeff fucking hell Iranian women are beautiful oh yeah they're incredible if that's what's even more fucked you got a great gene pool over there it's being stifled but the Persians are a great civilization if you look at the history they're an incredible people incredible wrestlers too yeah yeah long history of elite wrestlers come out of Iran yeah it's crazy man yeah so that's the hope that's the hope is economic development right and if you can get people trading and that's the idea well bring people out of desperation you stop crime everywhere right yeah I mean we should have done that in the United States long last time we got yeah we definitely should have figured out how to do that with Mexico yeah but we're a bunch of haters we don't want to do it well over there we don't compete with Mexico economically fuck that you know we had he was a guest on your show out to yo and gorilla yeah yeah yeah yeah and we and I never realized this but yo almost like you know there's a trade going on between Mexico and the United States so was that what do you mean he was like well drugs come over one way and the Americans give the guns come over the other way yeah yeah yeah I had mariana benzaller on from traffic yeah she actually followed the what how the LAPD the corrupt cops from the LAPD confiscate guns sell guns to the gang members the gang members then take those guns and drive into Mexico with them because you can get into Mexico easy they don't care come on in but leaving Mexico where it's get hard so they tell the guns drive back over empty trunk everybody's happy do you think your boys are gonna start some share with Venezuela I hope not it seems like it looks like it's going in that direction don't open up them boats soon after explosion Rafa I'm told by secure familiar the White House and Pentagon knew the incident was caused by an Israeli settler bulldozer running over unexploded ordinance contradicting Netanyahu's claim that Hamas had popped up from tunnels this is Ryan Graham who's a journalist after Netanyahu said he was blocking all aid from entering Gaza in response and unleashed a bombing campaign the administration conveyed to Israel that they know what happened Netanyahu then announced he would reopen the crossings in a few hours right fuck yeah so this is what happens in a war right everyone's fucking on edge something blows up they think we will run to attack and all thoughts again the worst suspicions are that you know wants this war to continue because it's always days in power because of the corruption stuff right and that's what Clinton said openly yeah yeah yeah that's that's gets real fucking scary yeah do you think that's true I don't know man I don't know enough about geopolitics I don't necessarily don't know enough about this conflict but you know I know there's a lot of people that are suspicious of it which is why a lot of people are suspicious about why it took so long to answer with October 7th oh is that that's why you were asking no I want to know why it took so long if you asked him because it does seem like a long time yeah you know I'm not accusing anybody of anything but a lot of people are yeah you know it's a that's a thing that people bring up on the internet all the time like why did it take so long for then respond was this unknown thing that was going to happen they allowed it to happen so now they have a reason where Netanyahu stays in power a war gets you know I find a hot to imagine it's a horrific notion if it is true it's absolutely horrific yeah it's horrific that we could even consider that a human being who's running a country would allow their citizens to die and I'm not saying they did but we do know that people have done that in the past you know false flags are that is a legitimate strategy to for an unwilling populist to be entertained into going to war I mean that's what they were trying to do with Operation Northwoods Operation Northwoods which was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff they were trying to get people to support a war with Cuba and so what they did was it we're gonna That's what they were trying to do with Operation Northwoods. Operation Northwoods, which was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, they were trying to get people to support a war with Cuba. And so what they did was they were going to blow up a drone jetliner, blame it on the Cubans. They were going to arm Cuban friendlies and fuck up Guantanamo Bay. And they were going to say, okay, this is it. Q is attacked. We have to attack back. And then next thing you know, we're at war with Cuba. And that was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. That was a full-on plan that was vetoed by Kennedy. Right. Wow. Yeah. So we know that. We also know that Gulf of Tonkin instant in Vietnam falls flat. So we know that people have done stuff before where they either have allowed something to happen, like Pearl Harbor, or they have just, you know, they've just capitalized on it. You just have to figure out which one is which. Right. I mean, World War II started with a false flag. You know this, the Glaewoods incident. Which one is that? So they basically, in order to justify the invasion of Poland, Hitler pretended that Polish soldiers had crossed the border and killed people in Germany. And that was their pretense for attacking. We also burned the Reichstag too, right? Did you blame other people on that? Yeah. I don't know that I know that for a fact. I'm maybe just not educated enough about that one. But the Glaewoods incident, they basically set it up so that it looked like the Pauls did and they didn't narrow do that too. Didn't he burn Rome and blame other people for that as well? I thought I'd done that. The story is that he fiddled while swam burn. Did you just perplexity to find out? Nero did that. Did he use, did he burn part of Rome? Might as well do the Reichstag as well because I want to know. Yeah, let's do that as well. Because I think that's just a common tactic for assholes. Yeah, I know. So it's an asshole in control of a government. But I think letting 4000 G. Hardy's invade your country and rape and slaughter and butcher people, that to me is beyond the realm of imagination. Of course, as is 9-11. But there's a lot of cookie people that believe that that was allowed to happen as well. You know, for the longest time, I thought that trade sent to seven. That was like a big question mark. My friend Winston Marshall, he sent me a video that explains it very well for the, I hadn't seen a good explanation of it. But it kind of, it made a lot of sense to me. Well, it doesn't happen all at once. That's one common misconception. You can watch the video. The top collapses inside the building, right? A couple minutes before it all goes. That's right. That's right. Yeah. And I think I want my fucking money back from her built that thing. That's for sure. Right. I'd be like, bro. You guys cut some fucking corners or something. Whatever your plan had that you had to keep this thing stable. Nero's role in the myth, contrary to popular myth is no credible evidence that Nero started the fire. Here we go. He was in the anti-M when it broke out and returned to coordinate emergency measures such as opening public spaces for refugees and importing food. The image of Nero fiddling my Rome burns is a later invention. The fiddle did not exist at the time. Of course, fiddled doesn't mean like a fiddle. This is like AI being literal. Yeah. It means fiddle around. And while like fiddle spinners, you fuck it. And while some sources claim he's saying about the fall of Troy during the fire, this account is disputed and likely part of political smear campaign. Who the fuck knows? You're too many years ago with this kind of shit. But either way, false flags are a real thing. Sure. Yeah. That's why people get real suspicious. Yeah. But a lot of the, sorry, go ahead. No, I was thinking, but is there not a part of you that just goes eventually the truth comes out? You know what I mean? Eventually. Well, especially in a country as small as Israel, which is tiny. Well, look at JFK. I mean, the truth is not come out about that. We're all like still trying to figure that out. And they're talking in this election. Like, there's going to be a thing when a release of JFK files. Oh, great. We're finally going to know nothing. There's nothing. So why do you think that is? Why is that not been? Because is it because there's nothing there? And what we told is what happened is what happens? Some's own words were if they showed you what they showed me, you wouldn't release it either. Wow. What was the fuck does that mean? I probably means a government assassinated Kennedy. Kennedy was the government. Well, I mean, it's CIA. I mean, the deep state or whatever it was at the time. Whoever it was. My friend Evan Hafer from Black Rifle Coffee, he has a theory of his about Kennedy pulling out air support from Bay of Pigs. And that without air support, that operation could never be effective. And a bunch of people were going to die. They shouldn't have died. And a bunch of those guys that were on that beach lost brothers. And they were hardcore, like serious soldiers. And you get those guys to kill Kennedy. That's interesting. As revenge. Because it was a very coordinated event. If it went the way the, you know, Oliver stones of the world think it went, which I think I tend to think he's like pretty accurate. I think he knows what happened roughly. And there's multiple people shooting at the same time. And this should never be allowed to be a path where you're on a convertible with the fucking president and his bushes and people can hide behind the bush and you don't have it sussed out. You didn't like you didn't scan the bushes and make sure there's nobody with a rifle there. Like the whole thing's nuts. He would never set it up that way if you were the secret service. Well, see, the obvious counter argument to that in my head, I'm just playing the argument out with you. I don't know anything is what happened to Trump. Right? Well, that's not a counter argument. Because the Trump thing is easily the same story if that kid's a better shot. That kid's a better shot. You have a dead president and you have a patsy, maybe who knows. You have some kid who was in a black rock commercial two years prior who somehow or another has a professionally scrubbed apartment. So they find his apartment. It doesn't have any silverware in it after he's dead. They creamed him within days. There's no toxicology report, no autopsy. There's no information on the kid. He has no social media. What fucking kids have no social media? He has three different phones. Why does he have three different phones? Why is there metadata from a phone outside of DC, outside of where the FBI offices traveling back and forth to this kid multiple times? Why is he training in these very technical gun ranges where people are doing tactical training and stuff like that? What is this guy doing? Who's getting him to do this? Why is he doing this? Do you think he really has knowledge that this thing is going to go down in Butler? Why are they allowing this guy to walk around the grounds with a rangefinder? 30 minutes before the event? Why is he seen? How does he get on the roof? How do they not have someone on the roof? How are they not? Like there's a lot of weirdness to it? Why is it the first one of those things that they're televising live on CNN? There's a lot of weird ones. So yeah, it's not a counter-argument. In fact, it backs up the point. Yeah, it's not only the back of the point, like the kid just sucked. He missed. I don't know what kind of a sight he had on his rifle. He might have had a red dot, but he definitely didn't have like a good long range scope. It looks like from the video or the images of the rifle that I've seen laying on the rooftop. If he had a really good scope and he was a good shot, that's an easy shot. It's only 150 yards, I think, from that roof, which is also preposterous that you let allow a person to climb on to a roof within 150 yards of a guy who's a very controversial figure who's running for president. It's nuts. The whole thing's nuts. You know, we interviewed a guy called Michael Francis, who's a former head of one of the big crime families. I think he was head. I was not head all the scene in the studio. He's a big guy. He's a big guy. And he said when it it comes to JFK, he said at the time in the mob, there was a joke where they would say, oh, we shot the wrong Kennedy. And he said that it was more related. Yeah, it could have been. It could have been multiple different shooters from multiple different organizations. I don't think Lee Harvey Oswald was innocent. You know, people like Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. Like that doesn't have to be the case. He might have actually even shot at Kennedy. He might have been one of the guys who shot at Kennedy. I think they had him set up to be the guy that takes the blame whether or not he actually pulled the trigger. He might have. I'm not opposed to the idea that he might have what I am opposed to the ideas of a one single shooter causing all that damage because it's a logical. It's not just a logical. It was created because they had to account for a bullet that hit the underpass. So bullet ricocheted off one of the curb stones in the underpass and fucked this guy up. And so they found the curve that had been chipped. This guy got wounded. He got hit with the ricochete when he got treated in the hospital. So they know that was one bullet. So now they have to two bullets. One is a headshot and one goes through Kennedy's body and into Connolly's body. The problem with that is Kennedy reacts to a gunshot before Connolly ever does because Connolly wasn't hit. Connolly was hit afterwards. Connolly was hit after Kennedy was shot in the neck and then he was shot in the back and then he was shot in the head. Kennedy was shot multiple times. The one in the neck he grabs his neck in the beginning of the video. There's a different, there's two different depictions of what that is. There's the Dallas hospital where they take him right after the shooting where they say it's an entry wound. And then in Bethesda, Maryland, they say it's a tricky enemy wound. Like they trick them, which is preposterous. He's no head. His head's missing. You put a trick pipe on a guy that does this half as fucking head's missing and he's dead as fuck. No, he didn't. No, it's a fucking entry wound. You see him grab his neck. He got shot in the neck. And it looks to me like his head was shot at the very least one time from the front at the very least one time. But it might have been his head might have hit by two bullets at the same time. I mean, there's people shooting at him. I think there was multiple people shooting him from different directions. And he does have a wound in his back. He has an entry wound in his back. So probably shot him in the back too. They might have been Oswald. Oswald might have shot him in the back. But I think the back into the left and the people that all called out that said that there was people firing behind them in the grass. You know, I bet that's correct. The whole way that they if you ever been a daily plaza, no, it's small. It's real weird. And it's a there's a turn like you have to make this turn. Like if you were a sniper, you could ask for a better place to set up because this guy is going 30 miles an hour or on the stupid little turn and come and straight at you and you're just sitting there in the bushes. You could pick him off. You could pick him up. The people that say that he couldn't shoot him from the window sill. It's too hard of a shot. He wasn't a good marksman. Shut the fuck up. Anybody could do that. I could show you how to do that. And you could do that in my I talked to my friend Andy Stump. I was talking about it on the podcast. I said, give Andy a day and he goes, fuck a day. He goes, give me a couple hours. I could teach you how to do that. It's not that hard. With a good rifle. What about this J.D. Tip it? Yeah. It seems like Lee Harvey Oswald killed this cop. So it seems like when Lee Harvey Oswald was taking off, he had an altercation with this cop and he shot the cop four times. Yeah. Well, that's why I think I don't think Lee Harvey Oswald was innocent. I think he was in on it. But I think he was the setup. He was the Patsy and they were going to have him go down for it. Whether or not he actually killed Kennedy, he might have. Look, if he shot him in the back, if that one shot from the back, it was was Lee Harvey Oswald. Maybe that would have killed Kennedy. Maybe that was the one to kill them or would have killed them for the headshot. But he was hit multiple times. Do you know what when you read about Kennedy and then you saw the, you know, the attempted assassination of Trump and make you realize just how fragile societies are. Like how different would our world be if for instance Kennedy survived and or Trump hadn't and vice versa? You know, do you know what I mean? Oh, yeah. Do you know, like, I remember someone asked me that question was like, what do you think would have happened? Yeah. If if the bullet had been within the Trump's case, two inches further towards the right, whatever it was, you know, how different would our society be right now? Very, very different. Very different. Would it be the beginning of a civil war? Who knows? It could have, everything could have popped off and on top of that, who would be president, right? Would they suspend the presidential elections and allow the Republicans to come up with the new viable candidate with JD Vance run for president? How would they do it? What would that, who would be the representative of the Republicans? Would they suspend the election entirely? Would, you know, they do something where Kamala just gets sworn in by the then president Biden? Who knows? They don't know. This is why I think political polarization of the kind of we've seen are so scary because I mean, the thing that really struck me when Charlie was assassinated was this was always possible. Yeah. And all the only reason it wasn't happening is we kind of had a culture of like, we don't do this basically, right? Because anyone can pick up a rifle in this country. And that's why I really worry about the fact that people think political violence is justified. Not just justified, but celebrated. Yeah. That was the creep apart. The creepy part was the celebration, the people that were celebrating. Some of my people recently just lost her job because people were driving by. She was doing a no-kinks protest and she started mocking getting shot in the neck. And she was a school teacher. Yeah. Elementary school teacher. Yeah. Fucking crazy people. There's a lot of crazy people out there. And some of the, I mean, people are, you know, they're, they're correct in worrying about the impact that these people have on their children. You're correct. Correct. You have a lot of crazy people that are teaching your kids. I know so many people now who are homeschooling to be honest to something I'm thinking about. It's not a bad idea. I mean, the problem socially is like kids need to hang out together. Yeah. I know. It's really important. I worry about that too. Yeah. But I mean, I think you could probably replace that with sports and good friends. Yeah. And especially if you lived in a community where multiple people were homeschooling. Yeah. But then, you know, people get weirded out about homeschooling because they think it's going to, that leads to religious radicals. You know, have to be a religious to homeschooling people in this country. Because that connected to religious Christians like radical Christian. I just don't want some 25 or hair teaching my son the communism is brilliant. Exactly. Can I not have that? In the weird ways people that have no desire to have children of their own, you know, and they want to indoctrinate people's kids into their way of thinking. It's like a part of why they teach, you know. It's because they're so, this is, I was, we were having this conversation. Yes, it is. And I said to Constantine, the great thing about an ideology is it gives you certainty. The terrible thing about an ideology is it gives you certainty. So true. And it's also the appealing thing about it. Oh, yeah. You know, I've always been attracted to the idea that these people like really believe like it's fascinating when I watch like super religious people that are praying five times a day and like, like that is amazing. Like look how dedicated they are to that thing. Like if there's a attractiveness to that, like God, I wish I was like, if I was that dedicated to something, I probably way more stable in my life. Yeah. You know, because you just locked in and everybody believes and you see people talking about the religion with utmost certainty. Like, oh, show that certain, yeah. Which house that certain? Those guys are so certain they're willing to die. Like, it also gives you like a lot of inner peace. It does. Like if you don't have that, which I don't, and I've got a friend who's, who's a devout Muslim and he's, and he's going through tough times at the moment. And I say to him, like, how do you get through this? And he's like, bro, I've got my religion. I've got God. And I know everything's going to be okay. He's a great guy. And it goes, I pray five times a day. It really helps me. And it makes me realize and understand that what I'm going through is part of his plan. It's part of his plan. Yeah. If you really do believe that, it definitely will help you. I haven't got that, but I have started going to church ever now and again. Yeah. Yeah. Do you enjoy it? I love it. Yeah. It's about, I do too. It's a bunch of people that are going to try to make their lives better. They're trying to be a better person. And they're trying to, I mean, for me at least, the place that I go to, they, you know, they read and analyze passages in the Bible. I'm really interested in what these people were trying to say, because I don't think it's nothing. There's a lot of like atheists and secular people that just like to dismiss Christianity as being foolish. You know, it's just fairy tales. I hear that amongst self-professed intelligent people, like it's a fairy tale. Like I don't know that's true. I think there's more to it. I think it's history, but I think it's a confusing history. It's a confusing history because it was a long time ago. And it's people telling things in an oral tradition and writing things down in a language that you don't understand in the context of a culture that you don't understand. And I think there's something to what they're saying. I think there's a reason why they all have a flood myth. I think there's a reason they all have a very similar story of catastrophic floods and chaos. And then that drives with what geologists are finding. With these people are finding that are exploring the younger, driest impact theory, that there was, there was floods massive enormous amounts of water that are instantaneously released from melting ice caps all over the world because of common impacts. Like it happened. There's evidence. Is it the evidence of this happening? And I think that's what they're trying to say in these stories. I just think it's so confusing. It's so confusing because you're dealing with a time so long ago. You bear, we talk about how different people live today on earth, but we more similar today than we would be reacting or interacting with a society that existed 6,000 years ago. What are we even talking about? What is that like? What is the world like then? What is discourse like? What rules are there? What protections do you have against being robbed and stolen from? And how often is war? What is life like back then? It's fucking nuts. So you're writing things down on animal skins frantically and hiding them and clay jars and kumran and like, I hope somebody finds this someday. And then thousands of years later, someone does. They find these ancient fucking scrolls and they pull them out and they're their versions of stories from the Bible. So these people have been telling these same stories for thousands of years. Like, well, okay, what were they trying to say? That's what's interesting to me. I don't think it's nothing. No. I think there's something to it and there's a reason why it resonates with people. And Christianity in particular is the most fascinating to me because there's this one person that everybody agrees existed that somehow or another had the best plan for how human being should interact with each other and behave and was the best example of it and even died in a nonviolent way. It didn't even protest died on the cross supposedly for our sins. Like, it's a fascinating story. What is it represent though? That's the real thing. What was that? Like, what happened? Who was Jesus Christ if it was a human being? What was that? That's wild. Well, Jordan's idea is I understand it is that the point of the story, if you like, is it's about voluntary self-sacrifice. It's about the fact that to have a good society, people have to be willing to sacrifice something of themselves for others. And that's what Jesus and that story supposed to inspire in all of us. But it's a historical human being too though. It's a historically documented human being. That's where it gets weird because there's a universal depiction of what this human being was like that doesn't seem to vary that much, but you know the people that knew them. That gets weird. You know, if you go to Jerusalem, you can go to the Garden of the Gefsemane. And for those people who don't know, that's where Jesus was arrested by the Roman soldiers. It still exists. You can go there 2000 years later. And you just literally walk around this place. You just like my god, like the connection to those stories. It's just, it's right there. And also I think the lessons that you learn from going to church are incredibly profound. Something as simple as I was raised Catholic is, you know, they'd say peace be upon you towards the end. Let's sow each other a sign of peace. Yeah. And you literally shake hands with the person next to you. Right. You don't know this person. You may have never met them, but you shake hands with the person behind in front and whatever else. Yeah. What an incredibly profound gesture that is. Just to shake hands with someone and all your anger and all your resentment and everything you feel, which is natural and jealousy and you go and but you make a literal physical connection with another human being that is so powerful. Yeah. And if you don't have something to believe in, there's not a thing that you follow that you believe is making you be a better version of yourself, be a better person. If you're just relying on your whims and your, you know, whatever you think is the moral thing to do, you know, then you know what you got? You get those people that are unable to answer the question of whether or not you should protect an unborn fetus or whether they have human rights. No. No, they don't. They just hope. They just like, that's what you get. That's what you get when you have no religion. Yeah. If you ever religion, you go, wow, that's a good question. That's a very good question. And it's it's also as well, you know, when we look at the new atheist movement and that's something that I really followed in our doorkins and all these kind of people who pointed out the ridiculousness of certain religions, etc. etc. And then we don't need religion. I think that's fundamentally inaccurate. I think human beings need religion. I don't know if you need it, but it definitely can help. But I think society's needed. Yeah. But I don't, I just think it's silly to dismiss all these stories as being useless. Totally. I just, I think they were trying to say something. Right. And I don't know what that something is, but the deeper you dive into it, the more interesting it gets. Yeah. Well, last time we had Richard on the show, if you remember, we kind of pushed him on this. Yeah. And his aunt, as far as we could get it, he was like, well, you know, maybe it's a story that's useful, but it's still not true. I'm going, well, if it's useful, maybe we should hang on to it for a little bit. You know, do we want to throw away something that's useful because we're so fixated on literal truth when this is perhaps a metaphor for something. Yeah. Perhaps. Yeah. You know. So yeah, I've kind of moved on on that. I was, you know, I used to love all that new atheist stuff. Me too. But a lot of those guys fell apart. And all those guys get real persnickety. You don't, they don't seem very enlightened. That seemed like they're a piece, which is interesting. You know, because that's the true Christians that I've met and I've met some like legitimate, like very charitable kind Christians. There's some of the happiest and kindest people I've ever met. And that's born out in the statistics as well. However, I will say this, though, right? And I think this is worth like the best people I've ever met are Christians, but also some of the worst people I've met. Oh, sure. You know what I mean. Well, that's, that's just a real issue in Texas where this is very wealthy guys that are trying to, they, they succeeded in getting the 10 commandments put in every public school, but they essentially want Texas to be a theocracy. They're, they're, they're netters. Right. They're out on the fringe, you know, they're, uh, their fire and brimstone type, Jesus is coming like them folks. Those folks are real too. That scares the shit out of me. Like, uh, I was talking to Ron White about that. Like Ron White's a southern guy. I've been here his whole life like he's like, be careful, them fucking really crazy Christians because don't think they're like regular Christians. Right. And he's right. There's, you get to the fringe where, you know, and it's the same with other religions. It's not specific to Christians. Yep. Yep. Yep. It's fun. It's nutters. It's just nutters, whether they're nutters as a Mormon or nutters as a Baptist, they're just nutters. They're crazy people that take things to the utmost degree. Do you remember, remember Richard Pryor and live at the sunset strip where he was talking about being in jail and he talked about meeting Islamic fundamentalist. He called them double Muslims. Richard Pryor. And that's why the soul so much in fact, he's ever seen that in my Phillips bit, uh, about the, the bridge. Do you know, what would you write? What's up? Yo, yo, yo, you're going to love this. What is it about? Uh, it's about, um, he meets a guy who's about to jump off a bridge and he starts talking to him and he realizes there's a lot of similarities, but I'm not going to do it just as a genuine can play it. You know, sorry, sorry. Can we not play it? That's, I don't, that's a four minute bit of someone else's. Oh, yeah, we can travel. Yeah, let's do that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's one of the best jokes ever. What are you guys doing? Stuy hanging out? Yeah. Yeah. Come to the club. Yeah. That's it already. Yeah. Yeah. It sounds fun. Hey, it's always a pleasure. It's really good to see you guys. I know I'm trying to get you to leave this your country and come to America, but I really do hope you win over there and fix that place. I always love England. It's an awesome place to visit and I, you know, I think if you go, what you guys do and having these conversations, I really do think it's important. I think it's important for the whole world, but I think it's really important for England. Yeah. Well, it's, you know, the way we feel about it is it's our country, man. And we don't want to run away. I get it. You know, we love it. We love our country. We want to live, you know, you talk about loving and we love England the same way you guys do. Yeah. If the United States was California, I would have done the same. Right. Yeah. But it's not right. It's not in its game. So I escaped, but yeah, I would have felt the same way like staying staying sorted out. Yeah. And I try at least try until till it gets real bad. I mean, we're about to get wealth taxes by all accounts. Right. So that's that's the next level. Well, look in the bright side. You got digital ID now. So that's, yeah, we're looking forward to that one. Uh, trigger number cheats available everywhere. It's a great show. I love you guys. Oh, it's great to see you. Thank you. Appreciate you. Bye. Bye, buddy.