The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hello, Hamilton Hey Joe good to see you man good to see you happen. This is our third podcast But not really I only count two of them because of the first one we were literally so stone We couldn't communicate remember that one. I remember well I like it. I feel like I'm getting the tour first It was your home than that lay location and now this new intermediate red tube Yeah, the red tube some folks called the red pill, but that also has a lot of negative connotations. So the red tube then yeah The the whatever it is this is this is podcast studio number one two three four five It's number five. I think it's number five. It might be number six One yeah, well number seven or number six whichever is right next door, and it's gonna be It's gonna be all I've learned from constructing podcast studios This one was very haphazardly constructed last minute because we made the decision to get the fuck out of LA and we had five weeks and My friend Matt Alvarez put this place together in five weeks Etc. I'll up and then five weeks later. We were broadcasting from Texas It looks good. It's not bad. It's okay. It's odd What is the optimal arrangement going to be? The optimal arrangement is probably less weird on the eyes like the thing about this is like you're looking around You're like why are there backlights behind those sound panels? Why is everything red and black? Why is it why is it like? Like tube shaped and it's just it's an odd room man It's all I buy I like it. I just don't I just think we could do better. We can make it we're a plus on board Get bored easy, but here for six months. Let me make it up. Yeah, mix it up. Yeah. How's Brooklyn? It's grim. It's a rim right now It's I've lived in New York for the majority of my life I love New York City and this is by far the grimest I have ever seen it Well, I mean this winter because it's everything that the entire country is facing, but it's the worst for COVID It's also extremely cold a lot of city services seem to have been Impaired in one way or another the streets are covered in garbage and ice and dog shit and You can't pretty much the only thing that I can do to maintain my sanity is run But everything including the outdoor running track is covered in ice and shit So it's just as dystopian frozen pandemic landscape where every Local business that I love disclosing down. It's a dark time Yeah, I hear that about Los Angeles. I saw a lot of it But I got out early I saw the riding on the wall and I was looking to move in May I just once once the lockdown got extended once they're like we're just gonna lock down for two weeks to flatten the curve I was like that makes sense and then here we are in April all the way through April Here we are in May and then I'm like oh, they're never gonna let us out of this I was like and then the crime started happening and the you know It started it started getting dark and I was like oh, we gotta get the fuck out here homeless The homeless thing was like flowers blooming out of rocks Like at a cracks in the concrete it's like more tents tents tents tents tents tents tents tents tents like Los Angeles Phil with tents like you can't believe it like when I tell people about it and then they go there They're like oh, I thought you were exaggerating like no, I was understated like Los Angeles is overwhelmed with tents It's fucking crazy like you can't believe that on La Brea They just allow people to set up tents everywhere It's nuts. Well. Yeah. What are people going to do? That's the question. What are people gonna do? Yeah, we're where you're gonna put them do you have? Hospitals available for and a lot of those the problem is a lot of those shelters. They won't let them do drugs Yeah, and they'll eyes people like I would rather rather be in a fucking tent Outside by the beach than be under your thumb because Los Angeles doesn't get cold, you know, I mean a cold days 50 you know it's a big deal right? Sleeping bag you're outside. It's nice. Yeah, it's really Emphasized a lot of these economic divides, you know because everyone in New York Just orders everything on Amazon. Yeah, so every apartment building in every nice part of New York receives a daily shipment of every tenants stuff from Amazon and then there's like a secondary Economy of people just going into all the buildings and stealing all the packages You have seen a lot of that. Yeah, I've seen a lot of ring videos The doorbell camera videos of people stealing shit. Oh, yeah, it's almost comical I mean I had one where I was loading my car with bags at two in the morning on a Tuesday and in the lobby of my building for maybe 15 minutes somebody just as soon as I walk around the corner someone goes and scoops everything up. Yeah, it's it's a wild time and I hope we're coming out of it I mean right when I came to Austin this is the first time I've you know been on an airplane since the beginning of the pandemic You're the first person I've spoken to without a mask. No, really? The first face. I feel weird coming in here You knew everyone was tested. No, no. Yeah. No, I felt fine. I thought I've just been very careful and Because it's also cold in New York. It just promotes this prison cell like lifestyle where I'm just sitting in my apartment reading and doing push-ups all day Yeah, yeah, yeah, the dog shit thing is like so people just don't clean up anymore. They just gave up You know how it is it's there's this kind of tumbling character where things just start to accumulate and then no one shovels the streets and then it gets easier Probably it's harder to pick it up because there's just like mounting layers of garbage everywhere And it just starts to look increasingly disgusting Maybe we'll just get out of this in a couple weeks and everything will be oh yeah The problem that I don't think the people that shut everything down for a fucking year Every taken into consideration is that people don't have the resources to bounce back things don't bounce back on their own Right, if you want to start a business it takes money like it takes quite a bit of money to get a lease to put the stock The shelves to hire employees and when you've been out of business for a year You don't have any money So you've probably used up all savings if you had any savings Try getting alone when you don't have anything. There's there's really There's no real logical path forward for a lot of these businesses in Los Angeles 75% of the restaurants are gone. Oh, yeah, I'm so worried about the restaurants in New York Yeah, it's terrible. It doesn't seem like it's even talked about sufficiently Because in New York in the winter time I mean they're really trying they're doing things that I would have never like truly extraordinary things like making these little heated space Gizzy bows covered in my law on the inside and they're and you know Ultimately most people don't even really want to do that so then there's this weird conflict of is it? Moral to support these businesses because you want them to stay in business or are you feeding into a system where people are subjecting themselves to unsafe working conditions and is it actually immoral to go to restaurants and of course people endlessly argue about that Well personal choices are not immoral, right? So if the people decide that they're willing to work there and they're masked up and they feel safe working there Isn't that better than not having a choice to work there? I guess the idea is that it instead of people going on unemployment they are feel Pressure to put themselves at risk and they really should be at home not potentially spreading coronavirus and Ideally receiving some sort of government assistance Well, it's all it's also like when does the government assistance run out because it has run out for a lot of people There is no more unemployment for a lot of folks and then on top of that The way everything's been mismanaged is so terrible in so many ways like why is it okay to be at target on top of people? Why is it okay to be at Walgreens on top of people? But it's not okay to have these mom pop stores open or retail stores. Oh, yeah Or you know like I said I haven't been on an airplane until I came to see you But of course I see all these stories in the news that are like this guy went on an airplane and he took off his mask And they had to do an emergency landing and they kicked him off the plane and everyone cheered and if you haven't been on a plane You just kind of read that and you think oh yeah That guy sounds like quite an asshole good that they kicked him off the plane, but then on the plane I then it I hadn't even considered this like what what is done with snacks What are the snack provisions? Are there no more peanuts? Is there no water and if it is served then? Everyone has to take off their masks So this is all just sort of like security theater because they still serve food and everyone unmask Simultaneously to eat so there's a period of at least 15 minutes where everyone on the plane is Unmasked by the doing of the actual airline. Yeah, it's nonsense Full nonsense across the board. Well, I think people just don't know what to do It's it's you know, they're aware that all these things are contradictory Everyone is trying to do their best. They're confused. They don't understand it even to this day People are trying not to be an asshole, you know when you wear a mask which are basically Things I'm not an asshole, you know, I'm gonna go around and I want you to feel like I care and I want You know, I want you to feel all right Someone to wear a mask, but it's not I mean, maybe it's protecting Somewhat it's not certainly not a hundred percent safe You know like it's protecting you against droplets Someone sneezes, but you're breathing. Oh, yeah, the masking is definitely good I think that's pretty well established, but I guess at what I don't understand is the hypocrisy Like if we have established that masking is good then we also have to not have snacks on the flight or water Or water or water, but yeah, so then what do you do? You're on top of each other sitting three people next to each other I mean, it's like the literally opposite of social distancing. It's incredibly intimate. You don't even know these people You're touching elbows with them. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. I mean, and this is why when it started I was one of these people that you know, I was thinking why you know, I work in media I know the way the media blows everything out of proportion. I remember swine flu I know that they sell newspapers by making everyone terrified this can't possibly be as bad as people think it is And I was sort of in COVID denial and I was also in the middle of filming the third season of my TV show so I was just sort of seduced by the momentum of production and didn't want it to end and And people are saying you know, I don't think we can film anymore. I think we have to stop and I thought what is the world? Going to shut down Is the like this is unprecedented? Yeah, the world isn't going to shut down. We're not going to be Kept in our apartments. It's just not conceivable. That's such a thing could happen cut to One year later, but it's not everywhere. That's what's interesting and here's the big thing There's been no emphasis What so ever on steps that you should take to make yourself healthier? There's been no discussion of reducing obesity. You got to lose weight. You've got to take vitamins You've got to do something to make sure that your immune system is strong like here's the steps that you can take Here's what we know about vitamin D is multiple studies that show that people in the ICU for COVID 84% of them have insufficient levels of vitamin D this significant correlation between low levels of vitamin D and weak And immune system they found only four percent of people in the ICU with COVID have a sufficient levels of vitamin D That's just one thing. They know about zinc and ionophores like corset 10 that corset 10 allows Zinc to get in the cell much more readily It's it's much more bioavailable and it protects you against viruses They know that vitamin C is also excellent for your immune system. They know that water is excellent for immune system This peer reviewed studies and this stuff. Yeah. No, I know I know but it's it's really hard to make those claims Because even if they do confer some kind of therapeutic benefit it doesn't Seemingly prevent coronavirus infection and I think there has been some emphasis on obesity as a contributing factor It's a one of the biggest comorbidity factors. Yeah, it's huge. Yeah The thing about it is though it does protect you somewhat from viruses. It does keep your immune system strong I'll send you some studies. Okay. Yeah, some interesting stuff on Zinc and corsetin that my doctor Dr. Gordon who is a specialist on this stuff has sent me and you know Recognized that there's there's significant steps that you can take with with nutrients. Yeah, to boost your immune system Yeah, I mean the pace of medicine Is just too slow usually to immediately address things like this in a really meaningful way Well, also medicine is divorced from nutrients the thing is the thing about medicine is people are looking for a pharmaceutical cure They're looking for you know things that we know are gonna work Whatever the medication is whether it's a treatment or whether it's a Vaccine or whatever it is we're looking for some sort of a medicine But there's a lot of things that you can do to strengthen your immune system with nutrients and with exercise and with healthy diet It's just not emphasized enough. It's not discussed enough Yeah, because I think you know you need really strong evidence and I've gone through all these different cycles I went first through the denial cycle where I was like it's can't possibly be this bad It's got to be a hype thing then I went through the Okay, well, maybe there's some antiviral agent that's in circulation right now because everyone knew that there was no way that a vaccine would be developed immediately that it would take a year which it did and so the only hope at that Time was a small molecule antiviral therapy of one kind or another so everyone who knew anything about medicinal chemistry or pharmacology was hoping that we'd find something and that's why there was so much interest in chloroquine You know if it came like everything today totally politicized It is I think it's a huge problem because you know Like a molecule shouldn't be politicized. It should have efficacy or not But it shouldn't be a Republican molecule or a Democrat or anything attached to Trump becomes poison Well, that's like the if you were an evil person and you wanted the world to be fucked What you do is get Trump to promote everything good for you. Yeah And I can I can provide maybe a little bit of insight into that because I saw so when all this was happening The there were you know a few antiviral therapies that people were talking about like remdesivir and faba peer-a-view however Macden yeah, and I've remact in and The problem with remdesivir has it had never been approved by the FDA at that time It's kind of difficult to synthesize and it was very expensive and it's administered IV And so all those things kind of weighed against it just being made in some gray market lab in India or China and being mass distributed as like a potential Intervention I remember you know when this started happening the first thing I did was think okay I should you know start contacting various labs that I know and see if I can get interesting experimental antiviral treatments if only to maybe write a scientific paper about the purity of antiviral drugs that are being sold in the context of a pandemic that was my justification, but I also just thought it would be cool to get all these things and and I remember I was ordering remdesivir early on probably in March and One of these labs said oh, you know, it's very expensive It's $2,000 a gram or something, but there's this other drug that we're using in China right now called chloroquine very very cheap it works just as well would you like to try that and I thought hmm, that's interesting. That was the first that I'd heard about it Then there was this huge buzz surrounding it everyone was talking about chloroquine and there were a small number of studies that had been published that provided a little bit of support for it potentially being useful But then it became so politicized that people couldn't talk about it rationally anymore and it was a total Total mess. I like I think that's you know the worst thing that could possibly happen in medicine My friend got COVID and the doctor literally asked him what his political meetings are You said why he goes well? I just want to tell you that in the early stages of infection There's some evidence that hydroxychloroquine has positive effect. He was trying to give a fuck about politics He was he was give me what works He's like how we have in this conversation the doctor started laughing was I know it just when I bring that up some people are so Anti-Trump that they didn't don't even want to hear it. Oh, yeah, and this was like, you know Mayish Juneish somewhere around there and people were afraid to acknowledge the fact that they were using it I knew physicians who had used it themselves, but they would never publicly acknowledge crazy Yeah, it's so weird. Yeah, I even one physician who had publicly spoken out against it I knew that they had privately gotten a prescription for it. Yes, some people were using it as a prophylactic Yeah, I mean that seems odd right it seems odd and I also think that as of Today the evidence seems to point against it having a therapeutic effect But it's there was a lot published you know It's gonna be years before we unpack all this up when I was saying earlier that the you know the pace of medicine isn't suited All this like it's been remarkable what people have achieved in the short period of time And I don't mean to say that you know people haven't been working very hard of course They have been but you need meta analyses you often need years of work to really begin to Understand the intricacies of how these drugs act in a context like this Have you considered moving somewhere other than Brooklyn? um Well, I was still making my show in Brooklyn so I couldn't move and now it seems to be There's light at the end of the tunnel. It seems like it's on its way out So and I and I like Brooklyn Yeah, I know you do. Yeah. Did you read James Altatur's piece about New York is gone. It's never coming back Did you read that no? It has a very controversial piece. Altatur is a I think he's a stock broker But he's also one of the owners of the stand which is a famous comedy club in New York and Is that Woody owns? Yeah, I think that's it and He wrote this piece about New York in this very detailed step-by-step Analysis of all the things that are wrong that you just can't resolve that are not going to be resolved very quickly Including the crime including the number of people that are moving out including the number of businesses that have failed Including, you know just across the board. It's more dystopian. Oh, yeah, and I actually am probably moving out of New York Where are you going? I think I'm gonna move to Philadelphia. Philadelphia's nice. Yeah, I love Philly Why Philly? Why did you choose that? The a lab that I work at is in Philadelphia And I think I'm gonna start doing chemistry full-time really you're gonna stop doing your show. Yeah, why? It's immensely difficult to make and it's not I like challenges I like difficult things, but it's not just difficult for me It's difficult for you know 10 other people that are really Suffering to make it possible and there wasn't enough money for it. You know, I was working 13 hours a day seven days a week I had to I because of the pandemic and I worked for something like four months without pay to finish it. You know, it was not a good Experience I'm proud of what we created, but it's a very good show. Thank you really is I've enjoyed it long before we ever met You know when you were doing the the other version of it. Yeah, do you get a chance to see any of the new season I have it. Oh, yeah. Well, it's I mean making something like that during the pandemic was Challenge it was an amazing challenge It was really you know it was in retrospect I am actually grateful because I learned so many things that I wouldn't have learned otherwise You know typically these productions are so compartmentalized where there's somebody that records sound and someone that holds a camera and some of it That's color correction and there still was that but it sort of broke down so that everyone had to do everything and learn each other's roles And I actually get it done Is this a temporary shift into going back and working for lab or do you think that you're gonna abandon media? Well, this is a really extraordinary time right now and For the last decade or so when I've done this chemistry work with this brilliant chemist named Jason Wallick There's been no funding whatsoever for this work the university pays for a little bit of it Tim Ferris once was really nice and gave me a few thousand dollars to synthesize a radioactive psychedelic for an experiment But there is no funding radio active psycho doubt. Yeah. What are you doing? You got some spider-man chick going on. What's happening? It's a it's an old Technique called auto radiography where you can chart the migration of a molecule and its distribution and tissue by looking at the distribution of the radio activity but But there was no funding for it and the idea of ever getting money to research psychedelics It would always have to be sort of distorted into research on schizophrenia or you couldn't just say I'm studying psychedelics and What if you go to Oregon? That might have some legal advantages, but this is just a funding thing and I wasn't it just didn't seem like It was that I wasn't in it for that reason anyway and you know it didn't cost all that money all that much money to begin with and so I would pay for a little bit of things And you can stretch a few thousand dollars a long way in a chemistry lab But now things are changing and there's a lot of support for Research on psychedelics. You know, there's actually a psychedelic program with the UFC I did not know that. Yeah, John Hopkins is doing studies with former fighters and current fighters on CTE One of the things about civil cyber that we know is that civil cyber actually helps regrow neurons and help It's one of the few things that really helps fighters the brain damage And so they're they're conducting some studies right now. That's amazing. Yeah, it's really amazing And they're doing some therapies and I hope to get these guys on soon and talk to them about what they've done and what they're doing But you know lions main is good for For the brain and there's several other different mushrooms But psychedelics in general particularly siliceye Ben. What do you know about siliceye? Been in the growth of neurons and and people with brain damage. You know anything Yeah, I mean this is a hot area of research. There is someone named David Olson who's been publishing a lot of papers recently on psychedelic induced neurogenesis although most of his papers are oriented toward Neurogenesis inducing psychedelic derivatives that aren't actually psychedelic But yeah, this is a great way to start it off right so then people are not experiencing psychoactive effects doesn't change their state of Consciousness they're sober Arguably it is. Yeah, I do wonder because you know There have been a number of compounds of one notable one called NSI 189 that are very potent neurogenesis inducing agents that Do not have Impressive therapeutic effect that failed in clinical trials. So it's not as simple as just neurogenesis equals good You know there needs to be something else it seems and the literature is contradictory I think all these things are in their infancy and we're just now starting to realize even a small fraction of their potential and I think that There's an idea a widely Believed idea that the reason that there's no medical scientific research on psychedelics Or at least there wasn't for a very long time is because the government Shut it all down right the government said these are evil drugs. No scientist is allowed To use them and that was part of it But that wasn't the whole picture and what was you know, there was a group in Maryland called the Maryland psychiatric Research Center and they were the last group doing psychedelic research up until 1977 and then there was a big gap until ricks raspans started as DMT studies in the late 80s early 90s so At the time that they were doing that psychedelic research that ended in 1977 they were just running out of funding There wasn't a lot of interest in what they were doing. There was no pharmaceutical future for the therapy No pharmaceutical companies were trying to commercialize any of it. They weren't seeing clients and making money off of it and The university and the funding bodies weren't all that interested in it and it just kind of died a sad Slow death of deprivation of funds and lack of public interest and enthusiasm It wasn't like everyone was behind this and then the hammer of the government destroyed it and I think that's a really important thing to remember because pharmaceutical companies are extremely controversial like everyone hates pharmaceutical whether pretty much ubiquitously despised by all people But when you think about these times of really fertile amazing psychedelic research in the 1960s One reason that there was so much funding and one reason that there was so much interest is because these were being paid for by pharmaceutical companies And there was hope that they could actually be developed and sold as medicines which is the end goal in our medical system right and and so I think that as controversial as it is the Pharmaceutical interest in these substances is going to provide support that has been entirely absent until recently and is going to really Have the potential to push things forward yeah, I think soldiers athletes and You know anything that's in the public realm where you know people are really aware of Brain damage aware of PTSD aware of a lot of different things that psychedelics can be used to help I think that's going to really sort of motivate the public To be more enthusiastic about it or be more open-minded about it because I think for the longest time people have this idea of psychedelics as being just people that want to escape reality You know and if there's more peer-reviewed studies there's more accredited Whether it's universities or research centers or someone that the people respect that's doing work on these things where you can see it in the New York Times see it in Washington Post see it in some newspaper that you respect see it on CNN wherever it is and Sort of slowly shift public perception that these things they're not just for hippies and If there are medicines that work that's probably the most convincing thing of all yeah because it doesn't matter how much you hate psychedelics or you hate drugs if you're suffering from cluster headaches and somebody gives you so a siren and you're free of pain. Yeah, you will be sold. Yeah. Yeah, that's that's what I'm hoping you know and I just think I mean my god imagine if we could get people to Microdose as much as we get them to drink coffee Just imagine we can get them to microdose as much as we get people to take out of all Hmm, I don't know there was a study that I think was just published that kind of shine some doubt On microdosing but it was self reported and this is with still us in what what kind of study what they say The author just emailed me that I think it was like a 5,000 person self reported self-flying study with microdosing LSD if I remember correctly But again, we're talking about microdosing as if it is one thing But what was the negative aspects of the study? Oh that it just wasn't different from placebo There was no negative. It just was not different perhaps But that's that that is one of those weird in terms of like the subjective experience of the people that reported They didn't find any difference in placebo they What when they Compared the results of the placebo and the results of the microdose. There was no difference between the two There's so many variables when it comes to people and how they view the world how they interface with society To you know to to to say there's no difference between one person taking Microdose versus another person taking a placebo. It's so hard to make that study accurate Because like what what what are you looking for like what's changed and what's going on in your life while this is going down? Are you breaking up with your girlfriend? Have you lost your job? Is this I'll take a place during the pandemic when you you know you have no hope like what's going on and Versus what's going on with the other person that's taking the microdose or the other person is taking the placebo There's just so many variables when it comes to human beings It's almost like the only way to do it correctly is to have clones of the same person living the same life and give one of them Microdose and give another one placebo That would be better ideal You know what I'm saying though these people they they self randomized so they would have some capsules that contain placebo Some that contain the microdose and this is not the end of it people will continue talking about this and it also depends on You know dose is so important in micro dosing, but no one really knows the dose they're taking that's a pretty big limitation as far as I'm concerned I've micro-dose LSD and a micro dose So I've been and I particularly find that still aside when micro dosing makes me very happy It does something real nice. It just gives you a nice feeling and I think it's real I think I don't I don't I think if you feel nice and you feel happy I think that in influences the way you interact with people which influences your whole life. Yeah I mean I haven't done it a lot, but I've done enough to know that it's It's legitimately effective and anecdotally I have a lot of friends that do it all the time and One in particular is he goes this is my medicine. He goes like this has changed my life. He's like he was depressed He's you know bummed out about all sorts of things in his life getting a divorce also the shit was going down in his life Started micro dosing and just every time you see him got a big smile hugging everybody and what dose do you use when you micro dose? With still a side and see the problem as I was getting it ground up and put into capsules So we're taking two of these capsules a day very small amount, but enough to it gives you like this That's what it gives you like nothing crazy But this is one of the problems I think is just even defining micro dosing Right for some people it might be a low a very subtle trip And that could be in for some people they define it as a sub psychedelic experience Right and so there's gonna be a lot of work that's to be done on Optimizing those sorts of effects. I mean the other thing is when we talk about micro dosing We're just talking about micro dosing these two common psychedelics still aside in an LSD, but Alexander Shulgan You know he was doing a lot of research on maybe their psychedelics that just are less psychedelic in general that have a little bit of that sort of effect that people are looking for with a micro dose of LSD Whereas maybe a mild stimulant maybe produces a small amount of empathy or just a small change of one kind or another I mean this has even been approved Medistling in the past both with when I began was a pharmaceutical product under the name Lambarin in France It was really yeah, and it was essentially pharmaceutical. I began micro dosing. That was oh shit Wasn't psychedelic I began that they were prescribed when were they doing this this was in the 50s? I believe wow When did they stop I think they said one in this? No, no you can find there's like French adventure novels or that are like as I ascended the volcano I took two Lamborghini to give myself the strength to reach the summit You know it was just it was just a stimulant the people took there was no discussion What so ever of Ibogaine as a psychedelic have you micro dose time again? I have yes, what did it do for you? I think that it is at 20 milligrams 20 to 25 milligrams. It exerts no Psychedelic effect whatsoever and feels almost like a mild stimulant and maybe Almost like a mild antidepressant. Yeah, and it's called Lamborghini. That's what they call it Lamborghini was the French brand name for What would two Lamborghini's be in terms of milligrams? Seven milligram tablets around the same range 14ish. Yeah, yeah, interesting That's that's it's weird that they stopped and wonder why they stopped and another one is there used to be an MDMA type compound called alpha ethyl triptamine now a schedule one controlled substance in the United States That was approved in the United States as an antidepressant under the brand name Mona's and it was a Basically like a micro dose of MDMA this was done form a suitically in our country But it's totally forgotten about what was that this was in I think the 60s as well see what stops these things that's what I understand it seems like that would be at least But look we know that MDMA is great for soldiers with PTSD. That's one of the map studies Right in this case it was a condition called a granulose Tosis that was toxic and and I think and potentially deadly in at least one instance So that there was a good reason for discontinuing that but it had nothing to do with the fact that it exerted an It is Mona's. Yeah, I want some It's come from that plant They used a hyacinth is the symbol of Mona's first reasons that are unclear to me I was watching this documentary and I forget where it is Where there were chop in these trees down where they were using them to synthesize MDMA Do you know what I'm talking about? I do know what you're talking about. What is the tree? It's a Cambodian tree that doesn't have a common English name and It's a source of saffral which is a precursor for MDMA and Yeah, it's just how can that forest down? So people could trip and this is what happens in an unregulated market This is I think one of the really unfortunate things about the way people talk about drugs is there like your drug use is destroying the forest your drug use is killing people in Latin America and And it's not people's drug use exactly that's causing those problems. It's a totally unregulated market where Because it's all illegal People can do whatever they want. It's done by criminals. There's no oversight whatsoever So if somebody wants saffral why not deforest Cambodia to get all the saffral and there are other ways to do it That just happens to be a cheap way that proliferates in a black market with no regulation. Mm-hmm interesting So there's better ways to do it that don't involve hacking. No, absolutely Yeah, yeah, and it's just the problem is that's the best way to do it if that forest is right there Yeah, and if no one cares, you know you can make it you could make MDMA from Hundreds if not thousands of different starting materials you can make it starting from black pepper if you want to black pepper Yes, black pepper. Yes. Yes. How the fuck do they do that? It's a multi-step process, but you isolate a chemical called piperine from the black pepper and then Do some chemical modifications So if someone goes to the grocery store and buys the whole shelf of black pepper keep an eye on that fucker Yes He's gonna be spending a lot keep an eye on him because he's gonna be wasting a lot of time To produce like one Grandual of MDMA, but really so it's not heard of it. I heard of it I mean it covered it up Neil Young had something recently about black pepper I had heard and I was wondering now that this is a great time to bring it up that it if you're too high It takes away the paranoia feelings. You can take like two or three People's boobs no, they're just the granules really the Pepper I guess Neil Young how black pepper sedated marijuana parent visits to dates, marijuana marijuana paranoia according to Neil Young in science He said it on tonight show or something great to Neil Young and science. Do you say that to the what is tonight show? There's a terpene in it that does something to do and that's not maybe it's the same chemical They say the name of it. You don't know this. Did we just dump Hamilton Morris This is clearly outrageous doesn't say exactly Medical extract basically terpene Hmm There goes oh Oh, no, I'm very go mercy and yeah, you know about that. I do know about it Yeah, did you know that it was in black pepper seeds? I didn't know that it's in black pepper seeds But it's in cannabis. I don't think that mercy and we should try it We should get super high as fuck and see if we freak out and then chew on some pepper seeds tried once did you? I mean I wasn't that high, but I was like I'm a little too Let there's you know Jamie's one of the rare individuals that Edibles don't work on him. He can take my fair. I want to see what he said He can take a thousand milligrams and just sit there And I go how you doing? He's like fine Interesting I mean I imagine you have a sizable tolerance Yeah, 1300 50 was the highest I've done. That's a lot. Yeah, that's a lot. That's a lot. There's something I should try to take that would help that you know of maybe a period of abstinence. Oh, okay He doesn't do that much. You're not a trip on edible all the time. No smoke more. Yeah, he's not it. You know It's it's it's edibles he gets high off smoking it. Hmm. I don't know. I mean maybe some Idiocent critic absorption. I don't know. I'd have to you know We'd have to talk about this a little bit What would prevent someone from getting high off of eating it? Oh There's a lot I mean there's lots of CB1 antagonist or inverse agonists that will actually like mercy and maybe has some mild Modulatory effect. I would not want to depend on mercy and to actually reverse the effect of a cannabis high I would be amazed if it were but is there any unusual bio Diversity issues like some weird things about your own chemical like your your chemistry that would stop THC edibles or or marijuana edibles from working on you Sure, you could think of a million you know, have you heard of that before there's someone can take you that much I Have not heard of that before no, it's so weird like I'll take 200 and I'll be gripping the chair like I'm in space We brought it up. I've got a lot of messages from people. I'm like what did what do you figure out to take? Finally, can you help me out? I'm dying to know. I'm like oh so other people don't get it either not doing one Yeah, huh. Yeah, that's the problem with things being illegal You know, we don't really know there's like so much. We don't know. Yeah, I mean Maybe some kind of metabolic quirk obviously when you consume as you talk about many times when you consume 11 hundred Hodroxie yeah, I draw xie, but that's but t. She itself of course is active without conversion to 11 hydroxy So that wouldn't explain it Maybe I maybe you have some you're a rapid metabolizer in terms of producing some kind of Inactive form of THC like there's there's variables in terms of how well people sober up from things, right? Like some people like particularly alcohol. I'm a quick sober upper when it comes to alcohol for whatever reason I can get drunk in like an hour later. I'm totally sober. Yeah in the weirdest way Yeah quickly because we're different we're metabolically different organisms depending on where your ancestors are from Depending on a number of different factors also depending on the history of things that you've subjected yourself to Can up-regulator down-regulate certain enzymes. Yeah, that's the weirdest thing is watching someone who has a lot of Low tolerance to alcohol just drink a little bit and get blasted. You're like what is going on? What happened? Where are you? Where'd you go? Oh? Yeah, you know. Oh, yeah, yeah I mean I don't drink so if I were to have even like two drinks. I would be blitzed I'd be pretty. That's kind of interesting. You don't drink. Yeah. I mean I'll drink away of your acid No, I'll drink you know every now and then I'm not it's not like I don't drink. I just don't really enjoy drinking and I feel very sensitive to hangovers, so I just it's just not and I do think it's kind of a weird bad drug Not bad drug in the sense that it's a bad drug like that. It should be illegal or it's evil or something like that I just think that all things consider there's a lot better things out there Especially compared to cannabis or something which is I think vastly superior. Well, that's Dr. Karl Hart's argument as well. He prefers heroin Yes, yeah Have you been paying attention to all the controversy about this really interesting? It is really interesting. I mean I read it covered a cover It's great. I love that guy me too. He's so brave like the way he talks about things to for the guy to be a professor at Columbia and To just be openly stating I enjoy heroin and it makes me feel good. It makes me compassionate You know and he uses pure heroin he likes to sniff it. It's tremendously brave and I I was working on my show for such a long time and you're doing it in isolation and then it comes out You're wondering what people think of it So I was name searching myself and saw some reddit thread of all these people kind of insulting Karl Hart And I just felt like I think the average person doesn't get it I don't think they understand exactly how brave Karl Hart is because I have traveled around the world I have interviewed countless academics have been in academic circles throughout my life Drug use of the sort that he describes is extremely common It's extremely common, but being honest about it is incredibly rare and is commendable and and if more people were like him I think a lot of these stigmas would be reduced and I've even heard people say well how dare he reduce the stigmas Associated with these things. That's cruel if you reduce the stigmas you're hurting people. They should be stigmatized No, they should not be stigmatized Maybe they shouldn't be encouraged But if you find yourself in that sort of situation you shouldn't be ashamed You should see it as if anything a medical problem or a social problem not something that you need to be hated for Right because we're not we don't hate people for being out cogs Right we praise them for their sobriety like when they get through 90 day chip or whatever they get you know people Say they don't they look at you like you know You're some sort of a fool because you couldn't handle alcohol. They go. Oh, he was in alcohol But he sobered himself up good for him. Oh, yeah. Yeah, you know heroin use is just so stigmatized and I'm not a heroin user. I haven't used heroin But I did have a morphine drip once when I had a surgery. It was awesome Oh my god. I kept hammering that thing you press a button to give you a morphine drip I had knee surgery and that was in the hospital and I was on this perpetual motion machine You ever seen one of those because I had an ACL reconstruction arterial cruciate ligament. It's a big injury They take a piece of your patella tendon a piece of your shin bone and a piece of your knee and they open you up and screw them in Drillman place pretty fucking painful and so while you're lying in bed my knee is on this thing It's going like bending and straightening my knee over and over and over again And I'm lying in there and they give you a drip and anytime you want just press that button and you get a little drip I'm morphine and I'm going bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang and it's just I felt so good. I felt so good. I was like oh now I get it now I know why people like this shit and morphine's basically heroin right pretty close Extremely close. Yeah. Yeah. I get it morphine. I get it. Yep. It's probably awesome But for him, you know, he's he's talking about pure heroin small amounts He understands it. He's a chemist. You know, I mean he really gets it No, he's a research scientist. He understands you know, he was a complete straight-laced guy Wasn't doing anything till he was in his thirties. Yeah, I know Pretty crazy story. It is a crazy story and what I really appreciate about what he does is I think there's a lot of Perhaps justified insecurity in the world of drugs so people Have been oppressed for such a long time that they needed justification of some kind. I'm using psychedelics because it's religious I'm using psychedelics because it's medical. It's a therapy. I'm using psychedelics because it's traditional It's part of my religion. I'm using psychedelics for this reason or that reason. It's very rare that people will just stand up and say I'm using these things because that's my freedom. Yeah, I don't need to justify it I don't need to say that I have chronic back pain and it's treating it And I should be allowed to treat my pain. It doesn't matter. It's just My choice as an adult even if it's bad for me. It's my choice as an adult. Yeah, it needs no justification Like whiskey. Yeah, I mean whiskey celebrated it's on television. You can watch ads for whiskey during TV shows It's like celebrated have a glass of whiskey and I like whiskey But you drink a lot of whiskey will fuck you up and we don't care We we're just accustomed to it. It's become a part of our culture. So it's a traditional use. It's sanctioned By the government you get a nice tax stamp on it and so we're okay with it But all these patterns I just described emerged during prohibition as well. Yeah, so you So alcohol is prohibited so you have medical whiskey You have you get a prescription from the doctor for whiskey because it's good for your nerves one of our sponsors buffalo trace They've been around longer than the United States. They've been around since 1773 And they made whiskey during prohibition. They're still running. They're the longest running Distillery in America and they made whiskey from a digital purposes during Prohibition just kind of hilarious and of course we see it with cannabis as well and I get it I understand why people are doing this because it remains very controversial and so you want some kind of justification But you should remember at the end of the day that no justification should be required And if you get too lost in the justification you might forget why you're doing it in the first place like An analogy that I've been thinking about for years Like it was kind of like a long analogy. So it's gonna be like a one minute analogy, but like it would be it would be like if In the 60s people started listening to music for the first time and They decided that it was Associated with the counter culture anti-war movement Some people are listening to music too loud and causing irreversible damage to their hearing and so medical doctors said okay This is clearly a problem this person is deaf as a result of listening to music. We've got a Regulate it. We've got a prohibited to protect people because it's a problem And then on top of that there's an added advantage that because everyone is gonna continue listening to music We can selectively prosecute the people that we want to because it's a little crime that everyone is committing And then that keeps going for years and people continue listening to music and playing music and they create their own biases where they say It's okay to listen to music. It's just as long as you don't perform it or record it It's all right as long as you're just a listener and Then eventually some scientists get together and they all say that they've never listened to music before because if they had it Somehow bias their understanding and that would be terrible So they've never listened to music before, but they've looked at old pre-provision information on music and they've decided scientifically That it is in fact very good and can be used as a medicine and then everyone embraces it as a medicine and says oh I just listened to music today. It was so wonderful for my anxiety. It was really fantastic And that would be great and that would be good and that would be a way to make music legal again But it also would entirely miss the point that music doesn't have to be a medicine and to be clear You could do these studies with music music is a medicine. There is music therapy. I'm sure you could design a study where music treats neurodegenerative diseases or Music treats depression. I guarantee it and you could get positive results and you could then say that music is a medicine, but So what it doesn't need to be a medicine and I just want people to as as much as I enjoy this New medicalization and the decriminalization it's taking place I just hope people remember that it doesn't need to be any of those things and this history of justification is Ultimately something that we are doing because we're afraid afraid that to acknowledge the fact that we should be free to do whatever we want regardless of whether or not it's good Yes, yeah well said so I mean you could use that for anything right you could say that about exercise You could say that about running you like to run well. There's been medical studies that show that running is bad for your knees You should stop running. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah Like we should outlaw CrossFit you know, maybe we'll fuck up their back tear shoulders for CrossFit Well, we need to stop CrossFit you could say that about anything and the problem is a lot of what you get when you have people telling people to not do things is people that don't have any experience in those things telling people not to do them and Whether they're drugs or whether they're physical activity or whether they're there There's a lot of different things that people do that you could racing cars you could deem them detrimental and I am a proponent of freedom and I don't think there's any all-knowing all-seeing being that's wiser That understands the correct way for all human beings to move forward in life and the correct decisions to make there's no father figure There's no God like human being out there that can guide us the correct way that it's not there's pros and cons to everything That you could abuse almost everything you do You know like if you if you show that people if they jog a little bit every day It actually turns out to be good for you, but ultra marathons we have to outlaw because these people are they getting Rob do my losis. They're they're pissing out diet Coke. They look terrible and they're dying like no You gotta be able to do whatever you want to do you're a human being and you are finite no matter what it's not like if you die the Entire world suffers some irreversable loss and millions of people starve to death because you decided to run a hundred miles That's no it's you and your life do what you want whether it's Smoking marijuana or running a hundred miles or doing whatever the fuck you want and unless we embrace that We're going to see more of this Nanny state nonsense that we've been dealing with since prohibition in this country and we're dealing with it right now There's a lot of things that will never kill you that are illegal Cannabis being one of the big ones because that's the most preposterous one Yes, yeah, and of course I agree with you completely and I think that the one thing that people have to be very careful about and remember is that it always Seems like a good idea to make something illegal. That's why it happens. It seems like a good idea so in the time since we last spoke Over 70 drugs have been scheduled over 60 of them are in schedule one really have no yes like what? Well, they're all bad drugs. So don't worry about it. They're all the bad ones none of the good ones It's just fentanyl derivatives. They're the bad ones So of course they're schedule one who would want to defend some new fentanyl derivative fentanyl kills people We've got to make them all illegal and they're synthetic cannabinoids Those are horrible make them all illegal those are the bad drugs and some stimulants as well Those are terrible make those illegal too Well, it's very hard to undo these things and it seems like the right thing to do when you do it but then Think of how hard it is to Put the toothpaste back in the tube afterwards. It doesn't go very well and People are not good at acknowledging mistakes at acknowledging when they've done something wrong. It took the church like 350 years to apologize to Galileo like it doesn't it takes a while to acknowledge that you make these mistakes and so I think that when we're caught up in a hysteria There's another thing that I really appreciate about Karl Hart is when we were caught up in a hysteria It always seems like the right thing to do to crack down because of course There's of course opioids are bad of course of course of course Of course we've got to make them illegal they kill people we have to make them all legal people are dying as a result But that's always been the way that we thought that's what we thought with psychedelics in the 60s That's what we thought with PCP derivatives in the 70s and then we realized that we'd actually made a mistake That maybe the science was flawed that maybe we hadn't fully Interrogated the therapeutic benefits that these substances have Yeah, and what the biggest argument against all that thinking is cigarettes I mean there's very little benefit other than a cognitive boost that you get from cigarettes Oh, yeah, it's leading preventable cause of death. Yeah, I mean and it kills a half a million people every year in this country I mean we're freaking out about heart attacks and strokes and rightly so and then we somehow are not as skirt right over cigarettes You know imagine if cannabis was killing a half a million people every year Jesus Christ could you imagine and people like hey man, just don't smoke so much You know like leave me my freedom that would really be a crazy argument Yeah, it's tricky. It's tricky because I also don't want to be a Drug elitist and say that you know, of course, I don't smoke cigarettes. I never have. I don't think they're good I discourage people from smoking cigarettes when I can but I also do think people should have the right to smoke them and sell them I have smoke cigarettes before comedy shows and it's wonderful Yeah, you know who likes it Dave's spell and I started to smoke I did a Show with my friend Tony Hinchcliffe back when he used to smoke now He just sucks on that jewel thing which is probably a hundred times worse But when he was smoking cigarettes, I'm like why why do you smoke that thing goes there? I get a nice rush for I could give me one of those fucking things He's like no you're gonna get addicted. I'm not gonna get addicted Just give me a fucking cigarette and I smoked as like ooh, this is a nice head rush And I went on stage and I was like I feel great like at this nice head rush It's like it's good right before you perform right before you go on stage Dave like well Dave smokes a lot, but he smokes him before he goes up, but he smokes those native What are those things called American spirits? Those are fine for you. I've got it. They got an Indian on it. It's all natural Don't worry But there's a rush that you get when you smoke a cigarette before you go on stage It's really nice and I have zero fear about getting addicted to them I smoked two of them the last time I did a show with him. I haven't smoked one sense You know But they're nice right before a show. I've never brought myself To buy I can't bring myself to buy them though I've never gone into a store and said give me a pack of cigarettes Yeah, it needs to get a bad example for my kids to have like got my car I think oh daddy what the fuck is this is that a pack of cigarettes? Oh no Yeah, bad example and it's taught it is I've never smoked cigarettes But I have been on and off User of nicotine gum. Ah, that stuff's good. Yeah, and Detective chew too. Yeah, my friend Donald's ruining it brought in some chew once and I chewed and you get a nice little Little pick me up for that, but I swallowed it. I swallowed the chew I didn't know what I was doing like was it dip. Yeah got in there Wanna up swallowing it. I've done that as well. Yeah. Do you ever smoke cigars? I have you like those. Yeah, they're all right. They're all right. Yeah not much I mean I'm very conflicted about nicotine because I really like it a lot but I should go right now Got one right over there. I'm sort of tempted Okay This is peer pressure No, no, it's good I'm gonna enjoy some nicotine like Americans. We can do what we want. They can't stop us Was it supposed to be bad for you? You're not scared are you Hamilton? No, I'm a love herb tobacco. I think it's an amazing plan Here you go. Here's a torch. There's the Cigar and here's a torch Yeah, it is an amazing plant. Well have you ever done ayahuasca ceremony where they're blow the tobacco on you? I have not seen a big part of the ceremony for some reason That they the shaman dances around you and blows tobacco on you. I think he's just taking advantage of the fact that you're out of your fucking mind Well, it has a clarifying effect on the mind and ayahuasca can be disorienting especially The beta carbolines. I think can have a kind of stoning unpleasant effect and anything that clarifies the mind I think can be very useful in a psychedelic experience to sort of focus the trajectory of your thoughts I'm sure I'm just kidding about that. Oh, sorry fucking round bone. Okay This needs to be trimmed more on both sides Yeah, the tobacco thing is fastening. We think about how many people it kills Oh Over there Yeah, it's fascinating, but it's also not entirely surprising because it's a Life is difficult and it promotes a little bit of joy and a little bit of focus and a little bit of relaxation and if yeah Difficult existence. I like it. I enjoy cigars But I feel reluctant to admit like every time I admit that I like cigarettes before shows I hesitate I've talked about in the podcast before but every time I say it I'm like ye Like I'm ashamed You know Like I'm a pretty healthy person to work out a lot. I eat well take vitamins But I like cigarettes. You know what I'm saying this one doesn't want to work What is this this is uh, I don't know From foundation cigars shout out to foundation cigars. Hmm. They sent me some good stuff This is the one thing that worries me about the move to Spotify is uh On YouTube. I could just fast forward over a moment like this But are there people that are going to be listening? You guys fast forward on Spotify? Okay. Oh, or like you could change the speed of playback Oh, I don't know they don't do that 15 seconds get button to okay, all right, and let's get past that Spotify is slowly but surely getting it shit together Okay, when it comes to like video playback and stuff, but yeah, this was a boring section Section of the podcast and I apologize for anybody's freaking the fuck out right now screaming in their car Are you real you guys were having a really interesting conversation in Rogan. Yeah, fucked it up Fucked it up with the cigar You fucking junkie That's nice well Feels good, right? Yeah, thanks. I mean remember when I was in high school I went to a very Progressive high school and at that time in the early 2000s There was a magazine called ad busters. It was very popular. Do you remember this and it was kind of like no? I don't know it All these ideas about the way advertising affects people were being talked about constantly advertising causes eating disorders Advertising of junk food and soft drinks causes obesity. We need to regulate advertisements so that women don't have a negative self image and people aren't obese and I remember thinking that it was a complicated scenario because of course I do believe that Advertisements have these effects on people, but I also believe that advertising has become a totally ubiquitous part of our culture that is inescapable and no amount of censorship will ever protect us from The advertising that pervades every dimension of our existence and so it is our responsibility to Protect ourselves as much as possible because we'll never truly be free. You know, so you get rid of Joe Camel and You regulate the way tobacco can be advertised and it's probably the right thing to do I'm not entirely sure it seems intuitively like it's not a bad idea not to advertise cigarettes to children. Yeah But then you get jewel Is jewel better? Probably it is I imagine that it is but I don't think it is you don't think it is no I think it A lot of long damage it comes particularly with just Unregulated vaping right there's a lot of vaping where you don't really know how they're making this oil Like what they're using to put together the The whatever the nicotine they're using, you know, like when you go to vape stores Like you're just getting some vape shit and some of it causes serious long damage. Oh, yeah I'm talking about a regulated product like jewel But yeah buying just like a jug of e juice from a gas station is something Call it Dump into your rig. I don't vape. I don't know Fuck some people a friend of mine had one the other day And it was like he was holding a cell phone from the 90s. I go what is that thing? When I bought you sir, I had to go get some for you. That's right. It was like we're like I didn't know what the fuck we were even doing with it Someone gave it to us. Yeah, I like it the pieces for it. That's right. It was a robot dick. I was sucking on a robot dick It was it was a ridiculous one This cigar does not want to stay lit Right. It's almost like maybe it's too moist in a humidor Um Yeah, I there's been a lot of People that vape a lot that have had some serious lung issues Like real real heavy-duty lung issues um, I think uh is most likely it's that e juice that you're talking about some unregulated bullshit You know, you just your bait. It's you're making some fucking weird mess with heat and you're sucking it into your lungs Yeah, and healing yeah many milliliters of propylene glycol right leads. I mean yes, it's I if I had to bet on Baping at least a regulated product assuming that there isn't some type of you know heavy metal contamination or vitamin E acetate or something like that in it versus smoking tobacco I would bet that vaping is safer But that said that can gum's probably the best though, right? Seems like it's the best to me But the other thing and this is something that Karl Hart doesn't talk about very much and he probably would this is maybe one Thing that we would disagree on as I do think that dependence in and of itself is undesirable and is disempowering and I'm not talking about addiction. I'm not talking about you know destroying your life destroying your family Professional women. I'm just talking about being dependent on anything habits. Yeah, having a habit is undesirable and should be avoided Yeah, that's good call. Yeah, um, he's he's talked about it, but I think what he's trying to do is uh downplay the effects of withdrawals and a lot of things that people associate with Opioid addiction a lot of other things like the way he describes it I mean, I don't know. He's right because I've never gone through it, but he describes it as like going through the flu It's like it's not a big deal. Yeah, I haven't experienced it either and I think it's funny how It's often the things that I haven't experienced that I'm most likely to disagree with somebody on and You must be America That gives me pause. I don't want to just say like I don't know about that, but I certainly have known many many people I've lived with someone who struggled very severely with opioid addiction and It's just context dependent So Karl Hart has a section in his book where he describes Intentionally becoming dependent on opioids and then almost as a stunt withdrawing immediately before giving a talk on opioid addiction Yeah, and I think that's a you know an interesting idea and I don't doubt that he was able to do that but there's a big difference between doing something for three weeks three months Three years depends on the dose depends on the support network depends on pre-existing psychological and medical conditions that may be contributing to the user's Choice to use this stuff in the first place. Yeah, you know for a lot of people it might start with back pain or something like that And you start taking the opioid and it helps you become dependent and then at the time that you have to stop you haven't done anything To address the root cause of the back pain So if you stop you have all the back pain that you started with which it may even be worse than it started and you've got a deal with Opioid withdrawal and it makes it very hard for people So I do have you know a lot of compassion for the people to get mixed up in that that said and I got into trouble for saying this last time I was on the podcast I made a point that I felt the way that opioids were discussed Everyone acted like it was a big surprise that they were addictive like we found evidence that perdue new oxycodone is addictive and We they knew this all along and this is the thing that I find a little bit difficult to stomach um people have known that opioids produce Dependence of one kind or another for hundreds of years if not thousands the first medically reported Cases of oxycodone addiction that I'm aware of are from 1914 in 1914 there was a medical term for oxycodone addiction called the eucadillism because the brand name for oxycodone at that time was eucadole and This was something that has been known about for over a century now I'm not suggesting that every medical doctor has read whatever Obscure literature that I'm aware of I know that they haven't and that's fine But what I find a little bit off-putting is how how could I as a high school student in Massachusetts Have had an intuitive awareness that percusset was a recreational drug that percusset was a drug that if you get a prescription for it That's gonna be fun. That's gonna be an enjoyable one and then Somehow these people that studied medicine were so unaware and almost all of the blame has been placed on the pharmaceutical companies who Make no mistake behaved very badly They did what pharmaceutical companies do they tried to sell their product and they manipulated I mean they infiltrated medical education they changed the very Way that pain was conceptualized and went from saying that it was something that you had to deal with to something that should be treated Compassionately and it caused a fundamental philosophical shift in the medical community That's an impressive maneuver for them to have pulled off But still at what point our doctors responsible for not recognizing that their patients had become dependent And at what point are people responsible for recognizing their own dependence if we put all of the blame on pharmaceutical companies It's ultimately a very disempowering position that won't protect us in the future because there will always be somebody Trying to sell us something that's bad for our health and to some extent for better Whereas it will always be our responsibility to protect ourselves So do you think the responsibility falls on the doctors? Do you think the responsibility falls on the patients combination both combination of both? and I and it falls on the pharmaceutical company as well make no mistake But here's the thing there's no There's nothing mysterious about oxycodone addiction. This should not have been a curve ball for anyone This is a simple derivative of morphine you have morphine you have heroin you have oxycodone hydrocodone hydro morophone oxymorphone and so on They're all in this chemical class called morfinance And they're all basically similar. I'm sure there's some opiophile listening to me say this is going to do a spit take but they're they're pretty similar opiophile Is there a magazine like audio file? opiophile magazine said i do it on a couch like this oh but but They're very similar drugs that are very very well characterized medically this is not some new fangled thing that no one this is not some you know RNA therapy that just was invented a year ago that no one had ever Known about that no one could have anticipated these are simple derivatives of morphine that have been known about medically for thousands of years and so the idea that no one could have predicted this is something that i find a little bit hard to stomach and i think that it's a Dangerous oversimplification of the phenomenon that will ultimately harm people Because if you don't take if you don't if you just point a finger at a bad guy and say it's oh It's a bad guy's fault and then it's easier for you because you don't have to assume any personal responsibility You don't have to think that your physician was maybe complicit in something that was damaging to your mental and physical health And so it was all Mortimer Sackler cackling and counting his blood bunny at Purdue pharmaceuticals but You know, I don't I don't buy that narrative as being as simple as it is Yeah, there is an infant Tallization of our society that we've kind of like you know they we didn't even know that cigarettes were bad for you Well people have known cigarettes are bad for you for a long time We didn't even know that this could like people don't take responsibility for what they put into their body and they Assume that these people that are taking it had no knowledge whatsoever We don't put any oneness on them to do any research or look especially today with the internet You know you can kind of research basically anything while you're waiting to go into the doctor's office Or while you're sitting in the doctor's office. I you know, Johnny I'm gonna give you Viking in you like Viking in hold on a second doctor You can just Google that and go mmm. It seems like Viking didn't give me an issue Like what about this constipation thing? What about that? I was watching this show the other day one thing that does disturb me is Commercials that's a garment sock. I feel like I want to give you another one Something about these 10 minutes a gar like they're not Staying lit intermission This one's okay. I got it going now. I was watching a show the other day and there was this commercial for some migraine medicine and Then they do the thing where they play the music You know, they got this kind of upbeat cheery music You know that this might you know Take one of these a month and it's gonna keep you from getting migraines And then it goes over the list of all the stuff that could happen to you if you take this stuff It's the weirdest thing that they sort of kind of like glosso and then say it while the cheery music's going on You might die you might get a constipation to the point where you got to go to the doctor All these different things that they and they say Ask your doctor about this stuff Like it seems really weird that they can advertise that like you have a problem Yeah, they're legally required to disclose these side. No, I understand that That's not my issue my issue is the fact that what there's only two countries in the world that allow you to advertise pharmaceutical drugs on television Yes, the United States and New Zealand. That's it. It's weird. It's weird and it shouldn't be done. No because it's we're influenced We were easily influenced. It's human beings are very malleable. You know we're Well, it no, though. That's talk again Critical for me to say that because I was just talking about how we have to have personal responsibility and not be endlessly seduced by the pervasive advertisements that surround us, but I am conflicted about it because that also seems like a little bit weird because they're Medical interventions. It could maybe be advertised to yeah doctors, but it's it's really complicated Here's a good example that is not widely known that I think is a useful point of contrast between What happened with oxycodone in the United States and what happened in France without far less known story So in France there was an antidepressant called aminaptine that unlike most antidepressants. It had a mild stimulant action I've actually used it myself. It's pleasant. It's Not highly stimulating at the therapeutic dose. What's the mechanism? What is it? I believe it's a low potency dopamine reuptake inhibitor But I it's been a while since I've looked at the literature and as I'm about to get to this pharmaceutical company has a history of misrepresenting the pharmacology of the substances that they sell so aminaptine comes out It's well received by people with depression because it produces a little bit of a stimulant effect in the United States We have a drug called well butrin which is also a stimulant antidepressant and many people Like that aspect of it because it doesn't just treat the depression. It gives you a little bit of energy to maybe tackle the tasks before you Okay, fine the problem is that people start using extremely extremely large doses of aminaptine and They're addicted to it. That's maybe a problem in and of itself Arugally depends on your position on that matter But it's also hepatotoxic so they're damaging their liver and it produces this monstrous Dermatological toxicity where people have these that kind of grotesque Leasions on their body on their genitals and face. It's all to taking the antidepressant. So that's not good aminaptine is removed from the market and Replaced with a non-addictive alternative an old story. There's a You know and this new drug is called Tienaptine Tienaptine is interesting because the Stated mechanism of action is that it is a serotonin Reuptake Enhancer not inhibitor enhancer. It has the opposite mechanism of prozac in every conventional SSRI antidepressant Hmm interesting strange. I even wrote a little article for Playboy years ago about like G.W. is The mind sure is strange that you can have these two Antitopressants for the posing pharmacologies that both exert a therapeutic effect Hmm as it turns out The pharmaceutical company Servier had Not disclosed that Tienaptine also was a full agonist at the new opioid receptor that it basically shared a pharmacology with morphine and heroin and This was a really important thing because there were all these people taking the stante depressive And they were saying yeah this stuff works really well, but you know I used to be used heroin and like I swear this stuff feels feels kind of like heroin to me and People on you know different forums would say like a short short short it feels like heroin But it's just it's a serotonin reuptake enhancer. That's that and this went on and on There were people that would take huge huge quantities saying like I don't know what it is about the stuff of my Itchy my pupils are pinpoint and I'm extremely extremely high when I take this serotonergic antidepressant eventually somebody overdosed on the stuff which is actually pretty safe in high doses and A physician injected them with naloxone or Narcan the opioid antagonist and it reversed the effect So I remember reading that case report and thinking Huh Wow This serotonergic drug produces an intoxication that is reversed by an opioid antagonist curious Very strange then in acquaintance at Columbia started actually looking at the pharmacology of this stuff and this guy's name is Andrew Krugel and he Found that it is primarily exerting its effect via the mu opioid receptor and that the pharmaceutical company had not told people that So all these people taking what they thought was a serotonergic antidepressant Were actually taking an opioid this has never approved in the United States but that is an instance I think of You know really unacceptable Pharmaceutical deception where you're telling someone that a drug does one thing and in fact it does something entirely different With oxycodone I feel like it's a little bit harder to make that argument because it had been used for over a hundred years and because People already knew that it was addictive They were making an argument that it was less addictive because it was a time release formulation Which is also a complicated thing because in many instances Slow release of a compound does reduce its potential for abuse So that Narcan stuff is the stuff the EMTs use when they find someone who's a Suffering from an overdose. Yes, but it's an injectable. Yeah, there's also a nasal spray formulation as well. Oh, so they find you Spasling and they just up your nose and you're alright. Yep. How does that work? It works because it's a very high affinity Antagonist at the same receptor that heroin binds to so it has a greater Attraction to that receptor then heroin doesn't it's able to displace it and reverse the effect and then also sober people up immediately Yes, so no one does it sober you up it precipitates instantaneous withdrawal So it's actually very uncomfortable for many people that use it because it's not just you take it in your fine It's you take it and you withdraw and then there's actually a problem that's not talked about very much is sometimes people overdose receive Narcan go into withdrawal and then use again because they're in horrible pain from the withdrawal and The half-life of the Narcan can be shorter than some opioids So then by the time it wears off you have the original opioid in your system that caused the overdose in addition to the new Opioi that you ingested to reverse the withdrawal that was precipitated by the Narcan overdose again and you can yeah Oh, Jesus. Yeah Is there anything that Mitigates with draw effects is there some sort of a chemical That you can take oh yeah, yeah, there's all sorts of things. I mean the most common I mean there's a brilliant brilliant drug that was designed at Jansen pharmaceuticals called laparamide brand name Emodium I'm sure you've heard of yeah, so what most people don't know about Emodium is that it's a super potent opioid and It's an opioid that was designed so that it never enters the brain So it exerts all the effects of an opioid on your peripheral system But not any of the CNS effects that caused euphoria at extremely high doses it can actually enter the brain But that's a separate does it work as a pain relief for people no unless you take extraordinarily high doses its main effect is on intestinal Motility and so it causes the constipation of an opioid without any of the psychological euphoria inducing effects it's a beautiful piece of drug design and medicinal chemistry and And so that can mitigate the gastrointestinal symptoms of opioid withdrawal There's also a number of sedatives benzodiazepines different things that people will take to address this or that concern There's also tapering there's also Ibogaine There's you know, there are there are definitely treatment strategies out there. You're not hopeless if you find yourself in the midst of this there's also You know Just different opioids right we talk about opioids is this monolithic entity like opioids are bad opioids do this well there are a pharmacological class that have You know a very diverse potential in all sorts of different directions the same chemists at Columbia was doing research on this antidepressant opioid that I was describing and What it was funny about it is that even though the pharmacology was to some extent misrepresented by the pharmaceutical company It did exert an antidepressant effect. Hmm. Hmm And he was even able to show that it had certain Spino Genesis inducing effects as well so it causes growth of dendritic spines on neurons cool So but when he was trying to get investors interested in some derivatives of T and FDA that he made He found that the opioid phobia has become so great in our culture that people are not interested in it Even if it is a potentially valuable antidepressant So this is why it's important to have a balanced perspective on these things because if we're not careful and we're not balanced The pendulum will continuously swing to different extremes of One point we decide okay It's all right for everyone to use opioids as much as they want and that's that which was kind of what happened at the beginning of the so-called opioid crisis right and then there's a compensatory backswing where you say wait a second look at all these people died There are all these problems with dependence. We can't do this. We've got to regulate them. Then the chronic pain community There will come out and say wait a second we need this stuff to function you can't cut us off from opioids It's just because of this epidemic of people that we're misusing it and it goes back and forth endlessly and it's really there is no answer like I'm sure I would like to think what I've just said to you right now is a pretty balanced perspective But I'm sure that there'll be enormous numbers of people that are angry at me about this because they think they're evil Or they think that I was too hard on them. It's a really polarizing issue Like absolutely everything these days. Well this what you just said this rant is one of the reasons why you must stay in media Ha you have to because he there's not a lot of people that it can articulate the pharmacological effects and just the pros and cons and the negative and positive in a balanced way like you just did You guys you're being very objective about these things and just fact-based science-based Analysis of the pros and cons and the realities of the use and the efficacy of these drugs This is important Hamilton there's not a lot of people that know what you know It is important that you get that can express themselves the way you do Well, thank you. That's nice of you to say but I just hope that you know as many people as possible will remember the lessons of the past that Hop away because these historians have never helped anyone and they caused incalculable human suffering. Yeah, you know, we can talk about the tragedies of the so-called crack epidemic But then that's what generated the sentencing disparities. Yes, and that is and I think it's safe to say that The number of people that have been imprisoned and have had their lives destroyed have had their families torn apart have had their employment opportunities Dashed to pieces because they had a small Nugget of alkaloidal material from a South African plant or South American plant rather It's just it's nuts and it didn't help anyone same thing with PCP. Oh, here's a good story. Here's a really good one So do you know about Charles in this have you heard about this guy? No Charles in this is a is the quintessential drug Scary story character He's the man who smoked angel dust and tore out both of his eyes and went completely insane He's the poster child for the horrors of PCP Hunter as Thompson wrote about Charles in this in fear and loving in Las Vegas Talking in it's kind of a in a few different sections. It's like in the news It was happening in 1971 at the same time that he was writing fear and loving in Las Vegas. So this was a topical story about the horrors of drugs in America, right? And this is talked about endlessly. He's got a lot of media at the time Don't smoke PCP you could end up like Charles in it's the man who tore out his eyes so one Dark and stormy night I get an email from Charles in us and I think There's no way Charlotte like first of all this was maybe a decade ago And I didn't know anything about even how blind people use computers So I thought Charles in us the man who tore out both of his eyes is watching my TV show and is writing me an email This has got to be a troll. There's no way. This is the same Charles in us So we start talking Eventually we talk on the phone and I realize that this is indeed the real Charles in us. This is the real is it I Think he was in his early 20s. I think he was at Johns Hopkins University student. Oh when he in the 1970s Yeah, when he's emailing you oh now he's I think probably in his 70s or 80s and and and And so he starts telling me his story and Surprise surprise the story is completely completely different from what was Described in the media what really happened to him isn't a story about the horrors of PCP at all It's a story about the horrors of police brutality and it is something that I don't think has ever even been publicly discussed he was a kind of I think a low-level We dealer in Baltimore in the 60s and he got set up by some cops They they wanted to in trap him in a buy so they said listen we've got this Amazing hash and we want to sell it to you've got the best price but to make sure that you're not a cop you have to Bring a little cocaine with you and if you bring the cocaine, we'll know that you're legit So he has no idea that he's being set up. He goes to this By he looks at the hash and he decides that it is of inferior quality and he doesn't want to buy it And he says yeah, sorry. I'm not interested. I don't want this stuff so he leaves the room and Gets tackled and arrested and they search him and find the cocaine and say well You've still got cocaine on you even though you didn't buy this cannabis. He says well you can't do that. That's in trapment the only reason I had this cocaine is that you insisted that I bring it so he gets a lawyer and He succeeds in defending himself the charges are dropped But he pisses off the Baltimore police department in doing this because he's just embarrassed them so some Local guy who he thinks is a police informant calls him up and says, you know, listen man like I am sorry about what happened to you But I've got a gift for you. It's this drug. It's like acid and it's sprayed onto parsley And I'm gonna I've got a lot of it so I want to give some to you and he said is this angel dust if it is I'm not interested I don't know it's not angel dust. It's not PCP. This is some some amazing new psychedelic It's gonna blow your mind so Like take it. It's good So he takes this canister of plant material and puts it on his shell for something Then an hour later the police raid his apartment. He realizes it's been set up again He runs to the canister and eats all of the contents of it knowing that they're going to arrest him for it and PCP is a powerful dissociative anesthetic so he loses consciousness He blacks out entirely they lock him up without any kind of medical supervision and in his delirious state He doesn't tear out his own eyes, but he damages his eyes severely enough that he has never recovered his vision. He scratches his eyes in some way and and And this is the sort of story that will be brought up as a don't smoke PCP story Someone who is entrapped neglected abused Has nothing to do whatsoever with PCP That's horrible and this happens all the time. This is not that's not an extraordinary story drugs are such an amazing scapegoat they're so good as tools to Domenish people to show that they're weak that they're bad that they're a low moral character of one kind or another and the moment that we Abandoned all those stigmas the moment they can't be used as a tool against us anymore God that's fucking horrible. It is horrible You know when it goes back to the one of the main arguments against criminalizing drugs is that you're you're just gonna prop up organized crime and You are you're definitely gonna prop up organized crime. I mean that's that's literally what's going on with the Mexican cartels It's gone on with Pablo Escobar and El Chapo and so on and so forth down the line But it's also with goes on with cops Using them to arrest people and you know planting drugs on people You know, I have to just a tiny little baggie planted on a person you can get away with a lot of shit And then there's a lot of bad cops. It's like what anything else. Oh Yeah, and I think that not only are there, you know, it's not even about good and bad cops It's I think that they will have a corrupting influence on law enforcement I think that it could make a good cop into a bad cop because it breaks down the idea of protecting people There's an implicit hypocrisy in the enforcement of these laws We are arresting people for victimless crimes that will distort your thinking inevitably it has to there's no way it couldn't and there's only two people two types of people on our culture That we allow to talk about the world in terms of good guys and bad guys and that's cops and children With children it's because they're not developed sufficiently to have a complex understanding of human behavior And so they're bad guys and the bad guys do bad things and they're good guys and the good guys save people and they do good things with cops There's it's psychologically necessary for them to have those moral binaries because if you don't How would you ever do your job? How would you ever arrest someone for stealing like an iPad or something like that if you thought wait a second this guy has no money This guy grew up in a part of the country with a broken public education system There's no opportunities. He has no role models in his life He has nothing to look forward to he maybe need this maybe this could help him out Is this a really a bad guy? Of course not it's not a bad person at all But if you think that then you would never be able to arrest anyone because you'd only be thinking about the fact that no one Really knowingly does wrong. I mean this is like an important philosophical idea that I don't think is discussed enough It's really this good guy bad guy mentality is permeating our culture and you know, there's like a interesting socratic dialogue that isn't talked about all that much called gorgeous and in it Socrates is just articulating this basic idea that no man knowingly does wrong That there aren't bad guys There aren't bad guys and I know that that's a slippery slope because if you go down that road too far Then you never punish anyone for everything because you understand that every action is justifiable in the mind of the perpetrator, right? But I think it is important to remember that when you're talking about these things. Yeah It's it's the argument of determinism, right? So Paul ski, you know, Robert's Paul ski I do yeah We had a conversation and he said that he believes that in the future one of the main things that we're gonna look back on when we look at this culture and We're gonna feel like we made a tremendous mistake is punishing people for Things that they've done and that you know the concept of determinism like that you really don't have free will and that you're What you think of as free will is your what all the accumulation of experiences and education and genetics and all the different things that have happened you that led you to this point and the idea that you're responsible for all of them and Especially if you've been abused especially if you've been harmed and damaged and programmed in a terrible way that You know he as a psychologist as someone who understands the mechanisms of the mind Said that he thinks that that's going I mean it and again This is you know if we're gonna have a polite society in a safe society We can't just allow people to run around murdering people and raping people and mugging people right we have to do something about it but He and it's again Like many things that have to do with human beings. It's very complicated So what do you do? He doesn't have an answer as to what you do and I don't think anybody can because there's so many variables and so many people and so many different situations, but he believes that that is going to be the one thing that we look back on and Much like you know, we look back on some of the barbaric treatment of people in the past and the long long go past So we're gonna look back on people today This idea that you're responsible for all of your actions particularly if you're talking about someone who grew up in a poor poor environment crime-ridden drug riddle neighborhood filled with gangs abused and then they go on to commit a crime is that really their fault It's slippery. Yeah It's slippery and it's also it's like you know Bill Cosby had that kind of like bootstrapping argument of like you know It's the real issue is a cultural of a bench up here. Oh does this as well. It drives me crazy That's like the real issue is a cultural issue. We got a bootstrap We got to get rid of all the rap music and if we can just get rid of rap music. I can say that We got to get rid of rap. He says it. He says it like inner city crime is a cultural problem basically well in some ways he's right and in some ways that is so simplifying a super complex issue and you're also dealing with a system that literally evolved out of slavery So you have a lot of these communities that have never recovered from slavery You went from they went from slavery in the 1800s to the Jim Crow era to the civil rights era to and still in many places Whether it's Baltimore or whether it's Detroit or South Sausage, Chicago these you have these Situations that exist in the same state in terms of like constant Crime constant violence decade after decade after decade with no intervention No, there's no you don't think about what we did and this is one of things that kind of drove me crazy in the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic where they They Decided that they need to spend trillions of dollars to relieve businesses Because these businesses had lost a lot of money during the pandemic and to relieve them But what about these really super impoverished communities have been fucked forever? Like the idea that these people growing up in these communities that are filled with gangs and violence That they have the same shot at someone who's growing up in the suburbs of Massachusetts like that's nonsense. That's crazy It's a crazy thought and there's no emphasis at all in terms of like a national dialogue of like look Here's our number this are number one problem too many people are fucked from birth too many people are literally they're born Into horrible environments where you have a very slim chance of ever Overcoming all the influences of your environment and the people around you to get out and the idea that you're just gonna Just figure this out on your own is crazy. Yeah, so few people do you look at the numbers of people that do figuring out whether they're athletes or entertainers or whoever makes it out of the hood Like the idea that you should be able to just figure it out like that's fucking crazy. It's crazy And yeah, well this is the argument that I always had about this whole idea of making America great again But sure it sounds great to make America great. Why would that be bad? Well, here's how you make America great? Less losers how do you have less losers? You got to fix these places? You got to put massive resources and emphasis into figuring out how you fix these crime-ridden impoverished communities until we do that Blaming them the same way you would blame someone who grows up in a you know two-parent household where everyone's loving and caring It's a totally different world totally different programming totally different environment Yeah, and of course we have laws that are explicitly designed to Oppress certain people sure like like the crack sentencing. Yes, and I remember the New York Times published this article that I found very annoying where they said like new evidence suggests that Like one of the early arrests of George Floyd for crack preceding his murder May have been done by a corrupt police officer and maybe he didn't actually have crack after all And it's like it doesn't matter whether he had crack or not doesn't matter he should have never been arrested for it in the first place It doesn't the this is corruption regardless of whether or not yet Yeah, well, it's also the narrative of crack versus cocaine Solaris narrative you say crack everybody's like oh my god your smoking crack We feel like oh he was doing coke. Well, it was just you know getting crazy He's getting crazy. He's doing coke, you know the same thing It's like pharmacologically right basically according to Karl Hart. It's the same I haven't done either one of them Mm-hmm, but oh yeah, yeah, I mean it's just cocaine free base. Yeah. Yeah Ridiculous yeah, you look at the sentencing and in many places it's still the same right like they're still disparity Oh, yeah Obama reduced it to something like 18 to one instead of Under to one. Yeah, why why any disparity. Yeah, how it's crazy possibly happen. That's like the difference between You know like if they catch it with a bomb you piece of shit. What are you doing? You're getting too high? You got a bomb that no can't take that a joint's fine But a bomb you're getting radical. What do you use wax you fucking animal? What are you doing lock them up? We cut your son with a bomb You know like no no one would no one would think that that's ridiculous But that's like that the bomb heads that you get when you get a big deep bomb hit like that's probably a A more potent version of what you're gonna get if you're just gonna take a hit off for joint and there in the reason that I spent so much time talking about this and The social aspects of it is because I genuinely do believe that this is one of the most pernicious and yet fixable things in our society Yeah, there's a little when you know whenever it's saying end white supremacy It's like of course. Yeah, I agree end white supremacy. That would be fantastic Let's end white supremacy, but how how is that gonna happen? It's like saying end badness and meanness I'm in favor of ending both badness and meanness and white supremacy Yeah, those are nebulous concepts that can't be addressed with any single intervention whereas there are specific problems associated with prohibition health care and Sentencing sentencing. I mean, you know public education teachers unions all sorts of things which I know is a controversial issue that Have created an environment where it's very very difficult to succeed and it's very easy to have your life Totally derailed by some little Thing yeah, well, this is why I think you need to stay in media because I think there's many people that really truly do not Understand the difference between cocaine and crack. They really don't understand that there is no difference They really don't get it so when they they do hear this from someone like you clearly understands what he's talking about and Then you realize that there's still is this massive disparity in sentencing between having crack and having coke and then you go well, well, why is that? Well because poor people have crack Like that's literally why like it doesn't make any there's no logic to it at all It's crazy and that's just that that is almost more than anything emblematic of a much larger issue Which is that people with money have ways to get every single drug that a poor person uses legally every single one Maybe not heroin, but you can get oxycodones. How do you get coke legally? Well cocaine is actually scheduled to you can get a prescription for it under some circumstances, but what yeah What's their circumstances I'm asking for a friend? My grandfather was an optic surgeon he had cocaine that he would use as a topical and aesthetic But that's but also it is sometimes used off label for treatment of cluster headaches I knew someone that had cluster headaches that had a prescription for cocaine. Whoa That's very common. Oh, that's a good one too because you can't really prove it Ha-ha. Bro, they keep common. I can't stop them What do you do when they give you coke for cluster headaches? Do you snort it in his case? He did I believe it's hilarious. Yeah. Yeah hilarious Well, of course of course it is hilarious because you know 10 years ago if you said you know listen doctor I'm really really depressed and I snort Academy in three times a week and it's just amazing You know it's it's working. It's helping me Not be depressed anymore. So you're insane. You've got a problem. You've got an issue You have to go to a treatment center. This is dangerous. You can't be snorting drugs Right, you can't be using ketamine three times a week or this is this is gonna kill you. Yeah now Using ketamine snorted three times a week is an FDA approved treatment for depression that is sold by Johnson and Johnson It's nuts I have a friend who is a veteran who is just telling me on the phone yesterday about his use of ketamine Therapeutic use of care ketamine through a physician IV and how much it benefited him he was going what he goes, you know for a What goes in the beginning. It's just like alleviating your your your your your shitty feelings and depression. He's like that's the initial The initial effects of it. He said but then it gets into this thing where he's sorting out his life And he's like recognizing problems that he has in his life and then Identifying fairly clear solutions that he can take action to fix those problems He's like it gives me a clarity in terms of like how to organize my life And it was a really interesting conversation because I never had anybody put it to me that way and it was very illuminating and there's I know quite a few friends who have used ketamine Over the last like six or seven years or so from doctors like doctors prescribing them ketamine with very defects Like some some of them. It was like you could really help them a lot Like my friend Neil Brennan had a great take on it He's like it's like because he was one of the first person ever Her do it and he's tried a bunch of different things for depression and He said, you know, I go to the doctor and you know puts me in a chair and gives me an IV drip Apparently because of a catamine. He's like and I am fucking tripping balls He goes I can't even believe this is legal like I can't believe this is happening I'm going to a doctor and I'm tripping my fucking brains out. I'm like wow Like is that helping you? He's like a lot. Yes Helping me But the fact that you can go to a doctor and have a full blown psychedelic experience as you should be able to I mean it's this is another sad thing is that for so long We've tried to strip these effects out of drugs as much as possible because we've decided that it's an unacceptable side effect Well, is it unacceptable if it actually helps you not want to die? Isn't it worth it to feel a small amount of intoxication? I mean for many people obviously it's also desirable Yeah, but because we're so afraid of these altered states we've tried to promote the creation of these sort of SSRI type drugs that don't really do all that much to your consciousness They have very subtle effects that you know, maybe make you a little bit high. Have you used them? I have yeah, what are your experiences on SSR eyes? I've never taken them for long periods of time. I've taken SSR I've taken Prozac for maybe three or I actually have to take it for weeks to exert a therapeutic effect And I wasn't taking it as a treatment for depression. I was taking it out of curiosity because I wanted to know what it felt like and But you weren't depressed. I was not depressed when I took my sec I've had friends that take it for depression and not not prozac but other SSR eyes and have had positive effects But I'm also had friends that they take it and just they felt like they were numb and like a car could just crash right in front of them the dark move with car crash just keep walking like nothing would Faze them and they'd rather feel shitty and feel things then feel numb But I think it varies wildly right? Of course and depression is not one disorder and we're going to Increasingly in the future appreciate that many of these things that we use with one term are probably many very ultimately dissimilar clinical entities so if you look at depression you wonder Wait a second why does this work for some people and not for other people well because they're different people and they probably have different things that we're calling depression Yes, there are different symptoms that we can agree in tandem Constitute depression, but that doesn't mean that depression is the same thing as caused by the same thing as treated with the same chemicals Which is another reason that I think it's really important to have a wide array of things available because you never know What thing is going to be the thing that helps you is ketamine schedule one? No, no ketamine is similar to PCP very similar. Yes, like what is the difference? Where ketamine as an end methyl group PCP is a pipe here at Een ring and then on the aromatic ring ketamine as a chlorine atom and then on the cyclohexane ring Academy as a ketone so there's like three points of modification. It's modified on and on every ring, but the major Experiential difference is that ketamine has a shorter duration than PCP ketamine is kind of more psychic Delectin PCP arguably it's dose dependent so I don't think you can say that absolutely and that and ketamine Has a Sedative effect where it becomes very difficult to move You're not inclined to move at high doses at all In fact, you basically can't walk at all at a high dose So just funny because people talk about it as like a dance drug or a social drug. I find it to be a profoundly Anti-social drug. Well, that's the K hole. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah But I think that's actually where ketamine becomes most interesting because at a lower dose ketamine has a kind of alcohol like a fact It basically feels more or less like you've had a couple of drinks and then as the dose increases you start to Receive into yourself and enter something that's sort of similar to a lucid dream where The imagery becomes increasingly abstract Unlike classical psychedelics. It doesn't tend to have the same sort of Like there are many archetypal classical psychedelic experiences like you've described It's smoking DMT and seeing Buddhas made of electricity often people will see religious imagery MC-ashr like imagery geometric imagery things that feel beautiful that feel connected to Humanity and nature There's something about the dissociative anesthetics it tends to be a bit more random a bit weirder It doesn't feel like you're entering a new menace holy realm as much as like a different channel of consciousness that is Bizarre and otherwise inaccessible Terence, we kind of described it like being in a brand new office building, but no one's in the building. Yes. Yeah I know it's weird. Yeah. Yeah. Well, he had it. He had a certain bias there Everyone has their biases but his bias was of course toward plants because he saw them as a sort of Well, he also had a perception and I don't know if you would agree with this or not He's this is kind of crazy thought because it's very unprovable, but he believed that Not only are you dealing with the psycho Active effects of these psychedelics, but you are also dealing with all of the people's experiences that have ever taken these psychedelics Somehow or another he had this feeling that when you're tripping You're not just tripping like you alone tripping But that you're somehow or another interfacing with all the various trips that all the people have done with Whatever these drugs are and that was one of the things that I think he was referring to and who's talked about ketamine Because a relatively small amount of people at least when he was alive had experienced ketamine Of course lily was famous for his love of ketamine and lily liked to use ketamine in In conjunction with the isolation tank that was his thing apparently like intramuscular ketamine sure and Sensory deprivation tanks. Yeah, and like so many things that Terrence McKenna said it's both true and untrue. I think it's untrue in a literal sense, but very true in a poetic sense because the historical cultural context of a drug is part of what you bring to that drug experience The molecule does not contain information the ketamine molecule does not bring an experience to you that is something that is generated in your brain by your consciousness and so if you have a new substance that has no cultural associations then maybe it was like that. So you don't have expectations. You don't have expectations. Right. That's a big part of it, isn't it? It's a huge part. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I I made a piece in the new season of my show about five amiode DMT containing toad venom and there's a big controversy in the toad venom community, which believe it or not is a community and they are Purists are they friends with the opia files? Oh Definitely not no no they don't like the opia file So what is the venom community think they think that this venom has some spiritual component derived from its association with the toad that makes it better than synthetic five amiode empty now I've analyzed several samples of toad venom and before five amiode empty was made illegal in the United States and in terms of what you find if you you know injected into a mass spectrometer five amiode empty is the only psychedelic that's present in some samples there might be trace quantities of another psychedelic called Bufotanine but it's a minuscule amount of a less potent molecule so predominantly you have five amiode empty which is likely the strongest naturally occurring serotonergic psychedelic and For conservation purposes, it's necessary that people stop milking toads because it's become too popular Mike Tyson's talking about it all the time I made I mean and that it's like it sounds ridiculous like Mike Tyson could have an effect on Conservation but if a celebrity says they like something that can have a tangible effect on the environment I know people who have toads For that very reason because Mike Tyson talked about those toads now they have toads and they milk these toads Oh, yeah, I mean me too I talked to the billionaire who flew a private jet full of toads to To create a private toad sanctuary Wow how many toads do you got? I didn't and the photos didn't look like that many didn't look like a jet full five amiode empty does not strike me Something that you'd want to do a lot. It's so terrifying That's probably the most terrifying experience I've ever had on psychedelics because I ceased to exist Like is the the one drug where I feel like when I took it I wasn't there anymore I was gone until I came back like I felt like I didn't have thoughts. I didn't have I knew I knew I was experiencing the five amiode empty realm or whatever it was But I didn't there was no context in terms of I didn't realize I'm on my couch sitting at home like I was gone. I was gone There's no visuals. It was just this White sort of pixelated like grayish white gone world You know and it was terrifying because it felt like death was the one thing that felt the most like oh my god Like now now I don't now. I'm not here anymore But coming back from it. I think it was very valuable like as I was returning I remember thinking so much about So much about the the bullshit way in which I talk I remember thinking that like God You just like so much of the way I would communicate Was not just me trying to get my thoughts across But me trying to say things in a way that would be impressive or in a way that would be Flowerry or you know try to make it look like I was more intelligent than it was or whatever But I remember like remembering that like really clear little like why I'm gonna clean up the way I talk So I'm full of shit like thinking that as I was like as I was trying to figure out how I was gonna describe This experience I was realizing as I was thinking like God I gotta figure out how to describe this like boy I talk like I'm full of shit like like so there was value in that but I Did it a few times I think I did it three times, but it was terrifying every time Terrifying like while you're gone like why you slip away. I remember just thinking like oh, this is not good This is not good. They feel like oh my God. I fucked up like I really died I really I really stopped being here and it also makes you think like maybe this is going to the light Maybe this is what they talk about when they talk about going to the light when you die like maybe you're having this kind of experience Because it's really disturbing but then pretty peaceful when it's over like felt pretty good when it came back But the concept of giving away all of my control of reality like that For some reason NNDMT doesn't scare me as much It's a totally different drug. Yeah, yeah experientially chemically. It's you know Silicent is closer to DMT then five meodMT is mushrooms are closer chemically speaking. Yeah, and yeah, I think that it defies description in a different way than other psychedelic experiences do with something like DMT It's difficult to describe because there is such an abundance of imagery and thoughts and associations that it's extremely difficult to Communicate that to someone with five meodMT. There's nothing and that's also difficult to communicate that Yeah, white out and there is an absence of everything Yeah, do you find a terrifying I have found it terrifying. Yes, it's very I've you know I had a very profound experience with it in 2017 and I have no real desire to use it again. Yeah, that's my thought Going back there. I'll go back to an N DMT I'll go back to that. Oh me too because it's just a different drug entirely and I think that DMT can be integrated into a normal life much more easily than five meodMT actually I credit DMT with like sort of I talked about the sort of COVID denial that I had at the beginning of the pandemic where I was You know, I can't stop making my TV show. We're all gonna get it anyway We can't just stop working we can't shut down the world. We can't stop flying and then I smoked DMT and had this image of MC Escher's Angels and demons, but instead of angels and demons it was pangolins and horseshoe bats Oh, whoa, and and came out of it and and thought Of course I feel horrible of course this is depressing and confusing This is actually one of the worst things that has happened in my lifetime And I just have to accept it now and I felt so much more at peace It just stripped away the denial and and I could just say all right this is happening and So you were just wrestling with the reality of having to shut down Yeah, and kind of I resented some other people on my team who in retrospect were behaving in a way that was completely rational Where I was thinking like oh come on. We're not gonna go on this shoot really, but but they were right and I was wrong and I had to stop What is the difference between Silasab and when it's Metabolized and and and and DMT there's they're very close right extremely close Yeah, well when you take Silasab and there's a phosphate ester that's Metabolically cleaved and that produces silasin silasin is the active metabolite and Silasin is for hydroxy DMT so very very similar the hydroxy group confers some protection from the enzyme M.A.O. that degrades DMT and You know the duration is obviously much longer, but they're very similar drugs and and experientially speaking and chemically and the peak of a Silasin experience is very similar to DMT as well It's all DMT is almost like isolating the highest point of a mushroom and confining it to a very short 10 to 15 minute period has anybody ever figured out a way to free base that The same way you free base DMT you can but it would have the same long duration So we have a faster onset, but it would still last for two to three hours really yeah, why? because in smoking it you wouldn't cleave the Hydroxy group that confers this resistance to M.A.O. so it would allow it to enter the bloodstream and the brain more rapidly But the metabolic degradation wouldn't be accelerated in any way You brought up something earlier that I really want to discuss So I remember when you were bringing this out that I had to ask you about this benzodiazepine and I'm sure you aware of what happened with Jordan Peterson. Yes. I am. Yeah. What did you think about that? He had to tell people what happened so that you yeah, well I mean again, this is like when we talk about addiction as a monolithic entity. We neglect to identify all the individual components. I mean Jordan Peterson is not an average person Jordan Peterson is an extraordinarily Unusual weird person who had a very stressful life situation at pre-existing Depression right then he went for being Relatively unknown to being a household name and one of the most controversial people in the world someone who is hated by countless people became very fashionable to treat him as if he was the devil incarnate for many liberal people and he I Mean imagine what that would feel like I think people don't have a lot of empathy for public figures and You know for example if a politician is stumbling over their words They'll say oh what an idiot that guy is what a fool But they're not remembering the pressure of knowing that every single word that you speak is going to be dissected by angry people Who are going to go out of their way to try to demonstrate You're an idiot and that you don't know what you're talking about and that everything that you say will be misinterpreted in order to prove that you're some type of bad person and it Stunts people's ability to communicate effectively. It's very difficult So you know without having spoken with Jordan Peterson Personally, but I've talked with his daughter about it a couple of times You know I I can totally understand why you would start using benzodiazepines You're giving talks all the time to enormous audiences. You're extremely controversial you can assume that every single thing you do is going to be eviscerated in the press and You need to relax a little bit and then you have these chemicals of leavus Kalanapen that he was taking that will just help you sleep at night at the very least, right and the problem Which is the case with most psychoactive drugs? It's the sort of the irony of pharmacology is that you often End up with whatever it was that you're trying to treat worse than when you started out So he has all these problems. They still exist. He has a drug it temporarily Relieves the stress is associated with it But then he becomes dependent on it which is completely understandable because the stresses don't go away and so when you try to stop You have all those stresses that drove you to use the drug in the first place Plus you have withdrawal which is exacerbating those stresses and it becomes very tricky in addition to that It sounds like he has some pre-existing Psychological conditions that he's publicly spoken about so it's you know, it's very common And I think benzodiazepines are some of the most Incidiously addictive substances that are used in our culture again Don't get me wrong. I'm not saying that we need to ban them or that no one should ever use them or that they don't have medical value But simply that they should be used with tremendous caution because it's very easy to Get into trouble with them. You know like I said, I have never Been a fan of opioids. I don't really like them at all But when I was a teenager I was prescribed Kalonopin and I experienced that as well and it's very very difficult to stop even after a short period of use So you have to keep that in mind and physicians don't tell you that they say and They say, you know, oh you've got anxiety here take this and you take it and then you realize when you stop that you can't sleep anymore And you have something to do the next day. You can't go in night with that sleep. You're doing a talk you have to sleep and so It becomes very difficult for people to disentangle themselves again. There are ways out of it. You're not doomed if you find yourself Dependent on benzodiazepines. You can you know use cannabis for sleep or you could use something else in the transitional period and you can taper off And there are treatment strategies and I've known lots of people that were dependent on benzodiazepines that now live normal lives myself included and And so it's it's not a death sentence by any means but it's something that people should recognize and treat with caution is there As you take benzodiazepines is there a point where where you take it for a longer period of time It's more difficult to get off of it. Yes. There is and one thing that people people often myself included are Formological reductionists when they talk about this so they say like oh, you know you have some kind of you know neuronal change or some change in receptor density or something that accounts for this But what also is changing is there's a psychological change where you're not developing healthy coping strategies and if you magnify that over Months or years you're those are months or years where you haven't figured out how to relax before bed How to unwind right because you didn't have to you had a pill and that pill was how you unwound before bed and a normal person And it allows you to cultivate bad habits, right? So you can maybe if you have a prescription for ambient it's not a big deal to have a cup of tea with dinner 9 p.m Whatever you're gonna take an ambient that night you'll go to sleep doesn't matter if you have the tea well when you take ambient out of the equation You might have to be a little bit more careful about the choices that you make and you have to have a little bit of additional Discipline so long term you also like I said you have psychological Changes in your coping strategies and that I think can be very hard for people and I think that when people talk about long term Problems as a result of drug abuse. They often assume that it's because the drug is neurotoxic and it damaged your brain But I think just as much it can be an issue of not adequately developing certain coping strategies as a result of using that drug use like if you always use a benzodiazepine when you're anxious You may have never learned how to appropriately take a breath and relax and Figure out your anxiety psychologically now when he Tried to get off these benzodiazepine Collinepin is that the only to think he took as far as I well I his daughter told me that during the detox he was also inhaling the xenon gas Which is it yeah, do you know about xenon? No, you would find xenon very very interesting. Yeah, what's that? I mean Can I pee? Yeah, yeah, yeah, go pee go pee? We're gonna talk about xenon gas when Hamilton Morris comes back If you heard about xenon gas, I'm gonna Go the word you're on it right now. Why aren't you some of a bit xenon gas? That doesn't sound like you're supposed to be inhaling that That sounds like some shit. They find in your basement. They have to clear your house out right? Well, that's right on right remember that yeah I googled it and weirdly a temperature screening unit is popping up so I don't know that That's temperature screening unit Yeah, it's gonna be a aesthetic that's used in lamps. I'm so glad I talked to him about this How much does this motherfucker know about drugs? I should just point out for anybody who's just listening to this Hamilton Morris does not have a single note in front of him I'm sure that this is all pop and right off the top of his head and this dude thinks he's just gonna go off be a chemist The fuck out of here. You better get back on YouTube. Yeah, on live on YouTube every day Yeah, he should be doing this every day, right This guy's a national treasure so he knows so much and he's so good at expressing it These it makes me sad that Someone like this is not more popular. I'm doing my best. He also gave me a book The psychedelic toad of the Sonoran desert. This is apparently a very old book that's been republished It says it's by Ken Nelson, but apparently this is like this unknown person And it said forward and updated addition by Hamilton Morris and I think he's publishing this But this is a small book about About the toad The whole air said Mike Tyson is affecting Ecology with his toad use. We're just singing your praises sir. Welcome back He's wondering Jesus. We're saying you can't quit. We're not allowing you to quit. There's your book. Oh nice. Thank you That's a story as well. Yes. We'll I want to get to that story We're gonna go to that story in a moment, but please go to the on gas. Okay, xenon gas is where we left Okay, so you know the the periodic table of elements. Yes, so most of the elements are not drugs in fact none of the elements are really Did you have lithium which in its as like a carbonate salt is used to treat bipolar and Rubidium is used to treat depression in Italy, but for the most part drugs are Compounds that are made from different elements joined together. There are very few Single elements that will exert a pharmacological effect and the exception is xenon so on the rightmost Column of the periodic table you have the noble gas as the lightest is helium then you have neon then you have Then you have argon then you have krypton and then you have xenon And Nice, all right, and then below that you have right on as well, but right on is unstable so xenon is the heaviest stable noble gas and it's a trace component of our atmosphere It's an every breath that we take it's point zero zero zero zero zero zero eight seven percent of the atmosphere and if you Distil hundreds are really more like millions of leaders there and to you compress it into a liquid under cryogenic Conditions and then you distill off all the different gases all the nitrogen all the oxygen You're left for the small fraction of this very heavy gas called xenon It's so heavy that if you you can almost pour it like a liquid and float a foil boat into it if you pour it into the Good for me very weird stuff and it has the opposite effect of helium on your voice so If you inhale helium your voice becomes a demon Yeah, you get this demonic ultra low voice. Yeah, very interesting stuff, but it's also a drug and When you inhale xenon it produces this amazing euphoric anesthetic effect that is Considered by some anesthesiologist to make it the perfect drug because many drugs are Biotransformed in one way or another. This is a single atom that is not altered in any way by the body You inhale it you exhale it unchanged and it's even uses a performance enhancing drug and Russia Supposedly for what they'll put people in xenon tents like oxygen deprivation tents But then you have the added sort of euphoric and aesthetic properties of the xenon that supposedly allow athletes to Work even harder really yeah Breathe it in the obscure gas improves athletes performance Xenon is one of the shyest members of the periodic table of the elements chemically It's almost inert and physically only there goes Naturally carrying elements. Okay, notably in Russia. It's used as an anesthetic It's also known to be to protect body tissues from the effect of low temperatures lack of oxygen And these even physical trauma in particular it increases the level of how do you say that word? Erithropoetin also known as EP. Oh hormone that encourages the formation of red blood cells. Oh Okay, so it works like EPO. I wonder if you take it if you'll test positive for EPO It's been banned in some places. I think as a performance enhancing Interesting very interesting stuff. I made a whole piece sounds make sense that he's it's Russian Because he he had to go through his detox in Russia, right or did go through his detox in Russia and You know, I know that he tried that I know that he tried a number of different things I don't want to let go into his medical history without his permission He's talked about it. Oh, he talked openly and his daughters talked about it. Oh, okay. Oh, I'll tell you that I'll say it was a whole year That he was suffering from this Yeah, I mean it can be rough. It can be really really rough especially if I Imagine especially if you're a public figure because your life is already Anxiety inducing enough then you had this coping strategy. It's the rug has been pulled from under you and you have to now Exist publicly without that it would be very very hard. I don't know exactly what dose he was using and I don't know How long he'd been using it. I would say that the severity of his response seems a little bit unusual But again, I don't know enough about his medical history to say But this severity would increase depending upon the length and the duration and the and social environmental Psychological factors as well. Yeah, that's why when people make statements like heroin withdrawal Is really really bad or heroin withdrawal is just like the flu. It's like will they're both true for different people? Probably it just depends Okay, that makes sense that makes sense But Kalanopin particularly difficult to get off Or benzodiazepines or benzodiazepines are I would say it's not so much that they are very difficult But I think more than they are difficult is that we don't treat them like they're difficult we treat heroin like it's difficult It's dramatized constantly, you know, we'd grow up on train spotting Requiem for a dream permanent midnight Christian f all these movies that dramatize the horrors of opioid addiction and opioid withdrawal It's a part of our cultural diet that we have learned that this is horrible and is to be avoided at all costs the same is not true of benzodiazepines which are just kind of Stuff right you have rappers talking about Xanax and it's not about So Xanax is a benzodiazepine as well. Yes, it is. Yeah. Okay. I know people that have a real problem with Xanax So that's what the problem is and as as bad as these things are and I don't want to call them bad to begin with but They they really are a Fast improvement over the drugs we have we're very spoiled right now We have a most of our complaints revolve around things that are too good as opposed to too bad We you go back to the bar bitzer. It's those would kill people Accidentally like there were people who weren't trying to who weren't we're just using them additionally and would die You know by because they had a drink or something the benzodiazepines are Comparatively very safe chemicals That's not to say that they are without danger But they represent a pretty substantial medical advance and that's the reason that they're so widely prescribed like it's very important Two physicians not to prescribe drugs that will accidentally kill people. That's another reason that SSRI's are so widely prescribed is because you know Problems aside they're very bad at Causing fatal overdoses. Yeah, so that's kind of the idea is when they came out This is chemists Leo Sternbach invented the benzodiazepines and this was amazing This was unbelievable because finally you could have a drug that treated anxiety That didn't have this horrible risk of killing people that used it. You know, this was when Jimmy Hendrix died Marilyn Monroe These were all bar bitturate associated deaths So this was actually considered like a huge boon to science and they're liberal prescribing reflects their relative safety But there isn't enough of a discussion about the problems associated with Sestation with draw for long-term users. So what is the mechanism? How do they reduce anxiety? What's going on? Yeah, so They're positive Allosteric modulators of something called the GABA A receptor and what it really means is that you have the neuron It's kind of it's actually kind of someone intuitive like you have the neuron and the neuron is like an electric it's an electrically mediated signal transducer and so this in order for it to have enough charge for it to transmit a signal it needs to cross a certain threshold and The charge is mediated by ions that are present in the brain So the more negative ions enter the cell the lower the charge the less likely it is to fire the more positive ions enter the cell The higher the charge the more likely it is to fire will have an excitatory effect So when a benzodiazepine binds to the GABA A receptor it promotes the opening of a channel that allows chloride ions to enter the cell the chloride ion carries a negative charge and It reduces the charge of the neuron making it less likely to fire so that's in a nutshell how a benzodiazepine works Now what is this thing that they talk about when you get off of Xanax in particular? They say it has Sort of like a slingshot effect and the way they describe it is the people that take Xanax they say that it reduces your anxiety But then when you get off them it actually increases the amount of anxiety you have as a base level. Yeah Yeah, because like I mean like I was saying earlier you have Law you have both a a tolerance effect so that your compensatory mechanisms within the body have adjusted to respond to the to the to this new found increased Introduction of chloride ions into the cell basically and so Then when you remove this drug Your body has already made adaptations to the presence of the drug that then cause a more severe a more severe excitatory response that can ultimately cause seizures and death in some instances Yeah, but that's not common that does happen that does happen, but that's not reflective of the normal That's you know very high dose long term use and even then it's not Necessarily something that will happen. That's also with very abrupt cessation a more responsible strategy is to taper the dose to avoid those sorts of effects as much as possible Is that the only way to mitigate the negative response of getting off of the drug? Is there anything else that someone can take while they're Yeah, there are tons of things. Yeah, you could you know you could take a muscle relax or like Tizanity and that has a different form of ecology or you could use can of banoids or you could use any number of things depending on You know what treatment is most appropriate for that person. It just really depends So and I don't want to you know make any claims that there's a magic bullet that will treat people I mean the main thing that you have to do I think is psychological work to try to cultivate habits where you're able to sleep better at night through Exercise and you have better strategies for psychologically dealing with stress in your environment those two things combined Will I think do a lot more Long-term to prevent you from using them again in the future? But again, you know these are these problems mostly emerge with long-term Hidos use there's a lot of people that can use a bedside as a penis a one-off thing on an airplane or Before some other stressful event and it doesn't cause those problems There's a big difference between taking something once or twice and taking something every single day for years That's the problem right? It said people get accustomed to the effects The anxiety relieving effects and they start taking it a lot and then next thing you know you have a physical issue Yeah, yeah It's it's really you know it's really and that's why I think It's good to be as familiar with these things as possible and it's good to understand them and they're potential But I also think it's good to try to not have a habit of using any one of them regularly And I I get very alarmed by the ones that I like even if they're innocuous like cannabis You know I I remember when I was in my 20s I would hear all these people saying oh yeah Yeah, when I was in my 20s. I love cannabis, but the day I turned 30 I started getting panic attacks every single time I smoked it and I had to stop and I think wow Well, I look forward to that day because I It's just not happening for me. I'm just enjoying it and it's only joyous and pleasant So is it ever going to get bad and the answer is no it never got bad But at some point I decided all right It's not gonna get bad for me So it's just my decision now because it has you know I was never like smoking all day I would just smoke a tiny bit before bed But still I didn't like the fact that it was a habit that if I if I was traveling somewhere I you know would have to think like oh maybe I won't sleep well that night and that's no good I didn't like that feeling and so I stopped completely for years and And I think that that's a really useful exercise even if nothing bad has happened even if you enjoy it It's good to experimentally to pry yourself of things that are good and that you like just to see how you change I observed something that I didn't even really know which was that cannabis was more than anything not even sleep It was a way of mitigating the anger that I felt you know because like there's so much reflecting anger in our society It's just endless like you look at Twitter Reddit YouTube Instagram any of these social media things are machines fed on human opinions and rage and people have almost optimized their communication to ensure this kind of Agitated engagement at all times and it's very psychologically difficult. I mean I I think like people need to try to avoid that kind of behavior as much as they possibly can because Not only are you volunteering your finite time on earth to feed a social media machine and advertisements with your own misery you are Preventing yourself from doing anything nice in the world. Yeah, which will ultimately make you feel better like forget what effect it has On the subject of the bullying. It's not good to be a bully. It's not good for the bully. It's not gonna make you happy Yeah, it's It's it's far too prevalent that this is the only way that people communicate the Communicate all day like that and it's It's devoid of social cues Devoid of compassion you're not looking at someone and everything empathy They don't see them. You could say something online say mean shit all day changes the way you communicate Changes the way you interface with humans. Yeah, I think it's real bad. I don't do it. I don't do it anymore I just post things I call it post and ghost. I post and I run away. I don't read anything Yeah, you know if I if I if I if I look at anything it's on Instagram and I don't read comments But sometimes people post interesting shit interesting shit about their life cool pictures. I look at that But I don't read any of mine. It's just I don't think it's healthy. I don't think I And then Facebook I think is the least healthy of them because people go on these long rants and you know and then people below those Long rants respond to those long rants and they get addicted to it and they're constantly checking it and battling back and forth with people on opinions and issues and politics and religion and social problems and It's just it's a piss poor way of working things out with people and it's the opposite of a podcast in my opinion one of the best things about a podcast is the fact that We're locked in like you and I have in this conversation. We're wearing headphones So I hear your voice at the same volume that I hear my voice Which is it makes it much harder to talk over people because you're too aware that you're being rude and You you don't hear anything from the outside world and we're looking at each other eye to eye We're staring each other across the table. No electronics. We're not looking at our phone. We're not we're not being distracted by anything It's the to me is the best way to sort things out to figure out how a person Really you get to know a person for real this way, you know without the the bullshit that comes from social media interactions, which I think is the worst way to communicate with people Yeah, and it's a shame because I actually love talking to people like some of the most interesting stories I've ever told some of the most interesting experiences I've ever had have come from strangers contacting and we have the internet which is the greatest educational tool ever devised by humans and it's being used as a machine for competitively angry remarks It's just natural when you when it's so easy to be angry at someone It's so easy when they're not there. It's so easy when you're not in their presence and you it's a shit way to communicate like You say something in a text and they say something in a text. It's not good the best way to communicate is Physically being in the same room with a person looking them in the eyes and using words and You you get a much better sense of what the person's trying to communicate. It's just such a filtered down Alan Levinevitz calls it He calls it processed Information the same way process food is bad for you But processed information is bad for you and so many people are on a processed food diet and it's just terrible for their health Well processed information is terrible for your mental health. I think he's dead right and I think it's an excellent way to describe it But it is also a cultural thing like it doesn't have to be this way people could internet could be any way that people wanted it to be and You could hold yourself to a different standard sometimes. I'll see people posting things like I don't know. I don't have time to look it up, but I think it's this. It's like well You're you just posted your time you're writing this on the greatest information gathering machine never to buy this right then Why don't you just look it up and not post you and not post you? And you know this really is a remarkable time like I do you know about Sigh hub have you ever heard about that? No Oh, man, I'm glad to be able to talk about this even briefly with you because it's crazy. You know Aaron Schwartz was yes Yeah, so you know that when Aaron Schwartz died What happened he was trying to collect all the scientific scholarly literature and make it freely available right what's not widely known is that someone else tried to do the same thing and they succeeded and there is this website called Sihub dot s e the dot suffix changes periodically and this is a woman in I believe she's in Kazakhstan. I'm gonna mispronounce her name. I think it's Alexandra Elkhabakian and She successfully created a website that allows you to access every scientific article ever published in the history of mankind. Whoa in the history of yes it's it is like to You can't overestimate the significance of what this is how long ago did she do this? This has been around for years and I think people do need to know about it because it's one of the most important I mean, she should win a Nobel Prize for this It is truly one of the greatest things that has ever happened to science because when people talk about science I think they're they don't really know like what is science is it the some knowledge of every living Scientists is it the opinion of the greatest expert what is science? But what science really is is a series of thousands and thousands and thousands of short papers when people talk about the body of scientific knowledge Which I'm about these short papers that up until recently have been pay walled so if you wanted to read even at two page article you'd have to pay 40 dollars to do it and She figured out a system where she could use the electronic resources of every major University to automatically download their entire catalogs of scientific literature and make it freely available to everyone in the world So it doesn't matter if you are in Kenya or Ethiopia or wherever you have access to the full digital resources of Oxford and Harvard and Yale and it is It's gonna chain. I mean it already has changed the world and like I guarantee 20 years from now There will be people winning Nobel Prizes who will attribute the knowledge that they have to that website It is huge and so you think about something like this. This is like inestimable greatness from this website and everybody uses it every scientist uses it right now and like We are in the presence of this extraordinary creation and then people are just like spending their entire life Insulting Trump on Twitter Like it's just like we have to recognize what an amazing time it is Even though there are of course horrible horrible things having all around us like there are things like that that are so Incredibly useful. Is this in danger at all? Oh of course. Yeah. Yes. Is that's why she changes the The address yeah, yes, it is in danger and I don't even know if it's you know I think it's worth talking about publicly because I think more people I think even there are some scientists even that don't know about it But yeah, it's it's in danger because there was money to be made But it's it's really Unfortunate because scientists aren't paid to write scientific articles so if you write a peer reviewed scientific article that's Something that you do you send it off to the publisher and then no one can read it unless they are also a scientist with either academic or institutional affiliations that allow them to access that journal and now that's not the case anymore It's huge Wow and has there ever been an effort to do some other than Aaron Schwartz Has there been an argument an Aaron Schwartz wound up killing himself because he faced a lengthy jail sentence, right? Yeah, and it's horrific like people are Furious about it to this day that he was prosecuted the way he was Is there any Effort amongst intellectuals to say that this is wrong and that all these papers should be released and that's something like Sihab should be readily available. Oh, yeah Everybody everyone that isn't a publisher of scientific literature supports Sihab Wow The major publishers like El severe have come out against the creator and I think she may even be in hiding as a result of that because yeah I'm sure they would throw the book at her if they could but she succeeded she really succeeded and this has been around for years and You know, this is a life-changing amazing Contribution to science so there's there's some good stuff out there. There's definitely some good stuff out there To go back to benzodiazepines. I want you were explaining the xenon gas Yeah, and the what is the psycho the what is the psychoactive effect of it like what is it? Do you that would help you get off of benzodiazepines like why would Jordan Peterson use that as a Therapy, oh, I just heard that was one of many things that he was trying. I mean, I think that he was in it as somewhat you know, I think he was you know really really seriously struggling and was trying a lot of different things to see what would stick and What xenon does when you inhale it is you? exit reality and enter a state of pure bliss Sounds pretty good. It's like nitrous oxide if you've ever tried that but nitrous oxide actually has some associated toxicity Kind of unusual toxicity where it Interferes with the metabolism of vitamin B12 none of that is present with xenon so if you inhale Nitrous oxide continuously for a long period of time eventually will actually kill you weapons with it. Yeah Yeah, I'm when I was a kid. I worked at Newport Creamery. It was a ice cream place and We had tanks of nitrous oxide to the use for whipped cream. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah dudes that I worked with would do whippets Get blasted. It's fun It's a beneficial effects of xenon inhalation on behavioral changes in a val proic is that right? Yep Val proic acid induced model of autism and rats whoa Whoa behavioral Modulatory effects of xenon are probably related to its generalized action on Accinatory excitatory excitatory inhibitory balance within the central nervous system our data suggests that sub anesthesia short-term exposure is xenon Have beneficial effect on several behavioral modalities and deserves further investigation So yeah, I'm not making any kind of medical claims about xenon being you know the cure for benzodiazepine addiction I want to be very clear about that. I actually just made it a documentary for my new season about xenon I think it's really interesting because this is you know another one of these things that I don't think can ever be regulated It's an every breath that we take it shows the pervasiveness of these psychoactive drugs You can talk about drugs as if they're over there or the thing we've got to get rid of there will always be drugs No matter what we do we can arrest everyone associated with Purdue. We can do whatever we want This is just part of our environment. I mean nitrous oxide. I didn't even know this until I started working on this piece I always assumed that nitrous oxide was a purely synthetic chemical And I always thought it was weird that Nitrous oxide interacts with B12 just seemed random to me But it's one of these things you read in a textbook and you just think all right nitrous oxide interferes of B12 metabolism Fine, that's a thing that happens and then I started thinking like but wait a second Why why would nitrous oxide of all things not oxygen not hydroxide not some other Oxidizing agent that would potentially be stronger and be but why nitrous oxide why would that interact with vitamin B12? And then I realized that both nitrous oxide and B12 are Produced by bacteria and that there's probably ancient bacterial Interactions and this has been researched a little bit as well that these might be part of ancient bacterial signaling cascades that you can use Nitrous oxide as a sort of biocide to shift a bacterium to a B12 Independent metabolic root and compete with other bacteria and that the majority of the nitrous oxide in our atmosphere isn't from human activity It's from bacteria So like all these things are constantly happening around us and when we have some kind of weird toxic reaction to a drug That might be some recapitulation of an ancient interaction that evolved in bacteria. Whoa. Yeah Now why did to go back to Jordan Peterson and his withdrawal because this is fascinating to me Why did he have to go to Russia? I don't understand that like he's saying that there was the only place that we could do a medical Rehabilitation or detoxification. Well, I mean again, I think that like using Jordan Peterson as an example of like a typical benzodiazepine Dependent person is is probably not the right way to think about it because you know I don't know what social factors he was facing as well like the last thing you want if you're So the withdrawal is going to increase anxiety The last thing you want is to be in a clinic surrounded by people that know who you are They're like oh your Jordan Peterson you're that all right Men's activist guy how dare you how dare you sir? You know or whatever you know, maybe he just wanted to get away from people that had opinions about his work Maybe he felt accused drowning in an abundance of this representation. Yeah I mean if I were him I would not want to be in LA at a detox center I would want to get as far away as possible. Right where TMZ could find you. Yeah. That's a good point. That's a good point Is there anything that does what benzodiazepine does but does it in a safer way or a less addictive way? Like anything that alleviates anxiety that doesn't come with this sort of slingshot effect Yeah, yeah, there are OB somewhat hesitant to make any sort of recommendations But there are other you know these drugs like pre-gabalin and gabapentin that also exert some kind of mild Enxialidic effect that some people consider less habituating then benzodiazepines it seems that they are in fact Better tolerated, but it's not the same. You know, it's like it's saying oh you could use cannabis But cannabis isn't the same now I beguene has some sort of a corrective effect on On addiction right yes, that a good way to describe it does for some people. Yeah some people Would that be effective and the withdrawal of benzodiazepine? I don't think that it would be effective Specifically for the GABAergic mechanism of benzodiazepine withdrawal But I think that it may be psychologically effective because that's a big component of Aboga and I began actually for the first time went to an aboga ceremony in Gabbon in December of 2019 and it was Incredible it was amazing it was one of the most amazing experiences of my entire life And I know and I felt like I fully Not fully not even close to fully, but I began to understand aboga in a way that I certainly didn't when I last spoke to you and a Big part of the ceremonies. You know we again we often talk about these things in a pharmacologically Reductionist terms, which is fine. I do it myself all the time, but a big part of the ceremony is fasting sleep deprivation various feats of endurance dancing for 12 straight hours continuous extremely loud music continuous socializing and So if you're somebody that Is struggling with an addiction of some kind suddenly you're surrounded by people who are watching you all the time Right, they have a sort of recessed period like almost like I hate to call it a dungeon But had a dungeon like character Where the people who are struggling with addiction all they side by side and There's it's like laying down and withdrawing in the middle of the loudest imaginable Party on one hand sounds kind of horrible But they're also surrounded by a support of community that genuinely cares about them and they're giving them aboga To enestitize them because aboga is also like ketamine and like xenon and NMDA antagonist at very high doses It produces a pseudo anesthetic effect and they even at very high doses will prick Thank you with a thorn to make sure you're still responsive and if you don't respond to the prick Then they realize that you've had enough and it's time to let you come down a little bit So they put you into this state you don't eat any food all of the water that you drink is a boge T So every sip of water has I began in it your body is inundated with I began with no food for five straight days Jesus So five straight days of dancing drum playing very little sleep Children are doing it children babies are doing it babies. The elderly are doing it the whole community does it it's the most amazing celebration you could possibly imagine and Again, I'm not gonna make any claims about the safety of this because I don't know But I certainly met several people who had been doing it since they were an infant who were college students who were doing completely fine who seemed socially functional and Happy to be there and What I learned about a boge I think a big part of it It's like you're familiar with breatharianism. Do you know this idea? Yeah, this is people think they can live off of just breathing air. Yeah This is widely mocked pseudo-scientific idea that if you're spiritually enlightened enough You don't need food nutrients or water you just extract it from the ether and enrich yourself with the power of the Prana or whatever And it's very easy to make fun of something like that because of course you need food of course you need food But I think whenever there's something like that that seems really stupid superficially. It's useful to think like Psychologically why would somebody do that? Why would anyone subject themselves to a period? Days of fasting and this delusional idea that they don't need food people have died this way Why would they do this because it's a tremendously empowering idea that everything that you need is within you that you don't need anything else that you can harvest vast sources of energy inside yourself and use that to sustain your every action and People are drawn to that concept even though it's completely fraudulent and in the aboga ceremony There is a component of that where you strip everything away Everything that you don't need water. You don't need to pee. You don't need food You don't need sleep You just keep going because everything that you need is within you and it emphasizes self-reliance and strength in a way that I think is tremendously beneficial for all people that have any kind of Dependence not just opioids not just any it doesn't matter It's not about a pharmacological class. It's about this substance that teaches you a lesson through also this culture Context that you have everything that you need within yourself Wow, so during these five days. Does it vary at all? I mean do you ever get sleep? Do you eat any you don't eat any food five days? They did not eat any food and then did you eat any food? I did yeah I didn't go all the way with it because I you know, it's amazing. I've never really fasted I I did just at the very end and even that was amazing It's like you know getting a second wind when you're running where you go through a period where you think of this is insane I can't I'm gonna die. I can't do this and then you keep going and suddenly There's this tremendous exhilaration and realizing that you're not going to die and that in fact There are additional reserves within you and that you can keep going and keep going and I think that by tapping into that Ceremonially people leave this with a sense of strength that empowers them and allows them to live life without The dependences that they had previously so how many days did you do it for? I did Low doses every night and then on the final night. I did what was probably a medium dose and it was utterly extraordinary What did you get out of it? I? Would say and it's pharmacologically and chemically quite different from other psychedelics I would say that it was the most logical I have ever felt in my entire life I truly felt that I was seeing myself like an outside observer without any kind of emotional Attachments and I could Understand the way that I had distorted various things and I could understand frameworks of Justifications and delusions in such a way as to Understand my own behavior forgive myself for it and correct it in the future and in the wake of that experience I did make changes to my life and I do feel better as a result of it Why does it help people with addictions? What's going on because there's there's an actual change in the way the brain interfaces with Whatever compound you're addicted to right? Yeah, there's a lot of proposed mechanisms kind of the the prevailing Concept is that you have a subtype of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor called the alpha three beta four acetylcholine receptor that it acts as an antagonist At and this is a pharmacology that's shared by some other Antidictive medications like well butrin so there's an idea that simply by binding to that receptor It is exerting a pharmacological anti-addictive effect. That's one hypothesis then there's an idea that it's working via release of neurotrophic factors Like BDNF and GDNF which is gliled or I have to neurotrophic factor Then there's an idea that is working by the NMDA receptor or that it may be exerting a classical serotonergic effect by the 5H T2A receptor or that it's Metabolite nor I became is exerting an opioid effect that lessons withdrawal There's it has a very complicated Pharmacology and binds to a wide variety of different receptors both of the I begin and it's metabolite nor I begin and so to pinpoint any one a fact is difficult same thing happens with ketamine people argue endlessly about the mechanism of ketamine and I Don't think anyone agrees on a single mechanism. I don't think we know but I can say that what I learned from that ceremony Was that it's not about opioids. It doesn't matter. It's about these compulsions that almost every person has and it's sort of like when people talk about drugs is if drugs are just one thing It's like we create these artificial boundaries where Oxycodone is a drug but Instagram isn't a drug air conditioning isn't a drug Having compulsive sex with people isn't a drug Gambling isn't a drug right, but they're all at least neurologically. They're probably operating on similar circuits They're all compulsions of one kind. They're all drives to lessen suffering and increase comfort in one way or another And we gear our life to reduce suffering and the only way that we can live a healthy life is to develop a mature attitude towards suffering and to find benefit in it. I mean I think that's even there's a lot of Christian iconography in these ceremonies even though this is in central West Africa and Part of me thinks like why do you want the like colonists imagery in your beautiful tradition? Why do I have to bow down to Christ as a part of this? But then I realized that for many cultures like the words of the Bible aren't Important what's important is that the image of Christ symbolizes Divinity in suffering that there is strength in suffering and that you can See that image and find strength in your own suffering and that out of that suffering You get wisdom and growth. Yeah That's a good way to end this bitch Dude, you you really need to keep doing this. Please don't just become a chemist You're so good at this. You show good at explaining these things and I think you're your Perspective is so valuable Please don't stop. I'll keep doing I have a podcast you can be free on dot com Such handle tomorrow and you never gonna stop that I'll do it. Yeah, it's mostly chemistry oriented But you can listen to that and I'm also publishing this book as well You need to do more of this if I need to have you on once every now and again or whenever to keep letting people understand I love talking to you. I'd love to come back. I love talking to you too Yeah, do more often that okay. All right. Thank you very much. I really appreciate it Matt Hamilton Marce