I've been working on this series for National Geographic. So I've been traveling around the world, searching for these people that do incredible feats that they've passed down through generations. And I'm trying to learn, but it's a fast learning curve. So it is the most dangerous thing that I've ever done in my life, but I have the best of the best helping. So that says a lot. Because you've done it. By far! You know what I think? Yes! Whoa. Well, you showed me some things off-camera that we can't talk about, but- Well, you can talk about it. I just can't show it, but- Okay. Well, so the scary thing was like three days ago. The Cobra? A King Cobra. Yeah. In the wild. Yeah. What is- Is there a trick to that? Is there a movement thing? Do you move slowly? So you don't- I studied for weeks and just tried to understand their behavior and worked with different cobras and was- I had a team around me that taught me how to move quickly and get out of the way. What happens if you get bit? Well, they've enough venom to kill full-grown elephant in 30 minutes. So- Is that anti venom? We had that there, but- But still. In my case, I don't trust that. And even if you get anti venom, it's still a rough ride. Yeah. You live, right? Yeah. But it was amazing. It was incredible. Is this similar to rattlesnake venom? Because rattlesnake venom essentially- So, yeah, I mean it- Digest your body. Well, this one shuts everything down. So your heart, your lungs, everything just start to- So were they like, ready on standby with a needle? Well, they don't- They put it in a serum. You have to go to a hospital. Oh, we had it in a hospital. Yeah. Sort of have to travel. But we had an ambulance right there and how far is the hospital? It was 20 minutes away. Oh, God. So 20 times in. Oh, God. So 20 minutes of King Cobra venom. It was the scariest and most intense thing I've ever done. Yeah. How many of these guys died doing this? Well, the snake, the two snakes we had, one of them killed its previous owner. Oh, boy. Yeah. And then it killed the snake after it killed the previous owner. Oh, no. This guy died, so. Exactly. Right. That's right. Oh, boy. Yeah, it's- But it is kind of incredible. Because there's another guy named Chris Sweet, who, well, that's his Instagram name. But he lives in Thailand with 90 venomous snakes. And he just lets them move through his legs through it. He's, well, he was bitten twice on my birthday and his heart stopped two times. But he lets him just- While you were there? No. No, no, no. On April 4th, I mean, oh, OK. Yeah. But he, but he's so calm with them. And he studies their behavior and he watches how they move. And then he gently takes him out. And there was one, we were outside. And the scariest thing wasn't trying to kiss it. Yeah. Oh, my God. You're not. Yeah. And I think that's a snake called a spire. Yeah. So that's one that was slithering through my legs. And you have to keep your heart rate down. Because if they sense, they have pheromones. They detect if you're nervous or uncomfortable. So anytime I would get like super tense, I would have to walk away carefully. Oh, boy. Yeah, that's him. And that's, yep, that's a snake called a spire. It has, you're so good at finding everything. Wow. Oh, my God. It's trying to bite you through the glass. Why is it trying to bite you through the glass, but won't try to bite you when you're right there? Well, there it's feeding. Oh, when it smells snake or food, it becomes aggressive. So you have to make sure you don't smell like any other snakes or anything or food. We'll catch food. They eat snakes, the kinkobras. They eat other snakes. Yeah. Not kinkobras, but other snakes. Other snakes. Yeah. Dude. Bang. Do you ever second guess when you're about to do something? That one I second guessed. I left and then came back a few months later and did it again. I wouldn't go, I was too afraid to go near it. What made you go back? I went to Cleveland and I trained with my friend Mike and my other friend, Chris Gillette, who's Gatorboy Chris, who's amazing. And we slowly started to understand just a little bit of the behavior of kinkobras. And then I went back to Indonesian train with Fitz, who's unbelievable with how he handles the cobras. And slowly I felt OK. But there was days I wouldn't even do anything. So luckily I had a week, which is still a really fast learning curve. Yeah. Normally I would train for something for a year. But with this show, I get like a few days. And then I have to try to do it. Oh boy. So what strategies you're using to keep your heart rate low? Like, if you feel yourself freaking out, how do you calm yourself down? I get out. Just get out. Yeah. Just get out and regroup. Yeah. Yeah. Take it, then. But that's the last dangerous thing I'm going to do like that. That's it. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Like that. Yeah. Well, I'm glad you're alive. And I feel like in my show of Vegas, I was jumping from the height of a nine story building, landing in boxes. And I dislocated my shoulder. It came down to my arm pit. But in retrospect, I think I was lucky, because I could have been really bad. It could have been the neck. It could have been something else. Oh yeah. So did you get surgery? No, I didn't get the surgery. Well, they did. There was an orthopedic surgeons convention in Vegas at that time. So I had five orthopedic surgeons in the audience. And one was a shoulder specialist. And they all came on stage. And he popped it right back in. So then I walked out to do the show. Joe. But my arm was all numb. It stayed numb for like two months. But I was going like this to get like to see if I could get feeling back. And it fell back out. So I think I'm back on stage. They popped it back in. And then I did the whole show with one arm. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, that's a bad one. I think that's all I got injured. Yeah. And my friend Doug, who's with the hat right there, when I jumped, he knew that something was going to go wrong. He bent over and took a heavy breath, because he knew that was the one. There's a gentleman named Yuri Projoska. He was the UFC Light Heavyweight Champion. And his shoulder dislocated during training. And his trainers tried to pop it back into place. And they were yanking on it. And they just destroyed his shoulder. They tore everything apart, just kind of pulling on it. And it ripped apart. The UFC doctor says the worst shoulder injury he'd ever seen. That's crazy. And he's fighting again next weekend. Got it repaired. He got surgery. Yep, got surgery. Vacated his title. And now he's back fighting for the title next weekend. And mine is still messed up. Really? Yeah. Like him away. Well, I can't really work out or do anything to say. How long ago? Maybe March. Did you get an MRI? Oh, many MRIs. What's the damage? No, it was really bad. It was in the ligand. It was bad. It came down to here. Right. Why didn't they do surgery? I'm like afraid of surgery, I have to say. Like horrified of it. Why are you afraid of surgery? I don't know. It's not afraid of King Hobresby. Yeah, it's crazy. But I'm horrified in surgery. Why? I don't know.