Go, Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe, Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. No worries, how's it going, Joe? Pleasure to meet you. Yeah, thank you for having me here today. I appreciate it. My pleasure. Well, as soon as I saw the subject, I was like, oh, yeah. Like, what are you doing? Right, right. Advanced power and propulsion. Kind of a bit of passion of mine for the last 20 some odd years. I suppose if I kind of look back through the annals of my life, right, I've been thinking about advanced power and propulsion ever since I was a teenager. What do you think inspired that? Was it space missions? Was it, did you look at it and go, I think we can do better? Like, what was it? Well, you know, I grew up in Washington, DC. And so I got a chance to spend a lot of time in the air and space Smithsonian. I don't know if you've ever had a chance to go to that. But to grow it up in DC, getting a chance to go to the air and space Smithsonian, I got to see all these awesome examples of people working together to try and accomplish amazing things. Right. And you know, you might walk into the air and space Smithsonian. You just think about, wow, this is full of a bunch of stuff. But it's not just about the stuff. It's about the people that worked together to do all these amazing things. Like the Bell X1 rocket. I mean, if you really want to go back the right flyer, that's something where two guys work together that made bicycles for a living, that decided to go create something that flew. And then in less than 50, you know, 50, 60 years from when they flew that right fire, we're putting human beings on the surface of the moon. And so all that really resonated with me as a kid. And I think tended to make me gravitate towards a technical field although it wasn't a straight line, right? I'd like to say, you know, I knew it at early age. What my calling was and what I was going to do. But I bounced around for a little bit until I finally got on a path that I really connected with. And so I think I knew very early on in my journey in university when I was going to get my degree that I wanted to work in advanced power and propulsion. And so at that point, everything I did kind of worked towards, how do I get the skills? How do I get the math and physics training that helps me kind of work in this domain? Because I was thinking about the idea of space war it's very early on. It's amazing that you were so focused so early. What a great head start, you know? It's a huge advantage to know what you really interested in at such an early age. Well, there were a few speed bumps along the way. We took a few detours like any human, right? You're like, I don't know if I want to do this yet, right? So it is pretty extraordinary if you look at that number that you said, like from Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright to space travel. Like how quick that is. I mean, and we think about in terms of ancient history how long it took us to get to this point and that kind of acceleration so rapidly inside of a lifetime to see just world changing events and the internet all happening simultaneously, right? Absolutely, absolutely. You know, there's another interesting story, right? So my background is I've got a PhD in physics at a masters in mechanical engineering so I both a scientist and an and an engineer. So I have, you know, deep appreciation for both disciplines. But within the discipline of science, right? You know, we just talked about the right flyer and then going to the surface of the moon and that's more of a kind of an engineering story on the topic of science. You know, think about equals MC squared. You probably heard that or saw it on a coffee cup. I don't really honestly know what it means. It's a theory of relativity. It's theory of relativity. I could say it to people like, come on, man. But it was MC squared. Yeah, exactly. Whatever. What is the theory of relativity? So equals MC squared, right, is an equation that relates energy to mass. If you were to take some modest piece of mass, say you've got some tidbits here, the mass that's in this pen right here. You take the mass that's in this pen and you convert it to energy. That equation helps you understand exactly how much energy you can potentially release. And so that equation, why it might sound very humble, right? Oh, equals MC squared. That's cool. But it had super big implications. And you just talked about how quickly things moved. So let's talk about that for just a second. Equals MC squared, Einstein comes up with this equation, 1911. Somebody will look it up on the internet and correct me if I'm wrong. Comes up with the equation in 1911. They split the first atom in 1928, 1932 time frame. I can't remember the exact time frame. In 1942, we had the first nuclear reactor underneath the squash court at University of Chicago. They did things very differently in the 1940s, Joe. Under a squash star. Yeah, right. Did they let the people play in squash? No, who knows, right? What happened to them? Are they X-Men now? No, right, exactly. That's the origin story. That's a spider-man origin story, right? Yeah. That's where Phoenix came from. Yeah, yeah, your friends tell you. I can hear the color blue now, right? So anyway, the first nuclear reactor underneath the squash court in 1942 and then the Trinity test. That's the atomic bomb test in 1945. And so in the span of just a few decades, we go from a cute coffee cup worthy equation to a paradigm shift in human existence. And that's without computers in the way we think of it. That's without machine learning and without AI. And so as we continue to move forward, right, we've got, if you think about everything we know in physics today, general relativity and quantum mechanics are kind of the two bookends of everything that we know, we're going to continue to expand our knowledge. And we will come up with new E equals MC squared kind of equations. But now we're equipped with computers. We're equipped with machine learning AI. And so it's going to be exponential growth, right? So it'll be interesting to see how quickly we go from, hey, I have this new insight. Found this funny thing in a lab to wow, it changes everything. How we do everything as a culture and community, right? So there's several problems with the current propulsion systems, right? And the big one is like biological entities being able to absorb G force. No matter if you're super hyper-engineer or something and haven't really crazy, but the things that we're seeing in the sky, the things that people describe, like Commander David Freaver, when he described that tick-tack, that vehicle, that thing, whatever it was that went from above 50,000 feet to sea level in a second and shot off at its same rate speeds. Biological entities can't survive that kind of G force, we think. Yeah, so I think in terms of a human ability to take Gs, I should take human, not like, tardigrades could. Right, right. Yeah, so a human being can, well, trained human beings can take potentially up to nine Gs. Have you ever done that before? I have not. I did it once with the Blue Angels. I got to seven and a half Gs. It was bananas. That's awesome. You have to force. I bet that was an experience. Oh, I am so jealous. Mad respect for those guys. Mad respect for those guys. First of all, the biggest thing when you go to that area, like these guys are jacked. They're in, like, insane shape because you're literally forcing blood into your brain to tolerate the G force. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So they have to hold onto their stick. They're, you know, the joystick and they're going, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, whoop, while they're flying, you know, through the canons, it's bananas, like extraordinary. So imagine a person being able to tolerate that on a regular basis and perform fine motor skill functions, like, you know, pointing and aiming and shooting and all the crazy stuff that those guys are capable of doing. Being able to think, and in some cases, if they're in combat, being able to make critical decisions. You know, in some ways what you're talking about, when you look at NASA's astronaut core, right, as part of their regimen, they have to go up in T38s on a regular basis to try and help, help train with the whole, how do you make decisions, right, when your life is on the line, and the time is finite, right? So there's a whole aspect of this. It's kind of geared towards keeping those portions of the brain trained in sharp, right? Which is the best argument for AI taking over. So when you hear about stories, about these fighter pilots, finding these objects in the sky that exhibit extraordinary capabilities and don't have all the signatures of traditional propulsion systems, what is your thoughts? Generally, I tend to be agnostic to the topic. I have a lot of friends that are extremely interested in a lot of things that are out and about in the media and in the literature. But generally, I tend to be agnostic. And here's why. In everything that's currently out that people talk about and highlight, it's difficult for me to take the data and the evidence and then pull that into the work that we do in the lab with some of the different test devices we work with as we kind of explore the frontiers of where physics and propulsion might intersect. It's hard to take that and turn that into some kind of action plan if you were home. So I'm certainly aware, like David Freaver, the experience that he had with, I think he calls him TikToks, right? An amazing account and there's multiple people that saw it, multiple platforms that saw it. And so to start with, I thought maybe there was a small chance that was just like we have stealth technology, right, where if you want to hide a plane, what if we had the ability to project something through some mechanism where we could make people go where we wanted them to go, right? Because I know there is a technology that uses like two different lasers that triangulate a certain point in open air and they put enough energy into a particular location that they ionize the air and so it creates like a bright pixel. And so they use that to create three-dimensional displays that kind of look like they're just floating out in air. Now they're not quite as big as what we saw described with the Nimitz encounter on the West Coast. So I thought for a little while maybe that might be something that we're seeing. They can project plasma as well, right? It's the same thing. So the two lasers intersect, they ionize the air which creates a plasma and they can do this over long distances as well, right? I don't know about long distances. I know they can do it over short distances. And so for a while there I wondered if that might be something that could explain some of what makes sense, what David Traver and the group saw. The problem would be the radar because I don't know if you wouldn't pick up that on radar, would you? Because it's not a mass, right? So the plasma would certainly absorb a radar signal, right? Because it's going to polarize any electromagnetic wave that tries to go through. So it might. It might. It might. Would it be possible to make something that big, that's 20 feet long out of that? It's hard for me to imagine that. But so I think there's one piece of data that just came out in the last few weeks. I think David Traver's wingman Alex, I think her name is Alex Dietrich. I can't remember the name, but I think you're right. So she came out and so in in all the things associated with that particular encounter, right? One of the things I've been trying to figure out is how do they describe the specular surface of the tiktok, right? Because if it's the these plasma pixels that I'm talking about that kind of creates a volumetric display, I would speculate it might be kind of a glowy looking thing. But I think Alex in her account described as kind of a flat type of like Matt. Yeah. Yeah. So that kind of torpedoed my my my working theory. So but again, while it's amazing and incredible and it's something that people want to go think about and go try and collect more data, it doesn't help me doing what I'm doing in the lab. And so I think I kind of keep, you know, my eyes dart every once a while over to that particular talk. What's that about this interesting? Yeah. I mean, I'm honestly agnostic as well. I bounce back and forth from being really excited about it to feel like I'm being duped all the time. Jamie and I talk about it all the time. I'm back in Jamie's back in and Jamie will find something. I think I'm looking to the article about the late, the Navy lasers that can do this and kind of figure out how big the objects are that they can make move. But they're definitely they're designed to trick heat seeking missiles. So they got to make a heat signature. So they trick the heat, which makes sense, right? Because they're plasma. Yeah. And from tens to hundreds of meters. Where are you at right now? What you a pho's unit you're out? There's I'm still in on something, but I don't know what the object is or what it is. But we both been in consciousness. A thing among that this week or month. Oh, the one where they think they can call the men. Not just that you need consciousness to use it or talk to their maybe maybe. There was some talk of gravity propulsion systems in the 1950s, I believe. There was some work that was being done. And there was some discussion about whether or not it be possible to use nuclear energy to create some sort of a gravity drive. What is your thoughts on that stuff? Well, I think in order to do, so I'm going to use a different parlance. Okay. Okay. And then obviously I have to know what I'm talking about. No, no, it's okay. That's okay. Right. So in in in terms of some of the the language that we use in the literature when we talk about something that would I think trace to what you mean when you say a gravity drive. Right. We might use the parlance space drive. Right. And so conceptually, it would be a form of propulsion that instead of using some form of onboard propellant in a tank. Right. It's found some way to couple to some external field, whatever it might be, and can generate some kind of a propulsive force. And so in my mind, in order for us to ever be able to go down a path where we're trying to create something like that that might look like or smell like that or what have you, we need to have a deeper understanding of gravity. Right. And so, you know, we just talked about equals MC squared and some of the backups just a minute. If you think about everything we know today as of in physics as a Venn diagram, there are two circles on this Venn diagram and they touch at a little tangent point. One of those circles is quantum mechanics that helps us understand how atoms behave, how light moves, and in the other circle, we have the words general relativity. And so that helps us understand how the cosmos evolves, how stars move and galaxies move. And so those two circles touch at a single tangent point. They don't overlap. So what that says is gravity, we don't know how to to connect gravity to quantum mechanics. We don't understand that. But in terms of all of our daily life, just that level of physics helps us every single day. Right. This cell phone is only possible because of quantum mechanics and GPS is only as accurate as it is because we use general relativity to correct the atomic clocks on the GPS satellites. But until we develop a better understanding of how gravity might connect to quantum mechanics or alternately how quantum mechanics might connect to gravity, I don't know that we'll be able to make meaningful progress. Right. And so we need more circles on the Venn diagram. Just those two aren't enough. There are a number of people that would speculate that quantum mechanics is incomplete. General relativity is incomplete. Perhaps it's even emergent. I think you had Hal put off on here yesterday and he talked about a physicist by the name of Sakharov who talked about the fact, I think he was one of the guys at first pioneer of the thought process. Maybe gravity is simply an emergent phenomenon and we'll develop a better understanding as we as we add more circles in and around the quantum mechanics circle, if you will. And so I think in order for us to be able to come up with a widget, some widget that generates a force in the form of a space drive, we're going to have to have more physics in what we currently have. So we'll have to have more of an understanding of what gravity actually is. Yes. And what generates gravity. Yeah. Yeah. And it's not just the gravity thing. It's quantum mechanics. The quantum mechanics might say quantum mechanics is completely incompatible with general relativity. So this is a big issue. Right. This is there are tons of people that spend their entire life trying to figure out how to unravel this mystery. It's a big conundrum. Well, it's so fascinating to me because if you were a scientist in the 1400s and you were having this discussion with those people, they would think you're a wizard. Absolutely. Especially if you held up something like that and get free by phone. I get burned at a state. I'm really sure the screen. Right. I said Jamie pulls something up. Yeah. Pulls something up. Doing what is happening? Is it that you show at the pond that I wall? Right. So imagine, you know, extrapolate magic going in the future and seeing what this all this stuff is going to look like once we gain more and more understanding, which is more more scientists, more researchers piling on their discoveries. And then ultimately one day we'll be looking back on 2025 going look at those barbarians. Oh my gosh. Did you see that? I was with Sunny and Joe where they were talking about what a bunch of maroon. They didn't even know a gravity was like, oh, yeah, it would be like bloodletting. Yeah. Yeah. Really kind of interesting because I bet every current civilization thinks it's at the pinnacle and that, you know, we've, this is, you know, everybody else is a moron and this is where are a seriously advanced society. Right. Right. It, it, age you want has been a long time part of the show and I'm excited to share some big news. The new age you won next gen formula is here. They did a bunch of research and improve their formula to make sure it's the best it can be. The same single scoop once a day, same subtly sweet flavors with those hints of vanilla and pineapple, but now with upgraded probiotics, vitamins and minerals for even more comprehensive formula. Agee one next gen is clinically backed with four human clinical trials and it's shown to fill common nutrient gaps even in healthy eaters. Plus, Agee one's next gen travel packs now common upgraded packaging. They're easier to tear, poor, shake and go. So your daily nutrition is even more seamless wherever life takes you. So subscribe today to try the next gen of age one. If you use my link, you'll also get a free bottle of age one D three K two and age one. Welcome, kid and five of the upgraded age one travel packs with your first subscription. So make sure you check out drink age one dot com slash Joe Rogan to get started with age one's next gen and notice the benefits for yourself. That's drink age one dot com slash Joe Rogan. It's interesting. You know, I get a chance to go do a bunch of discussions with students all over the globe, right? And talking about space exploration, specifically, you know, advanced power and propulsion, right? I really kind of get into this whole difference between two space and and through space. And so it's part of that narrative, right? I always spend a little bit of time telling them, right? We live in a society where everybody likes to pretend like we got all this stuff figured out, right? There's there's nothing left to figure out, right? You know, we got cell phones and internet and airplanes and right all different kinds of stuff. There's there's really nothing left and maintain what we have. Exactly. And so I like to remind them, right? When I talk about well, let's talk about that. What do we know? And then I kind of take them through that little thought process of the Venn diagram, just to say, Hey, look, right? These two models are not compatible. That says there, there's a bigger circle, right? That that connects the dots between all this stuff. And I highly doubt will ever come up with a single, you know, a single step that goes from just the, you know, the two circles on the Venn diagram to a final one, some grand unified theory. I don't think we'll ever take like one single step. I think it's going to be a series of a bunch of different steps by a bunch of different people over many generations. And it's like there's so much stuff to go figure out, come, you know, come help us push back against the darkness, help us, you know, for ever hunting the edge of the map, if you will. And so I think sometimes in today's society, we get lulled into this sense of security that we got it all figured out. I mean, we got AI, it says all kinds of neat, neat helps us out all, you know, all these different things. And so we get lulled into this sense that we've got it all figured out. And there's just, there's so much mystery out there for us to go figure out. Also, there's a lot of people that are full of shit that are muddying up the water. It's very difficult to know what is exactly true at any current moment. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, just in the UAP world, there's a ton of grifters, there's a ton of people that are just putting sensational nonsense out to get a bunch of clicks. And in some ways, I, you know, when, again, when I talk to students and I kind of give them suggestions and advice and mentoring, it's like if you've got some particular area that you're interested in and it's highly technical, you know, go do the work that's necessary to give yourself the, you know, the math skills, the engineering skills, the science, whatever you need, make sure you're equipped. Right. So that you can, whatever is in front of you, you can go look at it with a discerning eye. Right. Because like you said, the, the internet's changed the world for both the better and the worse. Right. The signal to noise ratio has changed a lot. There's a lot of noise out there. And so the, the best thing you can do to try and cope with something like that is just to make sure you're trained. Right. And you're capable of being able to discern something that's real versus something that's nonsense. So what is real in terms of at least conceptually? What is real about warp drives? You know, the great question, the, when we talk about space exploration, right, a lot of times, people think of like a Falcon 9 rocket, Saturn 5 or a space shuttle. And these are, these are all wonderful examples that should come to mind. But this, this is, this is what we need to get to space. Right. You got to climb against gravitational well, if you will and get into space. But when you, when you get into space and you want to try and move through space, right, you, the things that you might use to solve that problem in an optimal sense might look very differently from the idea of rockets to get you to space. And so through space is a lot of things that we can bring to bear. But this, this gets into, I think, a larger framework I'd like to unpack with you today to talk about this, this through space type of thought process. But since you specifically asked about warp, I'm going to jump forward, I'm going to jump forward on the, the discussion thread. We don't have to use it as a teaser. Okay. Well, let's, let's use that as a teaser. Let's, let's back up then. Okay. And so like, you know, I provided a, a video that we pulled together called Go Incredibly Fast. I did it with a Swedish digital artist, Eric Hornequist, he's done a bunch of wonderful videos for NASA and a bunch of other friends. But this, this video, kind of encapsulates the challenge of time and distance in space. Right. If you want to send human beings past Mars and the solar system, that sets up a problem statement. Right. That changes the nature of the types of technologies that you might think about bringing to bear to solve the problem. And so this video tells us what's, what are some things that we can do to solve this problem, spanning from things that we kind of know to things that we kind of don't know in terms of both physics and engineering. And so this video is kind of a, an emotional encapsulation of a highly technical stories. Let's watch this would be a great way to kind of tee off this discussion. The sky calls to us. We do not destroy ourselves. We're one day venture to the stars, Carl Sake. As incredible as it may seem, there will be a time and it may be closer than you think when we live on other worlds. The moon, Mars and in the space between. And when that day comes, just as always, our children will look with curiosity across these new horizons with a desire to go further and to explore what lies beyond. But beyond Mars, the distances between worlds grow immensely, even within our own solar system and become truly vast in between stars. If we ever want to reach out across these distances, we need to learn how to go fast. Nuclear electric propulsion. Here we go. Yeah, so this is what we know using our current knowledge of physics and engineering. We could build nuclear locomotives to take humans to all the worlds in our solar system. But a Starship powered with the nuclear heart aimed for even our closest star, Proxima Centauri, would have to harbor hundreds of generations of people all living their entire lives aboard before reaching its destination for and a quarter light years away. It would take two years just to reach the orbit of Saturn and another 2,000 years to reach Proxima Centauri. We need to be able to go faster fusion propulsion. We should re-record this with you doing that creature of engineering knowledge of physics. But with engineering we have yet to develop. We can imagine a propulsion system with a sun for a heart, a fusion engine that could accelerate a Starship up to 5% of the speed of light. This ship could cross the orbit of Saturn in 6 months and reach Proxima Centauri in just over a century. But if we want to traverse in our solar distances in less than a human lifetime, we have to go incredibly fast. The universe has shown us that this can be done by altering the scale of space itself and we are working to develop new understandings of physics to learn how this might be controlled. If we could construct a Starship with a propulsion system that decreases space in front of it and expands space behind it, this ship could cross enormous distances effectively faster than the speed of light. Such a ship would reach from Mars to Saturn in just a matter of minutes and be able to reach Proxima Centauri in less than 6 months. Whoa! From there, there are no limits to where we could go. Perhaps one day humanity will look up at an alien night sky and strain to find the pale yellow dot that is our sun, our home, and no for the first time as we look back on ourselves that we are not alone in the universe. our home and know for the first time as we look back on ourselves that we are not alone in the universe This journey starts today Whoa First of all whoever did the graphics. Thank you Yeah, Eric Wornquist was the the sweetest little digital artist that we used to develop that that video And so I got nailed it. Oh my gosh. Yeah, yeah, we had we had a like a three swimmer Lane chart if you will. It's a very technical version of this we we have a copy of it We don't we don't need to bring it up Jamie. I can just do it verbally here But it kind of encapsulates that thought process of this time distance problem You know when we think about space experts and with humans we think about Mars right? We're trying to we sent human beings to the moon We're probably going to go back to the moon sooner rather than later and then eventually we want to send human beings To Mars but what if we wanted to send human beings to Saturn and we want to get them there in 200 days These are that's a time frame that's kind of compatible with what we thought about for humans to Mars 180 to 220 days if you frame the question that way the amount of energy that's necessary to get humans To Saturn in 200 days is an order of magnitude more energy than it takes to get a payload From the surface of the earth to lower earth orbit so all that say right that particular problem Chemical propulsion can't solve that problem and so this is this is started to kind of frame the discussion That this narrative that we've pulled together when we talk to students all around the globe the difference between two space and the Response of through space when you talk about through space the distances are just so big Right you have to rethink the problem especially when you constrain it with how long does it take to get there right and so This particular video encapsulates things that we might do To solve problems like that and maybe even into another star system talking about Things that we know like the very first part of the video the vignette was like you said nuclear electric Propel I can't do your voice Nuclear electric propulsion right and so this is a situation where it's known physics known engineering We've got a nuclear reactor That's fissioning uranium. Let's say it's splitting apart atoms And that's the source of energy you use that energy to plug into some form of Electric propulsion like you got the neon sign that's behind you imagine You could take one of those tubes and cut the end off and allow the blue the blue or green glow a bit to come out the back Right and so the efficiency of electric propulsion versus chemical propulsion is much better and so that's a way We can potentially think of a spacecraft architecture nuclear electric propulsion a nuclear reactor Coupled to some form of electric propulsion that allows us to send human beings to Saturn in 200 days and technically speaking that Capability if we didn't invent anything else beyond that that would allow us to send human beings everywhere in the solar system That's why that's extremely important and now we're getting into the the passion of what I fought so fought for So hard working at NASA to try and advocate for this understanding of the big difference between These two types of problems if you will if we you know if we make up our minds To perfect the idea of nuclear electric propulsion as a capability. I mean that unlocks the whole solar system I mean that's just kind of like that just the tip of the iceberg and so the video then goes on after we you know after we kind of say you know nuclear electric propulsion Can open up a lot of stuff for us But it's still going to take you remember how long it said to go to Proxmas centauries like you know hundred years That two thousand years for the new that's right. So I mean I don't know about you But that better be one comfortable window seat right that's a long time to be on a flight if you will now Yeah, how screwed up. Yeah, right that live right because you're in breeding. Yeah, well It's yes good. Definitely it's gonna be generations, right? So either you generations you're gonna have to have babies and With who yeah, right how you gonna do that? How you gonna choose? We're gonna have arranged marriages in the spaces right? Progress right right, you know, right? Right? Force people to carry child children. Yeah, or it had door they might be frozen like Was it what's that movie? With the blue aliens I can't remember right imagine if they're debating the woman's right to choose while they're in space Oh, you know what I'm saying? Oh my gosh right gets weird. Yeah. Yeah, so We need to keep someone good if you all commit but I didn't commit my grandparents did but you're still on this thing It's like yeah my my great great great great great great great grandparents Right right this episode is brought to you by visible now. You know I tend to go down a lot of rabbit holes I want to know everything about everything and if you're like that You need wireless that can keep up visible is wireless that lets you live in the know It's the ultimate wireless hack you get unlimited data and hotspot So you're connected on the go plus visible is powered by Verizon's 5G network meaning fast speeds and great coverage and With the new visible plus pro plan you get premium wireless without the premium cost and the best part It's all digital no stores. You can switch to visible right from your phone It only takes about 15 minutes and then you manage your plan in the app ready for wireless that Let's you live in the know Make the switch at visible.com Slash Rogan plan started 25 dollars a month for the best features get the new visible plus pro plan for $45 a month term supply see visible calm for plan features and network management details Not only that the reality is by the time they get there The human beings will create a technology that far exceeds that and probably beat them to it Yeah, you kind of see that hinted in the video too, right? Where you got the you got the slow boat and then you got the fusions the next one that comes by on the guys like you know Waving as it goes by Well for sure you would be a sucker to get on the first ship because by the time it gets there The new ships will have already been there for months. Yeah They'll welcome you when you arrive right the grandchildren of this people walk So the the fusion propulsion is kind of the next step in the story and so when we make that step We're a little bit into the unknown right we we understand the we understand the physics right the sign at the center of our solar system works on fusing it Fuses atoms together instead of splitting them apart to generate electricity and so fusing propulsion is kind of another step in capability Right that allows us to do Maybe do an interstellar mission that's measured in a hundred Maybe 200 years still kind of long, but that's a lot more respectable than 2000 years, but Contrary to what the movie Iron Man might say We don't have fusion reactors that are gigawatts the size of this coffee cup, right? So in your chest. Yeah. Yeah We get we got a we got a little work to do Before we get there Probably in the 50s right right so when you think about this kind of progress this ability to Generate that amount of power and to bend gravity and to bend space What kind of a timeline do you think we're on for something like that? That's actually one of the most popular questions I get when I go talk to the students right whenever you you talk about that that last Swim lane in the video the idea of a space warp You know you can expand it contract space and that allows us to potentially go somewhere in months Whereas we were just previously talking about millennia and centuries, right? So just to remind folks we just talked about Everything that we know of physics today quantum mechanics general relativity right we got to add some more stuff to the vin diagram to develop an understanding And so my crystal ball is no better than yours Joe I couldn't say specifically If when something like that might happen, but I can say I actually do know What we need to be working on right now Right and so in that context right? I'm certainly doing the things that that I think might help make meaningful progress towards that type of operative goal at some point time But you know, I just don't know how long it might take and so let me let me kind of give a Experience that I had what site I taught at International Space University Over in Strasburg in France and they have they have a cathedral there in Strasburg absolutely stunning But the thing that's even more interesting about this structure. It's like 500 feet tall They started building it in 1100 AD and they didn't finish the cathedral until 1700 so the the people that built the basement Had no hope of seeing the finished product all they could do is imagine in their minds I what it might look like and they but they knew what they needed to do to kind of make meaningful progress And so they did their work and then they hand the baton off to the next generation. Maybe they're putting the floor in and Then another generation does the buttresses and so forth. So from that standpoint, I think sometimes it's important to you know, we talk about teamwork right teamwork is a great thing But teamwork we typically think of shoulder to shoulder right, but I think there's also value in teamwork across generations If you will right in a day in an age where you get impatient if you text somebody and they don't text you back and like 30 seconds, I think we've lost an Appreciation for the value of what that means right in terms of working over stuff longer than what your horizon might be I'd love to see the idea of a space warp You know before I I go to the next chapter But I don't know that that will happen for sure But I do know specifically what I need to be doing and so from that standpoint That's how I kind of that's how I grapple with that particular question because what I mean It's a wonderful question And I would love to be able to tell you a very concise answer that would fit with what I would hope it would be But I don't know for certain but I do know what I need to be doing next and that gets into Maybe we can unpack that in just a little bit that gets into the idea of how the idea of a space warp works and how that traces back to Those two circles on the bend I am Yeah, so maybe what we can do Jamie I sent you there's a there's a slide that's got like a cartoon space warp would looks like a little sheet of A mesh or something like that. I don't know how to explain if you could pull up Yes, that's the one that's the one so we actually did that graphic on the right for nature The journal nature they were doing an article on the 50th anniversary Star Trek and so they asked us to Pull together that graphic and so this is this is a an illustration of the idea of a space warp. Let me give just a little bit of background You know in in in physics There is a speed limit that we have to acknowledge when we talk about trying to go somewhere really quickly Right and so I like to call it the 11th commandment of physics now shouting not exceed the speed of light Right, it's kind of a hard and fast speed limit and so if you talk about trying to get to another star that's four and a quarter Light years away that might that should automatically set in your mind well, see we can't get in there And can't get there any quicker than four and a quarter light years right well There is a little bit of hope because there's a loophole in general relativity that establishes that hard speed limit General activity says we can expand and contract space at any speed and we see evidence For this when we look at the nature of the cosmos right right after the big bang 14 billion years ago There was something called an inflationary phase right where if you were to pick two random points in this Expanding bubble of the early cosmos you stood on one point and you looked at another point and figured out how fast it was moving away from you It would move away from you like 10 to the 30th you know 10 with 30 zeros times the speed of life So yeah, we're really really fast right and so we know from astrophysics and cosmology that this is possible and so This idea was kind of rattling around in a physicist brain called a kubir who said hey Well, you know this is interesting nature can do it on a grand scale. Can we potentially do it? on a purposeful in a purposeful way and so he published a paper in 1994 that kind of encapsulated the mathematics for this idea and if you if you take his mathematics and you put it in a physical form It's gonna look like my little cartoon here on the right and so you got the the little ring that goes around the little surface It looks like a wave and then there's a little central portion there kind of looks like a football let's say and so what happens is That ring that goes around that little football that's what would that's what's necessary to make the trick work and so it has to be filled with something called Exotic matter and so that's an important issue right the what's exotic matter right so it's it's something in general activity That's also equivalent to negative mass and so we all understand positive mass Right if your little brother hits you on the head with something that's positive mass hitting your head Right negative mass is not only zero mass but it's a negative value and so what does that even mean and so In the context of general activity if we come up with a model that requires exotic matter We have to highlight that as a problem because we don't in general activity General TV doesn't tell us how to make that and so that could potentially be an obstacle that would prevent something like this from ever being Physically real but if we could figure out how to make it and I'll actually speak to that in just a second if we could make that and we could Create a ring that could manifest that exotic matter It would cause space time to respond in such a way so that it would expand and contract to allow you to go to Proxima Centauri in five and a half months as measured by you on board the spacecraft in that football and as measured by Folks over in mission control over in Houston Now this exotic matter what do you speculate that would? What would that be? So exotic matter and this the cool thing is These are the equations so they'll be a test later Joe. So I'm ready so In know Kubie Ers paper in 1994 right he rightly highlights the fact that hey there's a problem danger Will Robinson this stuff requires exotic matter that may mean it's Non-physical however he highlights the fact Hey, we have this other circle over here called quantum mechanics and there's something in the context of quantum mechanics called negative vacuum energy density and so That's something that's connected to the idea of the Casmer force will impact that later But that is something that could serve as a proxy for the idea of exotic matter and may help us one day Make the idea of a space warp a physical real thing. Whoa so this ability to To go as fast as you're describing where you could conceivably make it to other source systems This obviously is a version of it that will probably be improved upon Right, so if this ever does come to fruition You could conceivably imagine a time where you generate even more power Have even more capability and you go everywhere in the universe right right potentially. Yeah, it it it unlocks Just about anything I you know if we just go back a slide real quick Jamie I want to share something with you so the next time you're in an airport you can do this right? Okay, so if you you know if you want to try and imagine the idea of how a how a space warp works in theory if you will a this is this now this is just a thought experiment So thought experiments aren't exactly precise, but they do help communicate the idea So you know when you go to an airport and they've got those Those long conveyor belts if you will yes I think they call them travelators and so they help us Move quicker between gates. Yeah, by the way folks you're supposed to walk on those things If right exactly, I mean absolutely walk right So the you know if you think about what happens when you make you So one of these travelators. It's just like you said most of us walk right so we're when we're when we're airport We're walking we're dragging our bag and we usually walk about three miles an hour And then when we get on to the belt we keep walking now if you think about what to so let's say Jamie's sitting at Agate and he's watching watching you walk by Before you get on get on to the belt he sees you walking at three miles an hour When you get on to the belt all of a sudden to Jamie it looks like you're going six miles an hour So what's going on here? Well think about think about the belt right the length of the belt in front of you What's happening to it? It's it's technically it's it's going underneath right? This is a metaphor right it's going underneath but the length of belt in front of you is actually Contracting right and so by the same token the length of belt behind you. Yes, it's come It's a conveyor belt, but it's expanding behind you So the belt is contracting and expanding in such a way that it now seems like to Jamie that you're Moving at six miles an hour so the next time you go to an airport and you get on to one of these travelators I want you to put your hand on the railing and say engage Well that it's a great comparison totally makes sense if you think about expanding that idea just Infinitely with gravity and just being able to write in that video by the way is so cool Like the way he generated that and looks exactly like these people Describe things they're saying in terms of you know when people find UAPs that are Particularly unusual right that the cool thing is if you Pop forward one more slide Jamie There we go the when you look at the math and physics associated with this right the The proper acceleration alpha on board the spacecraft is Formally zero so what that means when they turn the warp on and off It doesn't like splatter the crew against the bulkhead you talked about in the beginning of the show We talked about g forces right and so I don't know if alkubir Specifically was hoping to You know land on that kind of observation, but The little toy model that he came up with has got a lot of appealing characteristics And that's one of them right when you turn the warp on and off The proper acceleration alpha is formerly zero, so it's actually zero g. So Stump he stumbled into a really nice a really nice solution if you will If you don't mind while we're here. I'd love to maybe spend just a second to Talk about life imitating art. There's a there's some interesting things that I think it's the next Slide or two I keep going we'll come back to this one another another time So this is It's a modern rendering done by a mark rate of maker Digital artists from the Netherlands. I've worked with over the years This is a Star Trek ship concept That was developed by Matthew Jeffries in the 60s for the TV show Star Trek and so you might notice there are some Qualitative similarities here To this this little structure to the little gray cartoon that I just showed you it's got the rings on it Right, it's got this little central structure But there are there actually a couple of fatal flaws with this concept But the thing that's fascinating to me before we talk about the the things we're going to fix is Matthew Jeffries is not a physicist number one number two the the math and physics associated with the idea of a space warp hadn't been published In the 60s when he came up with his artwork, but look how close he got right for somebody just just you know Just following his gut instinct in terms of pulling something together What was his background was did he have some sort of a background science? I couldn't I couldn't say I don't know for certain But man, he sure did he nailed it. Yeah, he sure did get close So close. Yeah. Yeah, so the the the interesting thing is that the nature of this ship the fatal flaws that it had has So we did a we did a update of this as part of like an education outreach So I reached out to mark rate of maker and some folks from CBS studios and so we did an updated version of this For a Star Trek ships of the line calendar. That's cool. Yeah, and that's the one that's in the video right? I access enterprise go back just more Once like Jamie so the the problem with this Version here is the rings that go around the spaceship are entirely too thin So when you calculate how much of the exotic matter I just talked about that you might need to make this thing do something useful It's going to be a very large number that might be impossible to ever make So it's like fatal flaw number one fatal flaw number two is the bridge of the spaceship goes way out in front of where the war bubble would form As a result of those rings so the rings would form like a warp bubble that looks like a little capsule It would actually cut the bridge off and the bridge would go floating away and Scotty would be so fired That's that'd be a short-set episode of Star Trek. So they have a parachute right right exactly So we we work with CBS studios now you go to the next line So now we've got you know the rings are much more athletic They have more heft to them they're thicker so that reduces the energy requirements And then the spaceship itself is kind of properly nestled into the the warp bubble It just looks cooler right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like all things from the fast They can make a better version today right right right right right right so this this exotic material Do you imagine that this is an undiscovered element? Do you imagine what do you what's the theory right? Yet it's so it and this is where this is the lamentate the reason for some of the lamentation right about General activity in quantum mechanics General activity just doesn't tell us how to address it right it just simply says you have to highlight it in your paper Before you submit it for peer review and say this this may cause problems But quantum mechanics Has this stuff called Negative vacuum energy density right and so maybe we can unpack that So what what is negative vacuum energy density? So Let's let's talk about some of the implications of quantum mechanics And how they're a little different from our our day-to-day experience at this at the you know the macroscopic level right Empty space in quantum mechanics is actually not empty So if I if I told you to think about a vacuum chamber right and I told you the vacuum chamber is under vacuum And there's nothing not nothing in the vacuum chamber right that that operative word nothing Right that you have vacuum pumps that turn on and pull all the air out So there's nothing in the vacuum chamber Quantum mechanics says wait a minute hold on the idea of empty space even though there's this classical vacuum Right that we might think about. It's not actually empty. There's these fluctuating fields and forces That are always going on all the time so even though like this is the this is plumbrook You know NASA's large vacuum chamber Up in Ohio And so if you imagine you took that that vacuum chamber and pumped on it So there was no air on there and then you might say there's nothing in that vacuum chamber Well quantum mechanics says that at the microscopic level there are fluctuating fields and particles all the time and so this sounds very Very or you know counterintuitive to what we what we experience in our day-to-day life Right you pick up a coffee cup and you push against a door Right that's how we think of the world if you will but quantum mechanics deals with the microscopic realm and things are a little bit Different and so that's kind of background so You can there the peculiar nature that I'm explaining to you You can actually do an experiment That provides you a Observational consequence of this peculiar nature And it's it's called the chasm air force. I think I have a slide in there Jamie So the chasm air force can be thought of in the following way imagine that you've got Two metal plates like you see here in the graphic You put a very very close to one another that separation distances maybe 100 nanometers So certainly much smaller than a human hair very very small distance And then you imagine you have a vacuum chamber That you put these two small plates in And then you turn on the vacuum pumps and you pull all of the air out So there's nothing in there right. He said the way we would think about it So now we're gonna conduct a little thought experiment We're gonna imagine that Jamie has super hero powers and he can shrink himself down to being a we tiny little atomic person And we're gonna ask him to go into the vacuum chamber and we're gonna ask him to measure the pressure On the outside of the plates and we're gonna ask him to measure the pressure in between the two plates And so we're gonna expect based on the normal way we exist He's gonna say zero zero on the outside and he's gonna say zero in between the two plates But what he's gonna report back is he's going to say zero pressure on the outside like we expect But he's gonna say there is a negative pressure between the two plates What the hell is going on well the quantum field is full of fluctuating fields and forces Matter is both a particle and a wave you may have heard that statement at some point in your life And so all these little bits of energy right they have wavelengths associated with them And so any wavelength that is bigger than the physical gap of the cavity It won't be able to manifest between the cavity so when we add up all the bits of energy on the outside that's our zero reference when we add up all the bits of energy on the outside And then we add up all the bits of energy in between the two plates There are less bits of energy because all the bigger wavelengths are excluded And so there is a deficiency of vacuum energy that manifests between the two plates And that results in that negative pressure that wants to pull those two plates together That's called the chasmier force A guy by the name of chasmier was a guy that derived that back in 1948 But it took us until the late 90s to actually measure this in the lab to the physics community's satisfaction And so it's been studied hundreds of times since You know measuring forces at different regimes if you will and there's also Something called the transverse chasmier force so when you try and When you try and slide those two plates relative to one another the vacuum wants to resist you sliding Those two plates and so this is a very real phenomenon and it's in a a Wonderful illustration of the peculiar nature of reality at the microscopic level Right so you know that the theory was worked out in the late 40s The experimental stuff was started in the 90s and then there's been a bunch of work since then And I think they're even looking at looking at trying to use the chasmier force in MEMS devices But all that to this is a MEMS device Microelectro mechanical machine some small gears that you can't see with your eyes But they they serve different purposes that people are trying to come up with for sensors Maybe some things in your car some future chips that might be in your phone or something like that Things that they where they make micro mechanical systems that they make them with the light because you can't even See those kinds of things so the quantum vacuum this fluctuating field of Particles and forces and so forth is a very real phenomenon and so this stuff I just described to you is Is the negative vacuum energy density that alcubia highlighted in his paper when he said We don't know how to make exotic matter in general activity So that circle on the Venn diagram doesn't tell us where to go But quantum mechanics tells us how to make negative vacuum energy density in the in the context of what we see in a chasmier cavity and So maybe we can you know some future generation of scientists will figure out how to do something in some way to Like if you ask what's in that in those rings And so maybe we can, you know, some future generation of scientists will figure out how to do something in some way to like if you ask what's in that in those rings around the the I access enterprise, right? You know, maybe it's some deeper understanding of the nature of the quantum vacuum and point in fact. I talk to you about you ask me when when might this happen and I said, you know, I can't tell you when, but I know what I need to be doing next, right? And so in my mind, I think some of the the next big chapters and physics are going to be centered around understanding the nature of the quantum quantum vacuum and the quantum field. I think there's going to be a lot of fruit there and that may provide us the opportunity to add more circles to the men diagram or maybe expand one or what have you and so forth. So what kind of experiments have to be conducted in order to expand us? Like, is it you talking about things that are going to be achieved in particle colliders? Like, how are they like what do you anticipate? That's a good question. And I'm there. So there's a lot of different approaches people have taken to try and explore the nature of the quantum vacuum and you could even start to look at cosmological observations. We talk about dark energy, right? That's equated to the quantum vacuum at scale and the cosmological scale, if you will. I think there's even some recent stuff that's come out in the peer-reviewed literature that the cosmological constant may not be constant and may actually be changing over time. And so there's some experimentation has nothing to do with the idea of a space warp. They don't, you know, the people that do work on that could care less about space warps. But they're trying to understand the nature of the cosmological constant of the quantum vacuum at scale. So there's a domain where some interesting work might be done. I know universities all over the globe still do work today with studying the chasmir force. They make different types of things, different materials and so forth just to try and understand how materials respond when they make these small things and trying to understand how the quantum vacuum works with it. But I think there's also some other things that we can try. And so that goes, I think you've seen some of our work that we've been doing with some nano structured devices that we've been doing some work for DARPA for a number of years where we were actually trying to work on some systems that generate power. And so in the process of doing that we've actually found that our nano technology may actually have some intersections with the idea of a space warp. So I think it's what you're saying that like our nano technology might be used to create some sort of a space world in what way. Right, Jamie can you pull up one of those slides close to the, not that one go back, keep going back a little bit more. There's keep, yeah keep going up, right there, right, right there. So there's this on the left hand side of this image. There is a scanning electron microscope image of a nano structure that we in this case we 3D printed and then we metalized it. And so the work that we were doing for DARPA associated with that structure is focused on trying to harvest energy from the quantum field. And so we've been working towards trying to generate a voltage potential on that little structure where the pillars in the middle are at a different voltage from the walls that are in the picture there. And in the process of doing the analysis to help us understand how thin do we need to make those rod like structures you see inside the cavity gap. When we study how the quantum field responds to those structures, we noticed a kind of an unanticipated intersection with the idea of a space warp. If you look at there's like in the picture there's like a little blue surface overlaid on top of the center pillar there and you've got those two little regions that are like yellow. I think Jamie just moved his mouse over those right. So that's the pillar and if you move up that blue surface shows the quantum field response so that that negative vacuum energy density distribution you hear me talking about. That is a like a section cut in terms of what that looks like. And so we're trying to make sure that the nature of that distribution allows us to see a voltage difference right which we do see. That now we can go to the middle pane here. The top picture there is that image on the bottom left. And so you see those little yellow kind of looks like a lenticular shape. And then if you look at the picture beneath that, that is a section cut of a space warp that ring that goes around the spaceship. So if you look at the distribution of the exotic matter on the bottom pane versus the distribution of negative vacuum energy density in the top they're qualitatively very similar to one another. So we as part of an extra credit right we're still you know DARPA doesn't care about the idea of a space warp to be clear they don't care about that. But this as scientists you know we were interested in wow we didn't expect to see this this is interesting. And so we took that insight and we said alright the distribution that's on the left around that center pillar it's prismatic right it's it's a straight up and down kind of distribution it's not a ring which is what we might think about when we think about a space warp. So we said alright well let's do a let's do a slightly different model let's make a sphere inside a cylinder. And then let's study how the quantum field responds to that structure and so the energy density distribution to that the little green items there in the cartoon. The energy density distribution for that properly matches the requirements for the idea of a space warp. And so we put we published a paper yeah this is significant like because before we did that the only thing we could talk about in the literature was just the math right if somebody said well what might you build to make something like that you know all we could do is just sugar shoulders know. And so this allowed us to go through and say hey you know now we can propose a real structure right that we can we can potentially and you can 3D print that there are 3D printers that print down to that level right we could 3D print those structures. Maybe some clever scientist will come up with a good experiment on how to go through and maybe study the optical properties of this and somebody could do something like that where they could take our insights that we published in our paper. And then they could go 3D print some stuff and do some experiments to show that they can hey we measured the the change in optical properties associated with these little tiny warp bubbles that we're making on a chip if you will and so maybe that could be something a future scientist could do. But this is the first time in the literature that we can actually say as a community this is a real thing that we could go make and it's predicted to manifest a real. Warble not going anywhere it's not going to do anything but still that's significant as a you know as a measure of a paradigm shift in our understanding so. It's Leonardo da Vinci's drawing of. That's a wonderful matter it definitely could be something like that. Yeah when Da Vinci was drawing flying things. Yeah well it looks like what you would expect something to look like in Star Trek the generated a warp drive. Right. Right. Like you could see it lighting up. Yeah as some kind of a humming noise right. It sounds like a heartbeat or something. Right. The idea of using quantum energy is so fascinating because I don't understand what that means. I don't understand the whole idea of subatomic particles because it seems so fake. Seems so crazy that the universe has made out of things that are essentially working on magic. Yeah Peter and disappear right there in two places at the same time they're both still moving. Right. They're in super position. Right. They're entangled. Right. So in the grand scheme of things I would speculate that as we as we add circles to the physics and then diagram. We may actually be able to change some of that narrative. Right. So maybe maybe some. And so this gets into you know now we're getting into like philosophical history of physics and some of the debates that have gone on for the better part of a century. But you know maybe maybe as we continue to move forward and we add more circles to the physics and then diagram. You know it'll instead of having this this this narrative or this framework where we talk about. Probabilities and chances and entanglement and the cat is alive and the cat is dead. Right. Maybe there is a deeper level of understanding that we have yet uncover right beyond what we know in quantum mechanics today. That helps us understand things at a more fundamental level there is a a sub quantum dynamics right that explains the the randomness the stochasticity that we see and there'll be a much more satisfactory explanation for things where it's not like this. I would almost play back some of what you just said has if you think about it actually has kind of a bit of a metaphysical kind of sound to it if you want. Right. You know the collapse of the wave function. Well what does that really even mean right so maybe as we continue to move forward we add we get deeper understandings will have answers that are much more compelling and logical in some in some way we don't currently understand yet. Well when you try to explain to people the the double slit experiment. You try to explain that to people the waves and particles like what are you even say yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. Once lit you get a you know a nice Gaussian distribution around a center point then you open up two slits and you've got this weird interference pattern right it's like right this and that's the whole matter is both a particle and away right that's how you kind of see that. If you will but how do you explain that and so that actually there are you know thought processes that people have to explain that type of stuff in some of the stuff that's out in the literature today. Bomean trajectories is specifically one of the things but. It's almost frustrating because I know we're going to crack it one day you know it's like damn I wish I was born in twenty ninety. You don't mean like they probably would already nailed. Really like being born right here. I love being alive right now because it's such a fun time where these technological innovations are there happen they're compounding and they're building on each other in such a very incredible way that this kind of experiment is actually possible and now you can actually prove we have a theoretical work bubble. You show you how we can make it right right and so some of the stuff that we're focused on right so you know I spent. twenty years at NASA and then I left NASA at the end of twenty nineteen to go. Help stand up a nonprofit limit the space institute where we did some of the work that we just showed you right. And that's where we were doing some of the initial work for dark on the little nano structures that we're working on. And so we got we got a lot further with that work than we thought we were going to and so created a commercial company called Kazimir. where we're trying to commercialize our power generating nanotechnology and so in some ways it's like the interesting aspect of this story is in the process of us trying to pursue this romantic vision. Of the idea of a space warp we you know we may have stumbled into this power generating nanotechnology that could be useful here now in a lot of ways right to ranging from. you know powering up the fit bit on your wrist or tire pressure monitor system in your car. Maybe one day as we continue to grow the capability it'll do a lot more than that but you know in the process of chasing the romantic dream. We've stumbled across some technology that might be useful in the here and now right and so when you ask what might be in the rings around that that spaceship that I access enterprise. Maybe those could be long standing descendants from some of the stuff we're working on in the chips that we're making in the lab today essentially like the people put the foundation for the same peters Basilica down. They're not going to see. Right. Absolutely. And this is just how it goes with everything that's really extraordinary like that right right it's neat to think it's neat to think the speed at which innovation occurs right you know. I think you've had Elon Musk on the shows you times and it's neat to see what he's been able to accomplish with with SpaceX actually I met him in 2003 law is this very the very beginning of his journey right I was. I was on a planning committee for a conference American astronomical society and we were doing a conference in Houston with a focus on. Commercial space flight so this is at the dawn of the idea at the time I was working at Lockheed Martin. And so we had Elon Musk come in and talk to us about this crazy idea of SpaceX that he had right and so. Lockheed Martin corporate contacted me and asked me hey we know you're going to be interfacing with this guy. And so we want you to write up a profile on him after the conference and tell us what you think. And so I went to the conference and got a chance to watch a number of people come in talk about great ideas and Elon came and gave his talk and and so forth and after the conference was over. I wrote up a profile and submitted it to Lockheed corporate and I said you know I think this guy is going to do everything he said he's going to do. I think Lockheed Martin should consider buying his company at some point in time. And so fortunately they didn't right because I think if they did they would have like ruined the magic if you will right so. Yeah you needed in his control. He's got some pretty bizarre ideas that you know just watching them catch that rocket you're like what that's nuts. Absolutely nuts right my brain looks at that and goes no. It looks like I mean what's why the cooks in the internet think it's fake. It almost looks fake like how it's such a leap above anything that's ever been done before. Yeah could you imagine the design meeting right and I'm sure it was probably a long it said that said this. Yeah I want to I want to catch a 20 story building yeah I can see all the engineers is he serious right exactly because everybody thought they just had to deteriorate and fall to earth. Yeah right they run out of gas right you know when you're shooting a rocket up in the sky and then you plan it so they fall to the ocean like okay. I do think that I don't know if you've ever met Gwen shot well I think Gwen shot was kind of like his secret weapon right so in you know. Elon Musk strikes me as one of those guys it's like an idea generator all this great stuff's coming out. at the speed of light if you will and he's coming up with all these different ideas but you got to have somebody who can who can you know take all that chaos and pull out the important tidbits and then put them into action if you will and so. I think Gwen is kind of his secret weapon she helps take all of that chaos and then starts to put it into you know actionable steps if you will to help. SpaceX makes that make a sheet rules. Yeah just imagine as technology increases if you have someone with that sort of an innovative mind and someone like one can put it together as. All these new ideas come to fruition you can imagine where we're going to be with this. Right absolutely. And just kind of put that in context right in my mind SpaceX is an example of mastering the art of getting to space right SpaceX is conquering that that climbing against the gravity well as opposed to moving through space that there's there in lies a great opportunity to kind of re highlight that that that perennial difference that the challenge between the two right so. Right moving through space yeah and then the idea of some sort of a space station somewhere. Like not just circling the earth but out in the cosmos. There's so many different ways they can take this stuff and the idea of eventually colonizing other planets which is always like people go okay well that's that's what we're probably going to try to do wouldn't another civilization do that to us and that's where you get into the weird talk. Yeah right whether or not it's actually happening right what that guess it gets into the hole you know if somebody has the ability to come here right it's almost like I would rather be the one that was. technically advanced and able to go somewhere else rather than have them come here because that's. If you look at if you look at history that never that hasn't ever gone well for the for the for the organization you know for the the tribes that get visited it just never tends to go well for now so from like I'd rather be the one doing the visiting then. Exactly right so and then imagine the exotic viruses oh yeah right that's a good point. It always makes you think you know Star Trek they just go they beam down to the planet. Yeah there yeah right it's just like they breathe there same atmosphere same pressure. Like you know I keep waiting for the episode or somebody's sites starts bleeding from the rise right. Explodes. Yeah the guy with a red shirt you know right away right that's guys that's guys gone yeah I mean you have to take a chance. You know when you think of what's currently available today in terms of research that people have done our propulsion systems. When when people speculate that there's some sort of a black ops program that the government's been running secretly and this is what a lot of these drones are that people are seeing this is what a lot of like the tiktok stuff that it's probably our stuff which is while it's off military bases. Given your understanding of the current state of science do you think that's even possible. Yeah no well it's hard to imagine that being possible right just in terms of because my entire professional experience has been about wrestling with you know how do we how do we conquer this time distance problem and so I know all too well all the shortcomings I know. Where we are for the most part today where we're lacking right and so I just I don't know that there is an organization that has things that could potentially operate in the ways that we like that the tiktoks. Right I don't know that there is a black ops that actually has that capability. What I'm asking though is is it even conceivable that there could be a program where you could get the brightest minds who are working on this stuff to make advancements that are far beyond anything that conventional wisdom describes. Yeah now I'm with you I was on a different frequency thank you. Yeah you know if we had if we had some kind of kit right that is not from here however we got it right and people will spend some time studying it you know maybe they could figure it out but that also gets into you know a little bit of a. A logic conundrum right because I think you talked about going back to the 1400s and holding up an iPhone right if you if you. He had something like this to. You know Isaac Newton right he would have no idea what to make of this right so he might figure out the interface right the apples and a good job of making this thing. That's pretty user friendly but I mean how could even even if he looked at it would like a glass that allowed him to see maybe start to make out the pixels right he doesn't have the benefit of any of the math and physics and so forth so. It's possible right but those are the things that in gaming situations in my head what might that look like what it's like wow that's might be really hard to figure that out but. It'd be awesome if somebody had figured that out if that if that was in the realm of possibility right speaking for the people that believe that they have recovered these these vehicles from somewhere else. One of things that the one of the ways they describe them that's really kind of bizarre is they describe them as donations. That word if you were going to try to get someone to figure out how to construct their own automobile you wouldn't give them a 20 25 Corvette ZR one which you'd give them as a model T. You'd give them some simple combustion engine carburetor that you could go okay like someone who knows how to make a locomotive they could look at that and go. Okay I see what they're doing. Oh wow alright so this thing the combustion and then the gases spin around and then it creates energy and then it spins these wheels then this thing has different gears and that okay that goes to the back wheels okay I think we could do this. But you know if you gave them some electric Tesla you know like a new model S. Pride did go what the fuck is this Porsche 911 yeah exactly they would go what is this well specially electric right electric vehicles they go this is bananas like this thing goes 0 to 61.9 seconds yeah that's amazing car that's amazing isn't it it does feel if you've been an electric Tesla like the Model S. And it feels like it feels like you're not in this time period right you're in something in the future so if they gave us something to back engineer they would most likely give us a model T. I had never thought about it that way yeah start with the best shit we had right I mean like give these dummies a Jeep for 50 right I mean a willy's right yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah look at all the stuff you can work on it like if you open up the hood of one of those things you know an old Jeep you go I see where everything is. go, I see where everything is. Here's the spark plugs. Here's the distributor cap. I get it. Well, I guess if that were the case and I guess you could, I could follow you down that thought process, if you will. So then could you imagine, I mean, this is just, I'm just asking you because I know you understand science and you understand engineering. Is it possible that there could have been some program that's been going on in complete total secrecy shielded from Congress shielded from the higher levels of government. The most need to know basis possible with our current security systems that they could have some kind of a program that's working on this stuff. You know, I certainly couldn't rule that out, right? But some things I think about when I think about that problem. Let's talk about the F-117 stealth fighter, right? There was a program that was unclassified, I think it was in the late 70s, maybe the early 80s, called have blue. And so that's when they were first starting to explore the idea of having an aircraft that could be extremely stealthy. And so it was unclassified for a good amount of time until they put the first test shape onto a radar stand out in California in the desert or whatever the case may be. And then they turned on the radars and they're like, well, something's wrong because we're not seeing anything, right? And then a bird landed on the prototype and they saw the bird. And so when that happened, the whole program went black, right? It became classified. Before then it was not classified, then it was classified. But it of course came out in the 90s with Gulf War I, right? I think we saw some manifestations of this. And so there is a program that's extremely classified for the obvious reasons, but it still came out, right? And then I also think about, you know, I worked at NASA, right? And so you have the worked at NASA for 20 years and you get the full spectrum of people serving different roles in a facility. And so you're always going to have people that take out the garbage and do other different things like that. And so, you know, if you've got something that has implications like that, I mean, it could happen. But that's the thing I struggle with is that's, you know, there's a lot of different moving parts to try and keep that big of a secret. I mean, maybe it could happen, right? So, well, if I was running things and that was going on, I would talk to you. And it's like, look at this guy. And you seem to be on this pathway that we are currently exploring. I would, I would want to bring somebody in. Well, if somebody, if somebody's got a manual, they're going to help me figure out to go do something. Give me a call, right? I'd love that. And I know I'm going to get all kinds of emails as a result of saying that, right? So, I already get that now, right? You're going to get the cooks. But, you know, the question I guess I'm asking is, are there even experts in physics and engineering that are out there that could be quarantined, that could be taken away from everyone else and put on these projects and could they achieve meaningful results given that kind of compartmentalized science? Right. Maybe, maybe the thing that we could, we could throw into the sandbox on this discussion is the Manhattan Project. Maybe there's a better example of something where they were working on something that was extremely important for humanity and they were able to keep a lot of those secrets for quite some time. So, yeah, maybe that's how you would have to run something like that, I guess. I don't know. But would you have the expertise? Are there, I mean, are we aware of who all of the experts are? Is it possible that the government could have had access to brilliant minds that are on this sort of path like you are, you are, gotten them, move them into these projects and Kevin all hush-fush? Is that even? Certainly, the government also has an organization called The Jason's where they have a lot of extremely smart folks from academia and they come in typically, I think it's like a summer assignment, if you will. And so, they band together in the summer to go work on a series of problems that folks might have. And so, they kind of, what you're asking me kind of makes me think about that kind of a mechanism where you have access to the best and the brightest across the entire spectrum of US academia. And you pull them together and make them seal team six on whatever particular problem that you've got. But you could run into a problem where, you know, they might, they might look at a problem and only look at it in the context of what we know, right? You know, quantum mechanics and general relativity and they don't want to think about new things that could potentially be brought to bear so there could be some flies in the ointment with that thought process. But that in some ways, that does kind of exist in what we know is The Jason's, right? And they do classified work all the time. Interesting. So, I guess the question is where are the brightest minds in this particular area of innovation? Like, where, if I was running the government and I wanted someone to work on some sort of top-secret stuff like this, how would I even find the people? That's a tough question to answer because you might, that's, so that, so going to taking that question and going into like some specific steps, you might take, right? What disciplines are relevant, right? That's a difficult question to answer because there's so much stuff that we don't know. You probably would have to sample from a number of different disciplines, right? Both in general relativity and quantum mechanics with some hope that maybe you've got the right sprinkling of ingredients to bring to bear to that. And then there is a history of, I think, some folks in academia that actually like to think about advanced param propulsion that are also just primarily physicists in their day-to-day capacity. Right? You know, how put off, although he's got a lot of many in varied interests, he's a great physicist. He's published a lot of great papers in the literature just thinking about physics, right? He's got some stuff he's looked at called polarizable vacuum. And so, you know, in my, my, my drawer of preferred papers, I have a number of papers in there that are from housework on the polarizable vacuum because I find interesting and fascinating. And so there may be some things out there that are adjacent to the concept where you could try and pull some of that together. I guess that's a fascinating thing for you to say, because how believes they have them and he believes they we have 10 of them. Yeah. Oh, yes, I know that. Yeah. Yeah. Which is so nuts. And then, you know, he's a little agnostic on the Bob story. But the Bob Blazar story, which I'm sure you're aware of is essentially what we're talking about. Like you would bring in some out of the box thinkers. And if you found some wildly intelligent, young scientists who put a rocket engine in the back of a Honda, which is what he did, you would go, what does that crazy fucker up to? Like, let's have a look at it. What's it hurt? Right. The guy rocket, he's a wizard, you know, bring him out there or the guys that wherever he was, he wasn't at rocket time. He was at Los Alamos, the guys at Los Alamos, so he's a wizard. So let's bring him out here. Let's see what's going on. Yeah, his his his stories. I'm not too familiar with it. It's the funniest story of all time. And Bring them out here. Let's see what's going on. Yeah, his his his story is a not too familiar with it. It's the funniest story of all time and he supposedly well they denied that he ever worked at Los Alamos, but then they found him on an employee log and not only that he knew the outline of the place he knew the security people George Knapp took him on a tour of it and he knew everybody he knew the people that worked there He knew how to get around like he clearly worked there. So that's interesting that they tried to deny that he ever worked there and then from there He gets this job where he is flown out to the desert to area 51 site for and this is allegedly right During this time he can't even tell his wife what he's doing So his wife thinks he's going having affairs. He's got to leave fly away at 11 p.m. at night Like right, but you can't tell me where you're going you want to work or you're working late again The wife starts having an affair and because of his clean It sounds like a movie right? That's a movie which is one of the beautiful things about reality is that reality seems so fake that sometimes Sometimes actual true stories are bizarrely fictional So he his wife starts having an affair because of his clearance He cannot be working on these things if he could be under extreme emotional duress So they fire him they tell him he can't he didn't give him any explanation. They don't tell him his wife cheating on him He starts taking people out to the desert Explained to them you you have to see what we're working on they fly this thing on certain nights and they do these test flights around the base It's nuts. So it takes these people into this area They see it they get arrested when he gets arrested. He gets caught there. He explains what he was doing He says, okay, I've got to go public or they're gonna kill me So he goes public with George nap initially they hide his face and then he says, you know what fuck that? Let's just film me let me tell you everything he goes over the diagram of this device Yeah, and he calls it the sport model and it looks like that that thing that we have Oh, yeah, it's almost like a hubcap, right? But it's a copy of it Okay in the middle of that thing is some sort of a generator that he said works on this unknown element this element 115 Oh, some of this is coming back. I think I've seen some stuff over the years. Yeah Yeah, yeah, some of this coming back to me now and essentially the way he describes it traveling and again This is in the 1980s the way he describes it traveling is exactly the way you describe that sort of warp drive Changing space and time around And that you would point that thing where you wanted to go and it would just yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, it all it all sounds very surreal, right? There's there's another there's another story Again as I as I said I have a number of friends that are keenly interested in this and so I've been exposed to Some of the different things that that to me the tiktak account is interesting because it's got a lot of rigorous data if you will that helps you go well I can't explain that I can't explain that I can't explain that there is another Accounting that I just put in the category my brain doesn't even know what to make of it and it's a Concept of Rendles from forest. I don't know if that if that rings a bell there's something over in the UK where there's a base over there And some airmen came across some very weird. I can't even begin to describe I know this one. It's yeah, it's pretty bizarre I don't I don't know it well enough to unpack it today Other than to say it's it's so bizarre that when you listen to the accounts that were recorded, right? It doesn't make any sense. It's it's like you know if you think about if you If you watch an octopus in a In a aquarium right and the octopus is doing something you can sometimes Understand what their motivation is there's like a a across species ability to it's like communication but without words right you know that octopus wants to go eat that little Crab or whatever the case may be and so our our chemical computers even though they're different we can it we can look at their behavior We can go all right. I think I understand what's what that octopus might be wanting to do today or a shark or a dog or a porpoise but when you hear what happened in that Rendlesham forest thing it it breaks all of my guessing machine and I it's like what is the story? some they Colonel and some airmen reported some weird stuff that was going on in rental and forest yeah and They went out and tried to investigate it and they saw some Again, I'm doing such a terrible job of summarizing it because I don't really know the lore very well But here it is right here everything they saw was very bizarre and crazy. We can read it. It says 40 years ago remote forest and Suffolk was the scene of one of the most famous purported UFO sightings in history So just what did happen and will we ever know for sure? Victor Thorne cattle was out chopping wood one morning in Rendlesham forest in late December 1980 when a car drew up Outstep two men aged about 30 dressed in suits. Good morning. Do you mind if we ask you some questions? Asked one in the well-spoken English accent earlier on 26 and 28 of December United States Air Force security personnel station near Stationed at nearby RAF Woodbridge had reported seeing strange lights in the surrounding forest Forestry worker mr. Thorne kettle an unannounced and Unidentified visitors asked if he had been out the previous night. I said no he recalls they said Did you leave the house at all? Did you see anything? I said what they said oh there's a report of some red lights in the forest We're just checking and the two men very politely but firmly asked me probably about 20 questions. I thought they were journalists They suddenly said oh well fair enough. There's probably nothing in it and left So I bought the papers every day for the next few days to find out what was going on and of course there was nothing Three years later however sightings made the news of the world front page story It proclaimed UFO lands in Suffolk and it's and that's official The story was based on a memo from RAF Woodbridge deputy base commander lieutenant Colonel Charles halt to the Ministry of Defense It was released by the US government described as an encounter with an apparent UFO in the forest Since then the sightings have been the source of much debate and speculation among UFO enthusiasts in the subject of numerous books articles and TV programs and March a documentary concluded the sightings had achieved legend status like the Loch Ness Orking Arthur The the forest even has its own official UFO trail complete with a life-size replica Go back up of the flying saucer and this is the replica like the homs of thing on it that hand thing Those are Thirring kettle UK authorities have said they didn't learn about the incident. Okay. Well. What is the story though? Let's get to like what is the story scroll down more Let's say and that gets into the stuff that it doesn't make sense in terms of what they describe the UFO doing and it's just very peculiar, right? So Yeah, uh They got their my heart absolutely pumped there was nothing's absolutely normal glade the forest with three rabbits grapes They're all carefully marked that happened to be roughly triangle. Okay. What else is the saying? What is the sighting? Bernmarks on trees, but what's the sighting? Okay, sure That's what they said it looked like whoa And it had those markings on it I Google did my google search said that crush brought it up when he was on here But I couldn't find like even clips about it. So I don't know that we went that deep into it How bizarre is it that it has that symbol? What is that that's an ancient Hindu symbol correct that homs a symbol? I don't know. Oh, they're different. Yeah, that looks very weird Huh So what about this one stands out to you? I put this one in the category of I just I don't understand If it's a if it's a real account, right? I mean, so I think when you have a lieutenant colonel That's reporting something as factual I tend not to just immediately dismiss it right, but what the what the and it's not just him It's several people around him what they described Right doesn't make sense to me right? You know in terms of the David favor talking about the tiktak I can kind of you know that that's not totally alien to me. I could oh well They're it's trying to maneuver with the aircraft and It's maneuvering to their cap or whatever the case may be and I can kind of connect the dots with that But the Reynolds and forest thing it doesn't make any sense to me. Well, what about it doesn't make any sense That what they saw why it was doing what it was doing. They just wasn't doing. It just was out in the woods The woods, you know with blinky lights and doing weird stuff and like Why is that weirder than the tiktaktit? I? I don't know this is a gut thing right in terms of my guts telling me I don't make I don't understand this This doesn't make sense to me. I don't know how to explain it any better than that so But I if it's just an object that's in the wood blinking lights and looks like it's fine Why I just don't understand why that's weirder then I think it I think they also described it had like Melty bits or something like that that were like dripping off of it and so forth and I just That what it sounds so completely surreal I think maybe what I'm what I'm unconsciously trying to do is I'm trying to You know map how might I map you know math and physics to what it is They're describing to me and I just He's just the one where they they found debris at the scene did someone brought this up was it Jacques valet that brought this up Here it's a piece of debris seen burning up as a fireball over England Serviceman thought it was a down-craft. Haltz memos is glowing object metallic an appearance colored lights attempt to approach the object it appeared to move through the trees and The animals on a nearby farm went into a frenzy one of the servicemen Sergeant Jim pen peniston later claimed to have encountered a craft of unknown origin while in the forest although there was no published mention of this at the time And there is no corroboration from other witnesses Hmm, yeah, so there's not there's there's No matter how far you dig there's not going to be very much satisfactory resolution of the mystery if you will It's just a a bonkers kind of story this one stand out to you more than like say Roswell Because Roswell to me is one of the most bizarre ones when you look at the front page of the Ross was it the Roswell daily record I believe that has this story saying that the government has recovered a flying saucer and that a crash flying saucer was found and You know the story is that they grab the wreckage and food out the right path of scenarios Air force base and two separate planes in case one of them crashed and Truman met them there like Maybe in that case it's you know this It's a potentially a purported spaceship and It was around military bases. You know, I don't know. It's just the weirdler again again We're getting into the fact. Oh, yeah, I don't have a lot of depth in some of these areas, right? I understand But it's just the weirdest aspect of this Whole crashed retrieval program the alleged clash crash retrieval program like if it has occurred and It really does go back to the 1940s like how did you guys hide this like how do you kept this secret so long? Is that even? That's cevably possible that that's one of the things I wonder about there's a book I was recommended to read called blind man's bluff and it's a book about deeply classified projects Connected to the Navy right they were I think the end effect of what they were trying to achieve as part of what's detailed in this book is You remember hearing about deep sea rescue vehicles, right? So deep sea rescue vehicles basically that was a cover for some Subrains that the Navy was using to put Listening systems on communication cables that were at the bottom of some of the bodies of water That I think the Soviet Union was using at the time and so This this book kind of details a number of programs that went through and developed Kit and hardware to go through and accomplish these different tasks And so it's neat to kind of you know see how black programs like that unfold I don't know how that book I published but It's a fascinating book But then that speaks to what you're wrestling with right. How do you have something That's so classified that doesn't leak right because all the other data that we see from other programs There you can you can keep a secret for a little while, right? You can't keep it for that long Right at least that's when I look at these other things. That's what comes to my mind right now That doesn't mean I'm right there could definitely be programs that are out there Right that are Maybe they've figured out how to get around that But when you look at some of the most classified military things that are out there They usually have a lifetime associated Maybe it's just one of those things the government's really good at like the government's really bad at a lot of things But maybe they're really good That one thing they've got to down right right or at least there's a small section of the guy that's really good at that right Well, how's Speculation you know when when how says that he's pretty sure that there's ten of them that that gives me pause Because that that's a very serious person. Well, yeah, he's a very discriminating individual Yeah, he likes to he likes to question everything and even though he's thought about some very interesting things over the Span of his career right he does bring a little bit of that squinty-eyed physicist to some of the different things and so that gives you some measure of comfort that Even though he's thought about some wide-ranging things he's bringing a little bit of that Skepticism to whatever he's been confronted with also as crazy as what he says is there's some things that he won't talk about Which may okay, what is that Like if you're telling me there's ten crash A non-human intelligence and then there's stuff you can't tell me right that makes me just go What like what out what have you seen how Yeah, yeah, right Philippines buddy right come on. Everybody knows please but I guess if you did spill the beans My goodness. You wouldn't know no longer have access to any that stuff and you'd probably be in trouble You know, they're probably immediately get audited. Yeah, oh, yeah Absolutely you'd have a lot of special things Imagine yeah, because you're what what he describes that put it in light and perspective to me Said you have to understand that one of the things that would happen is There would be real problems because you'd have to figure out how the stuff was funded So this is funded by miss allocation of finances so you're lied to Congress So these are crimes these are crimes that put people in prison for life And then on top of that by the way that goes back to that book I was telling you about blind man's bluff because it talks about The amount of money that went into that program that was hundreds of millions of dollars right And it's interesting that gives you like a little bit of a window of insight into how the black classified world moves stuff right right Right and then you also have this national security problem Because what how's saying is that we're not the only ones that have these things and that there's essentially a mad race To try to back engineer these things and to successfully complete And this was the real fear like when people were seeing the New Jersey drones amongst conspiracy theories I was like all right. I would have China's are you nailed it right They're buzzing us I got to think I got to think when you when you look at any of the counts of these things the The important things to maybe help categorize The nature of things that they see If if a craft has the ability to manifest extremely fast speeds well and I mean SR-71 does mock you know 3.2 If you've got something that has radar track data that shows it's doing You know mock 8 or mock 10 that's interesting now. We do have hypersonic stuffs You can't just automatically say that it's something exotic. It still could be Something that we know might exist out there with some other flags on the side of the vehicle But then like you talked about g-forces if it can do like a a Tron turn 90 degree kind of turn and you got a radar track that might help you categorize the the nature of the different signals that are out there so The and to me that's why I like the the the tiktik thing has always been something It's hard for me to just sweep away because of the quality of the data And some of the stuff they describe I can't imagine other conventional systems that could potentially explain What they're seeing but a lot of the other stuff I can actually Probably piece together in my head. It could be it could be this or it could be that right You know they talk about The cubes inside of a clear sphere. There are patents in the system for radar corner cubes that are a cube A metallic cube inside of a clear balloon that gets floated to evaluate radar sensitivity right so When I those are like that just looks like there's a patent in the system. It's a there's a yeah So it's a corner cube But there's a patent that has a version of that that's light enough to go inside of a Some kind of a balloon. Maybe it's filled with helium or something like that. There you go. That's the patent right So there's a there's a patent in the system And so you know I can certainly see maybe if that's tethered to a boat Right there just evaluating our You know our radar systems if you will and so well that would kind of make sense until you listen to Ryan Graves Depictions of what these things were doing that they were standing motionless at 120 not winds If it's tethered well if it's moving. I can't I can't just I can't describe that But if it's static it could be tethered to a boat right But that looks goofy like if you look at what that looked like Jamie should pull up photo off you just had like that I don't think that's tricking One on the left though is it's actually a metallic cube inside interesting. Yeah, so the one on the left. Is there an image of that With the metallic cube inside this fear just be the patent. I don't know just a pack of okay, so it's theoretical I don't want us to know how it works Of course so in a lot of cases I can again I'm agnostic and so I bring this this framework to the table And so only you know the the tiktik ones really I think the one that bubbles up in my mind with the highest quality data That I haven't been able to categorize well it could be a b or c that's you know go back to that boring explanation Let me go back to that blue I could be some fake a I could be nonsense pilots notes for cube trans medium vehicle Promulated by order of it's gotta be a Restricted come on. It's restricted Super important it says for official use only I Am a French model right there. Yeah. That's just Oh, it's just by stuff. It's just goofy It's just silly we need to get those get some exact stuff You know the lack of sonic boom. It's one of the things I want to talk about Yeah, like if that thing could move at that kind of a hyper-sonic speed there would be some sort of a sonic boom Right if if it's not exactly right if it's if it's not some kind of laser system that's creating pixels Right and it's some solid thing if it's going supersonic It's based on everything we know where they're in an amix It should have a sonic boom and if it doesn't and it is a physical thing then that demands an explanation right and I wouldn't Be able to explain that right and so that's right Those and that's exactly why something like the data that comes out of it the tiktik thing I haven't been able to just pound flat and make go away right keep surviving all of my grumpy physicist attacks So do it doesn't frustrate you that you've never seen one of these things or have you? So funny story and beer beer is involved How much? Little bit which angles a little bit beer a little bit so we were down at Kennedy Space Center And this is this is a cautionary tale to don't always believe what your eyes see right because you potentially could you know lead yourself down The wrong path so we're down at Kennedy Space Center We had put some docking cameras on Some space-age modules and spent a lot of you know number of days working long hours Wearing those uncomfortable bunny suits and so forth and so finished all this stuff wanted to go celebrate So we went to the beach and had a little bit of unwinding time and drank a few beers hanging out And so we're out on the east coast down there close to Kennedy and We're looking up at the sky and you could see some of the satellites coming over right your eyes adjusted to the to the light You could occasionally see some satellites coming over and you kind of expect them to have a track that goes You know west to east if you will generally I mean they can come to all different angles But then we started seeing some Some satellite tracks that were very Different from what we might expect Being rocket scientists right we're watching this stuff. That looks a little different That's kind of interesting and it's a very different angle Well, maybe it's a Russian spy satellite that's retrograde and it's you know We're trying to figure out what this could be and then you know a couple more beers later We see four or five more of these tracks right and we're like well Maybe all these all these people that talk about these crazy things right? Maybe there's something to that right knows about about an hour has gone by as we've gone through this process And we finally see another one of these little glowy orbs if you will and I look at it and I just realized Out of the edge of the glowy orb The wings of a seagull So it's the white belly of a seagull reflecting the light the near the light from the nearby city And so that's what we're seeing right and so that's one of those things that's just Something to make it you know think about what you're seeing may not be Because it's it's breaking all my guessing machines. It's breaking all of our guessing machines And we're wondering and speculating about it, but in the end it was just you know It was just a seagull doing their nightly business, right? Look at these silly guys looking at me right? That's funny. That is funny So yeah, that's my only experience. Yeah, well the mind definitely plays tricks on you especially wouldn't beers involved Right, right, but I can't dismiss all of the different very serious people that have talked about these things and that's where I get Really perplexed and my agnosticism gets it gets chat tested Right, right, you know I tend to try and always keep a squinty eye towards it And I think that's probably good To do that because then that the stuff that survives that filter Right is high quality stuff. Right? And so the things that keep coming out of the The tiktik thing. I just I can't kill that. I keep wanting to try and kill it, but I can't What about when you look at things like the go fast video or the flier video and you look at these Crafts that are moving in some very weird way that they don't exhibit traditional propulsion signatures so Yes, those are interesting videos and they come from train professional fighter put them on where it rotates Jamie fighter pilots And so I can't I can't dismiss those accounts But the integrated quality of that data is not the same as the tiktik right where you've got multiple aircraft Multiple radar systems over multiple days, right? That's one of those and I wish it's yes exactly and not only eyewitnesses I mean they're they're laying eyes on this thing and you and it's not just one plane where sometimes you can fool yourself Look at this thing is very this is the gimbal video this thing I very strange Right, oh, you put the guys talking about it because And you know I acknowledge the fact it doesn't have any thermal signatures that were indicative of like a Pluses or something like that, right? So some of those things definitely are hard to explain It's also listening to these guys listening to fighter pilots going to look at that thing Yeah, because they're eyes are trained right go through and and discern Different things because you know, they're always thinking about you know Can this kill me? Can I kill it? What do I need? You know, they're I completely acknowledge the fact they have that that framework drilled into their head and that helps Put this into a special category But those are unfortunately single data points. I can't do anything with that right and that gets back to what we talked about at the beginning Of all this I would love for somebody to show up with a notebook Full of all these great observations that would help me You know, we're making these little these little nano chips that are we're trying to use to extract energy Yeah, sure these at the actual nano jeez these are a bunch of the nano chips that we're doing This is part of the chasmir company that we spent out These chips interact with the quantum field and generate a voltage potential between those leads And so we we measure voltage on those guys when we put them in dark RF shielded enclosures There's some pictures. Yeah, and so that's looking at these so cool Yeah, well and it's fun to think about how do you even make stuff like that? We can talk about that in just a minute, but you know, let's talk about the some of the applications right You know this this is the see Can we go back a couple slides? Keep going One more all right, so Let's just spend maybe three minutes here talking about the chasmir force At least taking up picking up where we left off. Okay, right So we talked about the idea of the chasmir force is a macroscopic Observational consequence of something called the quantum vacuum these fluctuating fields and forces if you go to the next slide Jamie So Conceptually the following is true independent of anything that we're doing with with the nanotechnology We're developing if you allow the quantum field to interact on these two metal plates that we talked about as part of the chasmir force It will apply a force over a distance and it will cause that gap to close and go to zero Right, so that is by definition a force over a distance and so that is a unit of work So the chasmir force phenomena is a illustration of extracting energy from the quantum field so independent of anything that we're doing Right, that's part of what's baked into the idea of the chasmir force interacting with the quantum field Now the you might say well, maybe we could use that as a power source The only the only problem with this Textbook illustration of a chasmir cavity So once the plates have collapsed But there's nowhere you can't get any more energy out of it You have to actually pull the plates apart You have to wind the wind the watch again if you will and so this type of an approach would at best Simply be a battery so you couldn't extract continuous energy from the quantum field from this type of an apparatus So this leads into an innovation that we came across so Jamie if you go forward one more slide This is a slightly larger version of that scanning electron microscope image so we've changed the Standard chasmir cavity concept by adding these pillars along the midplane So we have these structures that we put inside the middle of the chasmir cavity And so you see we've got a cavity wall on the left and a cavity wall on the right and these big three pillars The walls are fixed to the substrate. They can't move We don't want them to move. We want them to stay still And then the pillars are also fixed to the substrate. They cannot move The walls are electrically connected to one another And the pillars are electrically connected to one another but they're isolated So that's just a physical description of what this is So now let's talk about how does this custom structure Interact with the quantum field. What's the difference with this particular structure? So for that let me give you a metaphor Imagine a Pacific A-to-Island out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean It's surrounded by the Pacific Ocean with all this random wave energy that's beating the outside of the A-to-Island But at the center of the A-to-Island there's a nice lagoon Right very quiescent very smooth The water is connected to the Pacific but a lot of that wave energy can't manifest on the lagoon So it's a protected and nice environment. So imagine Joe you're sipping you know some some nice Water and having a nice paddle paddle board and nice environment. So imagine Joe, you're sipping some nice water and having a nice paddle, paddle board day, quiescent and joining yourself. And Jamie, he took the other package and he went deep sea fishing out on the Pacific Ocean. And so he's really bobbling back and forth and it's much more uncomfortable for him. Maybe he's getting sick and feeding the fish. Right, so now with that metaphor in mind, let's come back to the structure. So this structure, the walls on the outside are like the Pacific A-Toll Island inside the quantum field, which is like the Pacific Ocean. So it's assaulting that structure on all sides. The pillars are like you on your paddle board in the lagoon. It's a protected environment. And so the way the quantum field interacts with this structure is it will occasionally cause a real electron inside the walls to quantum tunnel to the pillars. And so the pillars are like you on your paddle board. It's a very quiescent environment. And so the electron shows up through this quantum tunneling process. But there's no wave energy on the lagoon to mirror that current back to the walls. So in that way, this structure will interact with the quantum field and generate a voltage potential. So we can measure a negative voltage on the pillars relative to the wall. And so although this is a very tiny little cavity, and we can measure the voltage directly using atomic force microscopes, if we put these guys together by the tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands, then we can get to voltage and current levels that map to things that we care about in application, like tire, pressure, and monitor system, something that uses a micro-watt's worth of power, or a fit bit, or you've got the ring there. I think that's an electronic ring or something like that. There's an ore ring. Yeah, some low power applications. And so using this approach, we're trying to generate, we're trying to create chips that are about the size of your pinky nail that generate 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 maps to a number of chips that are on the market today that operate at that power level. But they have to be recharged. We don't have to be recharged. We're like a solar panel that works in the dark. So you can put us in your device, and then it can go down to the bottom of the ocean, and it will continue to work. Or we can give it to our buddies at intuitive machines, and they can carry it to the surface of the moon. And maybe they want to throw a sensor off to go measure something, and it will collect data, even though the sun stops shining. So the cool thing is, like I said at the beginning of this interview, we were going down this whole path of trying to understand the nature of the quantum field, because we were motivated by where we might envision it could lead one day. Maybe we could add more a deeper understanding that physics and diagram, and get to a point where we can figure out what do we need to put into the rings that go around that eye-axis enterprise concept, so if you will. And so it's cool to think that maybe we could come up with a technology that provides useful power today for things like this. Maybe if we put it in aggregate, if we put a lot of them together, we could get to a point where this is just a 3D print of having a bunch of those little chips that are 5 millimeters by 5 millimeters, 1.5 volts, 25 microamps. If we add a bunch of those together at a very large extreme, that particular board might generate 3.4 watts. And so that board could recharge your phone in three hours. And so imagine a scenario where you had a phone that's pretty resilient that for the most parts, you'd never have to plug it in. That might be pretty useful. And it's neat to think that pursuing this whole reaching for the stars type of thing has fueled this exploration of pushing the boundaries of what we know and then kind of coming across instantiations that make us go, hey, wait a minute, although we were thinking about these kinds of things, look at what we could potentially do now. And so we could find ways to feed the research and still bring value here in incredible ways. I mean, this capability is amazing to think in terms of what it could unlock, right? Especially if we could, if this is three and a half watts, you could imagine you put a bunch of these together, you could rapidly get to a kilowatt or even more, right? And have expeditionary power. I don't know if you've ever wanted to have a farm out in the middle of some untouched area where you didn't want to pay the money to run the power line. Well, now maybe in 10, 15 years, maybe you wouldn't have to. We could provide a solution that would allow you to come off the grid, right? I was seeing something online about some new technology that I believe was invented in Japan where they have figured out a way to extract far more energy from solar panels. Yeah, I think they've increased the efficiency on solar panels, but there is a limit to that, right? In terms of, I think it's, you know, when you get to close to 40% efficiency on a solar panel, you're kind of at the limit of what you can do. And then the challenge you have with the solar panel is at the surface of the earth during ideal peak lighting conditions, the flux of power you get's about 1,000 watts per square meter, right? So if you wanted, you know, a system that provided five kilowatts of power, you could do the math and figure you did a fairly big area. With our technology, we can stack it on top of one another. We don't have to stretch out like that. And so the quantum field could potentially provide a lot more power with a much smaller footprint, if you will. Right now, I have to acknowledge we're still very early, right? We're very low power levels. And so we want to crawl, walk, run. But we're, you know, we're thinking about what can we do now to provide use, right? And then use those applications to continue to grow the capability at Casimir. And then ultimately, if you have those things stacked, 50 feet thick and, you know, 700 meters in a circle, then you have enough power to make a warp drive. Right. And so this gets into the cool thing is what we're trying to understand and study inside these little chips that we're making is we're trying to understand the nature of the quantum field, right? The structure to the quantum field. How can we alternate? How can we tweak it? What can we do with it? Because you know, we talked about the fact that negative vacuum energy density is potentially a good proxy for the idea of exotic matter in terms of what general activity requires. And so in the process of developing a deeper understanding of the quantum field with what we're doing with these devices, right? I would contend that we're actually adding another circle on that Venn diagram that's potentially not only overlapping part of quantum mechanics, but is also overlapping part of general activity. And I think that's kind of what's going to be necessary to be able to make the idea of a space warp real one day. We're going to have to have that new body of physics. Those new E equals MC squared equations, right, that allows us to potentially, ah, hey, if I do this and this and it might, you know, maybe I can solve that problem. But I think your instincts are right on, right, from the standpoint what we're doing in the micro here, right, if you cracked open one of the access panels on the IXS Enterprise and you looked, you might see some stuff that's like, I can see how these guys are descendants to what gets put together in that ring in macroscopic whenever that might be, right? It's got to be so frustrating that this has, this immense potential, but like, imagine seeing it. Like, how do you get to do it? It's not, I want to say frustrating. Challenging, exciting. Just knowing that there's this potential energy source that can be tapped and knowing that just like all technology, I mean, if you go back to the Apollo program, the amount of power that you have in your phone, far exceeds what they used and they had like a whole giant room filled with super computers. Now you just carry it around and you plug it into the wall and it's 50% charge in 20 minutes. Yeah, I would like to know. Yeah, we take that for granted. Oh, it's interesting you mentioned that, right? If you look back through, if you think about the industrial revolution, when we started, when we came up with steam power, right? And then when we later figured out gasoline engines, the amount of power we had available to us changed so drastically, right? The change that it had on human civilization and human culture is just hard to fully comprehend because, I mean, if you think about all the different things that get done, a single tractor with one person on it will do all the stuff that's necessary to seed a field, to cultivate a field, to plow a field. And it's amazing to think that that's possible just with one human being at the helm of the tractor, but you had to unlock all the energy insights to unlock the energy and what we know from petrochemical, just gas, diesel, whatever. And so, yeah, it's neat to think how things like that change civilization. And so, in some ways, it's like, if you think about the long-term benefits of reducing something like this to practice, right? The, you know, we talked about the grid, right? You were here in Texas when we had, I think we had some issues during a very cold winter where Urcott, got its R removed, right? The power grid had some issues because it got really cold. But imagine a future where we can start to create microgrids, maybe even eventually move away from something like that. And then what would that kind of a capability do for parts of the world that currently don't have any infrastructure in place, right? There's a lot of places in Africa where if you brought this type of a capability where you could plop a brick down on the table, it's one kilowatt, right? And let people know you can, how can you make use of this? And so just like Starlink provides this opportunity for people in remote locations to have access to the internet, right? We could potentially bring a solution to the table that could help a lot of places on the planet that, you know, they might not ever see that otherwise, right? So those are some things that have us excited about as we continue to wrestle with technology, right? Anytime you're trying to do something, when you're trying to establish order where there's only chaos, it's hard, right? But the things that help us whether that is the long-term implications of what we're doing, both in the near term and in the far term, it's really cool to think, right? We can provide benefits, you know, here and then farther down the line here and then farther down the line here and then oh, by the way, the whole reason we're doing all this stuff is because we hope to try and make the idea of a space where possible one day, right? It's cool to kind of have that connection between all these different nodes along the way where you can see the path. Yeah, you can see the path. Right, let me see how it'd be worth it. Useful for people today. Right, I mean, think about like what when we have a hurricane that hits, right, the power goes out. You're without power until they can get the power lines up, right? If you have capabilities like this, maybe 50 years in the future or something like that, right? Where everybody just, you know, they're off the grid, right? The nature of how we contend with, you know, disasters like that. Right. And monopolizing resources. Right. That's the other issue. We no longer be dependent upon fossil fuels or essentially everyone would be independent. Right. And then you could imagine as it scales up, it gets better and better, just like cell phones were initially these very large bricks that, you know, member from Wall Street. We got to have a high. Yeah. Okay, yeah. Sure. And now there are little tiny things. Yeah. And so you could imagine how that would eventually get to a point where it's portable and anyone can have power everywhere you want to go. Yeah. Some of the things we think about in terms of the road map for things, right, you know, it may take us a little while before we could provide all the power that's necessary for like a Tesla. But we could imagine a scenario where like a whole little prop up again, we've got this three and a half watt brick, three and a half watt card. Maybe we put a bunch of them together to create a one kilowatt module of sorts. So maybe a Tesla's got 50 kilowatt hours worth of capacity in it. Most of your daily driving that folks do is, you know, two work in homes. But maybe 50 miles, two and 50 miles from 100 miles a day, right? And so if you've got an electric vehicle that has all the batteries already in it, but then you make the decision to buy a one kilowatt, a cashmere module, right? And you connect it to your car. That module will provide over a 24 hour period, it'll provide 24 kilowatt hours of capacity. And so in terms of the driving duty that I just talked to you about, right, you're not going to drain the battery enough where the cashmere cell couldn't just continue to recharge it. So in that particular instance, even though we might be a little bit farther away from being able to power a whole car, we might be able to find opportunities for early adopters where hey, for 99% of how you might use your electric vehicle, you don't have to plug it in. So from where we are now with your current research and all this, these incredible ideas, what steps have to be taken in order to advance this stuff? Right. Right. So the first step is trying to get to the power magnitude I just described, one and a half volts in 25 microamps. So we have chips, these chips right here, you know, they can achieve very high voltages. But then they relax to a certain steady state voltage over a long term, right? So they have the ability to provide steady state power. But it's like 30 millivolts with a steady state current. And so it's the current that we're currently working on right now. We're trying to get the current up to that 25 microamp ability right now. And so that's the stuff that we're doing. You know, every month we're trying to do another generation of chips to go through and work the material science and get that capacity to that level. So and making chips is that's tough. That is tough business. So it's been quite the slog. You know, we've we've been doing this since 2020, the first chips we worked on took us 18 months to make. And then we got the time down to 12 months. And then we got the time down to seven months. And then we got, you know, we got these guys down to it's actually this was a two week sprint from the time we did the design to the time we got them in hand. But roughly we're anticipating we can make these generations once a month. So making chips is very different from, you know, how we view the rest like this wooden table, right? You know, if you if you think about making something, you think about drills and saws and cutting holes and putting bolts in and so forth. But when you talk about making chips, it's an entirely different approach to how you make things. You make things with with light and you make things with plasma. Right. You know, this will be a good opportunity for me to use a a little verbal description and then you can grade me on how well I communicate this, right? Okay. So how, you know, in concept, how do you make something smaller than what you can see with your eyeballs? So ordinarily when we want to look at something very small, we use a microscope, right? So we got this optical system we look through and then we look at something maybe it's got a perimissium or whatever in it. Now, what we're looking at is very tiny and we use optics to blow that up and in some cases instead of putting our eyes against the little view ports on the microscope, maybe we'll put an image or a camera on there and we'll take that the camera will collect the image and put it on a big screen, a big LCD screen. Now, if you think about that in reverse, what if you, you know, let's say you're looking at your looking at our chips and you're seeing these squares and circles and tiny little different shapes and so forth. But it's projected on a big screen. Now, imagine for a moment instead, you go through in some CAD program and you draw squares and circles or whatever, maybe you draw a picture of Jamie's head, right? And then you go through and you take that, that, that digital file you just created and you kind of look at this whole process that I was talking about in reverse. And so instead of using a image or to collect the image, use a projector to project the image back down through the optics, right? We're now you project some shape you want to manifest on a chip, right? But you can't see it whether you could look at it with your eyes, but you couldn't see it, right? But you're using this projection system through the microscope in reverse to put the image down on the chip. So now the next thing you do is you take, let's say you got a silicon wafer and then you go through and you apply something we call photo resist. It's like a really thick, almost like a honey type of consistent little thinner than that, right? But you put some photo resist on the wafer and then you spin it at really high RPM and it spins at photo resist so that it's very thin and you take that wafer with the photo resist and you expose it to the image you want to put onto it with ultraviolet light, right? And so that hardens part of that photo resist and then you develop that wafer to remove all of the photo resist that was not exposed to the ultraviolet light. And then maybe you expose it to a plasma and you etch it. And so every place where there's no photo resist, it etches the surface, but where the where the photo resist survived because you exposed it with your ultraviolet light, you now have an image. So you could look at that with a microscope again and then you'd see, you know, Jamie's mug on the surface of the silicon wafer. And so in concept, that's how the idea of when you make a CPU or you make memory or you make any of this digital technology, that's that's technically how it works. But are you old enough to remember microfiche? What is that? You know, the little film? Yeah, the little acetate things in school that you put in. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's another kind of illustration of it, but just not applied to a chip, right? Well, I would imagine the manufacturing or something like this is a spectacular undertaking that would require a long time to develop the kind of factories that you would need to do this kind of stuff at scale in the United States. And this is this is an issue that we have that was really highlighted by the the COVID pandemic where we weren't able to get shipments of things and a lot of cars weren't for sale, because they didn't have the chips to put in a lot of the new American vehicles. Or in some cases, they took functionality out because they couldn't get the ding dang chips to go do what they wanted to go do. Yeah, this right. Yeah, I was really glad to see a lot of attention be brought to bear with I think it was the chips act. And even Texas has taken a very strong stance on trying to to try and attract some chip manufacturing capability here in Texas, right? Yeah, we're talking about the Samsung plant that they built here. But the Samsung plant kind of highlights the issues because they weren't able to achieve the tolerance as they required in large batches. I think I think they'll eventually get there, right? This is those are just illustrations of the fact it takes a while to get everything dialed in. Just like it took us 18 months to get our first chip and now we're getting a two-week sprint, we can make our chip, but it took five years to get to that capability, if you will. I think they'll get all that figured out. But in my mind, the other value proposition for chip manufacturing is, to me, chip manufacturing is like the 21st century automobile manufacturing jobs, if you will. It seems like that could provide a great opportunity for people to get meaningful work that pays well, that makes a product that a lot of people need, right? And so I think in some ways that's the upside to trying to focus on getting more chip manufacturing here in the States, right? So I just think that's a win. That's a win win, right? Yeah, because chip manufacturing, one of the things that Apple stated, they have apparently a big leap coming forward with the iPhone 17, and they think that they're going to have to manufacture these in China. I was reading Tim Cook talking about it because they're saying that China is the only nation that's capable of achieving what they're trying to put into these. Is it China or Taiwan? I believe. I don't know. I believe it's China. I think. Because I think I certainly, I don't know definitively either, right? But when I think of, actually maybe it's just manufacturing, that's the issue of not chips. But see if you could find what Tim Cook said about needing to develop the iPhone or manufacture of the iPhone 17 because I think a lot of their stuff they do in India now, but they think this new one is going to be sophisticated. They're going to have to have it made back in China. Yeah. So when I think of cutting edge chip capability, I think of TSMC, that is in Taiwan, right? And they've got those machines, the ASML machines that are, this is a very interesting thing, right? So the machines that help make some of those tiny chips that are inside the iPhone, they're made by this machine that's developed by a company called ASML over in the Netherlands. And part of me thinks it's like, that's a very small brain trust of people that are making machines that are kind of setting the pace for, you know, because I think about how, what happens if somebody, you know, a bus has an accident or something like that, right? Because it's just like such a small group of people that have this skill on how to make these tiny little features that are two or three nanometers. I mean, that's like, that's crazy small. So we're, we're percentage of population can do that. Right, there's not a lot. And two or three nanometers, it's like, that's, you know, if you were to put DNA on the table, right, and you calculated two or three nanometers, it'd be, it'd be very, oh, here, let me give you, here's a, here's a better comparison. If you hold a marble in your hand and you imagine that is one nanometer, right, it just kind of compares an error. So you have a marble in your hand, that's one nanometer. Well, how big is a meter? A meter is the size of the earth by comparison. Just to put a nanometer in mind, right, so we can all envision a meter, right, so that puts a nanometer to scale, right? And so there, they're making things the lateral features that have this, you know, handful of nanometers in mind. Now, that said, I do think, I do think that is so crazy. I do think chips are reaching a limit in terms of what they can do for the lateral features. The next big chapter, I think for chips is they're going to go 3D. They're going to start making them, they've got a bunch of efforts in place to try and figure out how to make chips much more 3D, like especially when they may even include multiple different chips, right, that serve different purposes, if you will. You'll no longer just have the single flat chip that does this surface. There'll be a bunch of chips on top one or another that get integrated into a semi. You already see it in this tire pressure monitor system. There's a little chip here on the back of it. It's actually a system of chips, there's a bunch of chips in that little silver piece on the end there. Like a processor, there's a Bluetooth module, there's a pressure sensor, and then there's a receiver. The customer that's not there, right? So that little shiny silver piece, that shiny silver piece, that's not only just the pressure sensor, it's all the other support electronics and everything else is just simple dumb stuff. And a big battery in comparison to everything else. And a big battery that has to last five years, right? So that's why they, and this is not, you don't take the lid off this. thing, this is glued on, right? Right. When it's done, you're just doing it away. Right. So that's the current operating process. So, so crazy. Now when you think about the current capabilities of AI and how it's expanding at a very rapid rate, do you think that that will assist us in being able to figure out new ways to accomplish these tasks? You know, I think, so when AI first came out, I tried it a few times and I wasn't satisfied with the quality of what I was able to do with it. This is a number of years ago, right? But in the last 12 months, I've kind of gotten in the habit of using it much more in a lot of the different things that I do. And it certainly does bring a lot of value in certain areas. And you know, a lot of people talk about artificial intelligence is going to kill us. Oh my gosh, it's going to kill us. I don't think it's artificial intelligence that's going to, you know, that's going to be a potential big problem. It's more a measure of artificial incompetence. Right. So let me unpack that. Okay. So I think AI is an amazing tool and it's only going to get more useful as we continue to move forward and I use it every single day. Right. In terms of different things that I explore, it's extremely useful. And there's times when you're interacting with it where you might even think to yourself, come on, is there some dude actually typing on the other side of this screen? Cause it's like, it's joking with me for crying out. And it's instantaneous. Right. And it's instantaneous. Right. And so I think as human beings, we tend to anthropomorphize everything. Right. And so I think in a lot of ways, we want to give it more credit than it is due. Right. And so we, when we interact with it, we might think based on the quality of the interaction. Oh my gosh, this stuff is amazing. This is artificial general intelligence. But then it'll go off and do something totally boneheaded and you'll even call it on it. And it'll say, no, I did this exactly right. And it's just like, you know from your own training, right, that whatever it offered up is quite, quite wrong. Right. And so I keep waiting for somebody, do you remember the movie, Dr. Strange love from the 60s? Right. And this movie of absurdity showing, you know, how, in competence in the government, the military leads to the destruction of the world, if you will. You know, it's like we need a Stanley Kubrick equivalent today to do a movie called AI Bob, right, where AI Bob, you know, accidentally takes out the world while trying to help, right? Right. Right. Right. And it just, I think it's one of those things where I think AI is an amazing tool. You need to find out more ways to use it. It's incredible. But I think we just need to remind ourselves, it's not quite as capable as we might think it is. And we need to be careful of that so that we don't, you know, put it in control of something in a certain way where because it has these other faults, right, it does something that's really unfortunate. Right. So we have to make sure that it's reached a very high level proficiency before it gets right. Or just be careful how we use it and never be afraid to question when it provides. Right. Because there's no question, it helps me be faster at a lot of stuff I want to do. Right. But I have a lot of skills and talent that I use to filter whatever it's given me. And I know that's totally wrong. Right. But I wouldn't be able to do that. I just trust it. I'd build something that kills everybody. Yeah. That's, uh, dang it. I forgot to carry the two. Well, when you, when you think about the potential future versions of AI, that's where things get very interesting. Because if you do get to a point where it achieves a much higher level of understanding of all the physical properties of the universe and does really understand the quantum vacuum. It does really understand how to utilize it. So I think, I think one of the things, because I have been thinking about this is, and I know a lot of other people are trying to figure out how to use AI to go through and help navigate on physics frontiers. AI is trained on a bunch of existing data. Right. And so in some ways, it is an enormous experiment in statistics. And so I would wonder how much an AI system by itself. in statistics. And so I would wonder how much an AI system by itself could innovate new ideas. It certainly could recognize patterns. Once you institute sentience and then if it's possible at all to make it creative. That's where I wonder what great question. And I'm not an AI expert. I'm going to tread very carefully here. When I think about how they train AI today it is certainly a measure of statistics. Right? And so when you talk about an AI agent being able to actually think in the way that you and I might consider thinking. I don't think anything that we have does that per se. Right? You just got a bunch of GPUs that are taking an input and then passing it through a matrix of all this stuff that's from training. And then so the statistics of what comes out, right, is a result of whatever training that was done. So it's not like it's not like Leonardo da Vinci imagining where he's going to put his next brushstroke on the ceiling of the the cysteine chapel. But certainly it could potentially take an image of the cysteine chapel and mix it with an image of some other modern art or whatever and come up with some cool homogenization of things. Right? And so forth. So I still think I think we need to better understand what is consciousness. Right? Before we can really even do that. What do you think it is? Oh, that's yeah. I know you thought about it. You think let everything. Right. I don't know. It's a good question. I would speculate. Right. Maybe this comes down to the nature of the quantum field, the quantum vacuum. I think there are other forms of radiation scalar field fluctuations with the quantum field that are beyond electromagnetic, like the lights in this room that's electrifying that. It's radiation. Scalar fluctuations would potentially be a whole other realm of radiation that we currently don't have any sensors to detect. Right? But maybe biology uses those types of things. And so there's there are things inside cell structures called microtubules. I think Hal maybe even mentioned something about microtubules when he was here the other day. But cells have microtubules structures in them. And I think that may be connected to the idea of consciousness. Although I don't have a well enough formulated answer to be able to defend anything. So I'm treading very carefully because this is not my area of expertise. But it's on the spectrum. It is fun to speculate. And maybe we can maybe we can schedule another opportunity to come back and we can talk about consciousness, bring a couple other folks that are more cognizant than me. I would love that. Yeah. I want to organize that. Yeah. Let's know who you would call. I don't know yet. I'll think about how to do it. I'll have a think. I actually probably have a couple other cool ideas for cool things. We can we can confirm on. I think a lot of people would really enjoy learning and listening about. Well, that was the fantastic collaboration with people that have theories about consciousness along with these theories, these quantum theories. Yeah. Yeah. Fascinating stuff. Yeah. Harold, thank you so much. Yeah. So interesting. And I'm so happy that people like you are out there in the world working on this stuff, which I'm sure one day, you know, when people look at the past and say, boy, look at those cave people, look what they're doing. But you know what I'm saying? Because like, like we would look at the Victorian people or we would look at people from thousands of years ago. I think they'll look back at this going while they were, this is where it all started. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This was the moment. Yeah. So it's definitely do that. We'll definitely have another visit and bring in some people that will explore consciousness together. Sounds good. I love it. Thank you so much. Really appreciate it. Thank you, thank you for having us. Bye, buddy. Yeah.