The general gun experience. I don't know exactly what's happening. All I know is very short clips that I found on the internet But the funniest thing is this one guy on Twitter that was saying a while back I live on a ground floor apartment and I hear Jews underneath me They're like you're out of your fucking mind. Yeah, that's anti-Semitic exactly and now he's like I told you I was a great thing, but this guy was What are they doing like I heard that they hired people to build like this tunnel and they were hanging out and like the people would live They're like three weeks these like migrant workers Which is digging this tunnel and they stayed there for three weeks, but what's the purpose of it? I have no idea. I have no idea. I don't know anything I just know that there's tunnels and that this this is one video of this guy coming out of the sewer So he lifts a manhole cover comes out of the sewer and then he's fucking wandering around This is civic Jewish guy and there was like what the fuck are you doing down there? Yeah, that's really bizarre they wouldn't come out to the cops had to get them out like they were like We don't want to come out and they were like charged with disorderly conductus. I don't know the whole fucking world is just weird What do you know about this Jamie anything? Yeah, but that's I've gotten is out that they started baking them during COVID But that like it lined it makes sense, but it also you see the tunnels are like no way that's Not even do that in two years or a year or six months or whatever They weren't exactly nice tunnels either. They were just kind of shitty rudimentary Basic holes where they were they do miss theirs. That was they thought the world's gonna end I Wait man the tunnels are so big that you don't think they could make them in two years. Is that what you're saying? Some of them look big. Really? How do you I mean some of them are saying they go multi they're going to multiple different buildings It's like a series of tunnels. It's not just let's look into this. There's still looking into it I don't know like the way it's a guy right is it yesterday It's only been discovered a couple years ago. I forget how a couple years ago Read it a days ago. It's something I forget even how they discovered it. I think they were looking It's probably that guy complaining you probably heard something and then maybe they saw somebody coming to a manhole cover and somebody put two and two together I have no idea what happened. Yeah, it's strange, but it's very bizarre And then of course there's conspiracy theories and what are they doing down there and evil Evil theory they immediately want to pour concrete in it which makes sense because it's probably not safe You got it's not supporting the weight of the you know Of all the buildings above it. Yeah, you don't think of that when you move into an apartment building this I'm asshole might build a tunnel The building on you Much of you're on the ground floor and you're like why is my floor so much? These assholes are building a sinkhole under my house Yeah, I don't uh, but it's funny how like things are so crazy like you read about something like that And it doesn't even stand out that much like we talk about it now And then tomorrow be some of the weird shit right like every day it's something weird. It's something crazy. Yeah Yeah, it's way more than ever before. Yeah, we got we got jamming Happen on Monday afternoon. I was very Something about tunneling. Yeah, which is so crazy. Yeah, that's such a commitment. Yeah Isn't it interesting like you build on top of a building? It's no big deal Would you go under the building like what are you doing? Yeah, you're really destabilizing right? Tunnel for several hours police pleaded with the young men to leave the entrance to the tunnel according to the witnesses After they refused the officers covered the area with a wire curtain and entered the dusty crevasse with zip ties to detain the protesters When they took the first person out with zip ties that's when the outbursts happened Burushed to haunt a 21-year-old study of the synagogue who videotaped the congregants fighting Almost everyone was against what they did But as soon as people saw the handcuffs there was confusion and pushing footage posted to social media shows Scores of onlookers mostly young men jeering at the NYPD's community affairs officers Some lifted wooden desks into the air sending prayer books scattering in response the officer Appeared to deploy an irritating spray to disperse the group So how do they find the out about this? I don't know but even after hearing that I still know nothing about what they were doing or why I think they're just starting to try to figure it out So it's a scroll down a little bit Okay, a good like actually mentioned on what the initial call was for that was trying to switch to different articles And why they being called protesters like what were they protesting if you're just sitting in a tunnel? Is that actually a protest everyone's a protest? Yeah, and everyone's an activist yeah Officials in local said young men the community recently built the passage to the sanctuary in secret when the groups leaders Tried to seal it off on Monday. They staged a protest to turn violent as police moved in to make arrests Huh take to make a tunnel? I'm doing assuming a couple years if it went that that far It all depends entirely on what's down there already do what they put in pot dirt in their pockets like fucking Shawshank That's what they said they were doing they had like dirt in a pocket Boy asshole endeavor what a rough time for the Jews it is yeah Yeah, this doesn't the shit from all angles. They really are yeah this on top of that And and it's like the whole the whole planet just hates each other everybody fucking hates each other weird right? It is I don't even think it's about the issues I don't think people necessarily people believe what they believe But I think it's more the the addiction to arguing and the addiction to being angry like no matter what the subject People just hate each other if they give if if someone gives the wrong answer the people who think it's the wrong answer hit your guts