Go to the show, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Park, ask my night, all day! Pleasure meeting. I'll close the certificate. Right there. That's good. Pulling off this from your face. So I usually tell people. Well I'm enjoying your book. Which one are you reading? I'm in the middle of... Which one? Interengineering. Oh, okay. Why is that funny? Is that funny? No, that was the... I mean after that, three books have come, so I was thinking you must have gotten more recent one. Well I found some of your stuff online and I started watching some of your videos online and they're very interesting and very educational. And then I said, alright, let me find out what this guy's all about. So I got into that book. That's good. How did you find out about me? Because your people reached out to be on here. Well right now we are on this soil mission. I brought you a little bit of gift, this is an Indian end. This leaf, an empty stomach if you just chew, two leaves they're not very pleasant to eat and then drink some maybe a tepid water. Okay. It is a great blood purifier. Blood purifier. Yes. How's the purifier blood? How's that work? It has the necessary juices in it to do that. The necessary juices. Save soil. I was wondered about these things about pots that plants come in. Do you think plants like that? Definitely not. They would like to grow wild. This is just a baby. It's in a nursery. You have to take it home and put it in your backyard. Okay. That's what I'm here. All of my bigger pots. Because once I started learning about mycology and this is not where it would like to grow. This is just a baby. Just a baby. Even a big pot. They don't really like that, right? They would like to be in the ground. This ground is best in no question because there is a ecosystem. Yes. You just have to connect with it. Yes. There's nothing like the ground. But because in Texas or in Austin it could get too cold for her. Oh. So she may not survive in your garden then you have to bring her in. I don't want her to die. So wintertime maybe you will have to bring it in. So maybe I can pot it outside during the spring and then put it inside. Winter you have to bring her in. Okay. We'll work it out. She's Indian. Yeah. I know. I'm an Indian, not an Indian or American. Right. They have a lot of Indian animals in Texas believe it or not. Really? Yeah. Access deer. It's very common animal out here. Really. Yeah. They imported them here. I don't know when but they're all over the place. I saw one like six months ago on the side of the road. Yeah. So some things from India survived. But a lot of them died off. Last year we had a very big freeze that lasted for a couple of weeks and a lot of exotic animals from other countries that are brought in. Unless they're from northern part of India. Well, it's in the Himalayan region. They may survive. Right. But South Indian animals like me won't make it in winter. So you're on this grand tour right now you're saying. You just got back from New York right? Yes. And I just came from India two days ago. Then I was in New York, Tennessee, New York, and here and today. This night I'm leaving for Caribbean because we are making signing some memorandum of understanding with the karaokeom nations for the soil safe soil moment. So they're all coming on board. We have made a policy document specific for each country depending on their latitude soil types, economic conditions and agricultural traditions of an individual nation based on this 192 nations we've made soil policies. So this is something that you're very concerned about and rightly so that there's a problem with the top soil in America in particular that we've been aware of for a long time. There's only like what's the number like 45 years worth of top soil left if we go about practices the same way? Generally most human agencies are talking about something like 60 to 80 harvests which could be somewhere between 45 to 60 years of top soil. But it's not like it's suddenly going to get over one day. It's not like it's not like a bank account. It'll start sliding which is already sliding. So sliding means on one level there is loss of nutrients in the food and another level the yields are coming down. We're going on increasing the inputs. The input cost is going up. They tell me 50 percent of the American farmers have not seen a dollar in the last 12 years and the highest suicide rate among all professions is among the farming community in the United States. Really? Yes. It is so in India also. I know it's in India and I thought they attributed that a lot to debt. There are some issues. But why debt? Why the debt is piling up? The banks give debt only what is suitable for that crop. It's not like they're going to give you a billion dollars to do some farming. They're going to calculate and give you why is he not able to pay it back? He's not able to pay it back one main reason is the input cost is going up year-on-year because the soil fertility is going down and the input cost is going up to a point where it's no more practical to do it. There was also some sort of an issue with Monsanto, correct? Those things are there but you don't think that's a big deal? It would be if it came big time but Monsanto is not so big time in India yet. It's not. No, the policies have kind of blocked it and made it regulated. So we have not taken to GMO crops in a big way. Only a few items we have taken. that people are protesting and generally farmers are aware and most people lodge a number of farmers have rejected it. So that's a different aspect. See, the problem is always we are always saying home to hit. All right. So this is a moment which is not against anybody because in this one thing we can all come together as one. We may be of different nations, we may be of different racial backgrounds, religious backgrounds, caste, creed, gender, whatever and political ideologies, whatever. But we all come from soil, live off the soil and when we die we go back to the soil. The only question we have in our life is will we get this that soil is the basis of our existence here? Will we get this now or will we get it when we buried? That's only choice we have. So having said that, see people are talking about organic farming. These are all urban people talking about it. They've never formed in their life. They don't know what it means to do organic farming. Right now if the world shifts to organic farming, 100%, let's say tomorrow morning. Our food production in the world will come down to 20 to 25% of what it is right now. So that is death for most of the population. So when they're talking about organic farming, they're talking about farmer with no pesticides. No herbicides, no fertilizer, all this. No fertilizer? Yeah. Is it non-organic? Yes, it is chemical fertilizer, right? Okay. But what about organic fertilizer? That is a manure. That is organic content is different. So people who are talking about this, it's an ideal life. But will farmer who is doing it for his commercial requirement, will he be able to conduct his agriculture in an idealistic way? No believe me. I have an engage with farmers. It's not like that. Like you're eating good food. But if you have yourself checked up, your doctor may say, well your calcium is a little deficient, your iron is deficient. So take these two pills. So you took these two pills and tomorrow you felt great. Then you decided you don't have to really eat food, you can just eat a lot of these pills and you will be fine. That is how we have done agriculture. We had rich soil in that whatever is with this gentler, we put a little bit of nitrogen or phosphate or something. Suddenly the crops burst out. Then we forgot that we have to put organic content. We just started putting these salts forever and in 25 to 30 years time the soil becomes fallow. Yeah, there's a book I read years ago called Dead Doctors Don't Lie by a man named Dr. Joel Wallach and it talked about mineral deficiencies from top soils. It was a big issue. And one of the things that he brought up is that people who grow agriculture and have animals have known forever that they have to supplement the animals' diets with minerals. And that this is primarily because the food that they're getting is not mineraly sufficient and that's the same thing with their own food. Because even though you can grow a lot of these vegetables, you're not getting the same nutrients in the world. Not good if you had rich top soils. Not good dog. See the amount of nourishment or micronutrients that you got from a given vegetable, let's say in early 20th century, let's say 1920. And today what you're getting from the same thing is approximately 10% of the 100%. Yes, 90% drop has happened. Wow. So it's especially this food. These studies are available in United States. Everywhere in the world there are not enough studies but it could be a similar number. If not the same amount. It could be something like that anywhere between 10 to 25% let's say. For example, if you ate an orange in 1920, today to get the same stuff, you will have to eat eight oranges. Wow. So it's simply not practical. So people think this malnourishment, these problems and this starvation, these things will happen only to Africa or South America or somewhere. No. World Food Program predicts that by 2035 there could be famines around Illinois region. Illinois. Yes. Really? Because the food that they're eating is deficient. No, the thing is the soil has been so used up. You heard of 1930s, the dust bowl. Yes. Yesterday I was in New York and I was talking to somebody there. So they're saying that some whatever volume, I don't know the volume but some enormous amount of dust came and settled in New York City. And the dust bowls just came up like, you know, it just blinded the whole half the country. So people are calculating how many whatever million tons or hundreds and thousands of tons of dust or soil landed up in New York City. See it stopped in New York City because of the tall buildings and stuff. But how many millions of tons of soil, American soil went and landed in Atlantic Ocean that you can never calculate, right? Right. Farmers are growing these monocrop agriculture, like if they're growing corn or soy or things like that. Is that part of the problems? Yes. It's not a regenerative agriculture, none of manure, animals grazing in the same lands. Monoculture is a basic problem. Okay. And we've gotten into this kind of thing because we're looking at soil like some industrial machine that we put in so much and we have to get so much. But soil is a living thing. If you take a handful of soil, there are anywhere between seven to 10 billion organisms in it, anywhere between 50 to 75,000 species of organisms in it. But now with, we are plowing with machines, it plows anywhere between 12 to 14 inches. 87% of the life on this planet, including you and me, come from the first 12 to 15 inches of the soil. But we are plowing the soil 12 to 14 inches, living it open to harsh sunlight and living it like that for months. That itself is a tremendous damage. We have taken to this because of monoculture, you crop everything at once. If it was multi-culture, you would crop one thing, the other thing would be still there. And when you buy the time you crop that, another one would have again grown up, you know? Yeah. Even greenery on the soil and organic activity would be going on. Microorganisms would be alive and active. But now it's a single crop. You take everything out by machines, plow it and leave it open to the sun. That's causing a massive damage. Now, if we do it another way, if you have a bunch of different plants growing there and you leave trees for shade and all sorts of... Is there enough land with what they're growing on now, with the amount of food they're growing now? Is this scalable? If you have some sort of regenerative agriculture plan? We can grow much more on much less land. Really? Yes. See, we have been doing this for over 24, 25 years now. We've converted a few hundred thousand farmers into what is called as tree-based agriculture. Earlier we used to call it as agroforestry. Then it came under trouble because then the whole thing went under the forest ministry. Forest ministry is full of restrictions. It is actually agriculture land, but it was called as agroforestry. So we retitled it as tree-based agriculture. So now it's under the agriculture ministry because it's farmers land. It's not forest land. So by doing this properly, there are scientific ways of doing it. crops can be done differently and pruning the trees at the right time and taking that... See, enough green material should be generated on the farm. Enough animal waste must be generated on the farm. Right now animals have gone out of the farms and trees have gone off the farm. So where is the organic material? These are only two sources of organic material that you have in the world. You may have any... Because I've been in California in the last month and whatever you say, somebody comes up and says, said, Guru, my friend has made an app. It can solve any problem. See, with technology, you may be able to improve the application. I'll give that margin. But you cannot generate organic content with technology. It's only plant life and animal life which can create organic content. There is no way you can generate organic content anywhere else. It has to come from the land. Simply there is no other way. If I can tell you a joke, you're getting very serious about this soil business. I love a joke. This happened in 2016. A few scientists from the planet got an appointment with God. They wanted to meet him. They went there and said, hey, well man, you don't pretty well with creation. But today everything that you can do, we can also do. It's time you retire. God said, oh, is that so? What is it that you can do? They dug up a little bit of soil and made a vague picture of a human child and did so many things. And within a few minutes the child set up a life. God said, oh, that's really impressive. But first, get your own soil. Everything, whether it's a worm or an insect or a plant or a bird or an animal or human beings, we've all come from soil. There is nothing else here on this planet which is not the source is not soil. Everything, the source is soil. So, safety has something that's a large monocrop like corn. It's a big one in America. And you wanted to transform the way they're growing corn and make it so that it's sustainable, that you have some sort of regenerative agriculture situation. How would you do that? If you wanted to grow monocrops, I wouldn't advise that. That's not the best way to do it. But for commercial reasons, you wanted to do monocropping. All right. You're a corn farmer. You don't want to grow anything else if that is so. You must put back substantial amount of organic content because even if you take a corn plant which grows almost six to seven feet tall and you're only eating the corn, you don't have animals on the farm largely. If you're just the plant part of it, if you just chop it into pieces and put it back in the soil, the soil will be very happy. You got your corn anyway. And soil will be very rich. What do they do with it now? Right now they bail it up and sell it to somebody. Some people in some countries, they just burn it. They use it as fuel for household purposes or they use it in so many other ways. But it is not going back into the soil. And they just use commercial fertilizer for that. We'll last see that will last for first 10, 20 years maximum. After that, it'll start diminishing because you can't just grow with salts. You need organic content. Because the way the soil mechanics happen is, it's a very complex and sophisticated marketplace. The plants have to capture the carbon from the atmosphere and make it into carbon sugars and that is the currency with which it can exchange for nutrients with organisms. They won't give it free. So even in our own stomach, you today you know that without the gut microveum, you cannot really digest the food that you eat without their cooperation. So what is happening in the soil is probably a thousand, ten thousand or a million times more complex operation. Who we are right now as a life? We are just a consequence of what's happening in the soil. Even in the evolutionary process, that's how it's happened. That today what we are right now, over 60% of our bodies actually microorganisms, only 40% is our parental genetics. Rest is all microorganisms. So what we are now is a reflection of what's in the soil. The moment you weaken the soil, life on the planet will start becoming weak. People don't notice this. I know this is a controversial thing to say, but I think you're known for controversy. So what's my problem? So I'm saying, see for example, there are certain countries which are suffering this whole corona virus much more than the other. I don't want to make an absolute statement about this, but one thing is something we must look at is any doctor. You don't need a top virologist. A simple doctor will tell you if you lack vitamin A, vitamin B6, B12, D, E and foliate, an iron and zinc and magnesium in your system, you will become susceptible to upper respiratory tract infections. This is a known fact. Yes. So what is the deficiency in America? Vitamin E, most Americans are 90% deficient. D. Yes. Vitamin A, 43% deficient. Vitamin C, 39% deficient like this, you can go on. With all these deficiencies, we are trying to make it up with pills. I see I was in Los Angeles last month and there's a building-sized hoarding which says my favorite pharmacy said, when did this happen? When the next thing is, you'll say my favorite hospital. Next thing you'll say my favorite symmetry. Your pharmacy and hospital and symmetry are not favorite places. We go there only when it's inevitable. We may have to go there, but we don't wish to go there. When you say something is my favorite, you want to go there. All right? That's what it means. So you should never have a favorite pharmacy or a favorite symmetry for that matter. It is a place when it's inevitable, something some trouble came. We will have to go. But today it's become the norm in, well, the most affluent country in the nation where there's a variety of choices of nourishment. In this country, without pills, you cannot exist because the food doesn't have the stuff. So once the food doesn't have the stuff, people won't have it either. All animals won't have it either. So the very species will become weaker and weaker by the day. In a few generations, it'll become so weak that we won't be able to sustain a common cold. We could become like that. So you taking a pill will bridge you for some time. It is not a solution for life. When something is lacking, a pill will bridge us across a little bit. But it is not a solution how it comes through the complex mechanism of food and how it it becomes part of our body and a simple chemical of a tablet, they are not the same thing. They will not do the same things to us. And what other consequences it has? Nobody can ever estimate it because there are so many other consequences in a country like United States where there is a whole choice of nourishment and a whole choice of lifestyles. You're spending nearly three and a half trillion dollars in healthcare. That is a huge statement about America's health. Well, it is very obvious if you look at most Americans and what is really interesting is there has been some photos that people have put up recently of beaches from the 1970s. And you see these people on the beach with their shirts off and bikinis on and they look so good. They look so much healthier. They look so much different than people look today. When you go to the beach today, you have a large, I mean it is a representative of America. And in America, some large percentage of people are overweight. And a lot of that is because of the food choices. A lot of that is because what is fast and quick and available. One thing about obesity is, see when the food lacks the necessary nutrients, the body longs for more food to fulfill that need. So you end up eating more and more thinking, I mean the body is thinking that it will get nourishment by eating more. That more makes you grow horizontally. Yes. And it is also like the kind of food. If there is food that has a lot of sugar in it, your body freaks out and it just wants more of it and it can't stop eating it because it is an unnatural state to have that much sugar and something that doesn't have fiber or that doesn't leave you drinking a sugary drink. I mean, I don't know how to say this. I am not being disparaging about a nation or a society. But the food choices in America are atrocious. There is a lot of bad choices. But there is also a disconnect in America because there are so many people that live in urban environments that are completely removed from the process of growing, raising cattle, raising animals, raising food, growing vegetables. They have no connection to it. They don't know about it at all. They just look for the term organic when they go to the supermarket and they feel like they are healthy if they do that. I mean, this is not talking about women's choices of footwear. But I call this high-heal life. That means you're well about earth. You're living in an apartment which is 14 floors above the earth. You're walking all the time with insulated from the earth. In every way you are trying to be away from the earth. Which is a wrong way. You people may believe they will go to different types of heavens depending on their belief systems. But we all come from the same sorry being connected with that is most essential because the body is thriving only because of its natural connection. Well they have classes now where people are grounding. Where they go outside and they take the shoes off and walk around and lay on the ground. They're paying money to hug the cow. Legitimate tree hugging. Like real tree hugging. It used to be a term that we would use to people to make fun of them. But now it's legitimate. Like people are hugging trees to try to get better. Grounding is like the principles of grounding. The idea is that there's some sort of a connection that you get from mother earth. The only way you get it is to be bare skin touching the grass and the soil. And that there's actually a benefit to that. No, they're mainly talking about the electrical positive charge getting neutralized. That is true. It is true. It is true. But it's not the most important aspect. The more important aspect is the microbial life in your body and the microbial life in the soil or cousins. They need to meet. They need reunions. Yes. If that doesn't happen, you're living like a lab rat all the time washing yourself up with all kinds of things that nothing can be on your hands. Nothing can be on your feet. So there is no connection with the source. And that the body suffers. And today there is substantial scientific data to show how, you know, micronutrients or lack of micronutrients and mental illnesses are very directly connected. Yes. Today, the WHO is predicting mental illness pandemic. See what this means is we said a coronavirus pandemic. What this means is if we are in this room, three people. All three of us are susceptible. We may get it. All right. Now, mental illness pandemic means just that. Any one of us can go lose it right now. Well, we're going there. I mean, in 2020, in Japan, more people committed suicide than they died of coronavirus. How's that? It's pretty crazy. So in a country where it's a fluent, they're not dying for economic reasons obviously. because of poverty, not because of hunger. No, just they're not able to handle their own minds. One important aspect, it's not the only aspect, but one important aspect is lack of micronutrients that's directly collected to the type of soil that we're walking upon right now when we grow food. When we say where we grow food, 71% of the world's soil or world's land is under cultivation in the world. So why I'm focusing on agricultural soil. People ask why not, what rain for us? Why not the ocean? Yes, all those things need to be taken care of. I 100% agree with that. But agricultural soil is that place. Agricultural land is that place, which is every day tended to buy a human being. A man or woman is on the land tending to it. The place that is being regularly tended to buy a human being is in its worst possible condition where there is no human footprint. Everything seems to be fine. Well, the problem is just this. See, we are the most intelligent species on the planet or more intellectual species on the planet. I would like to withdraw the intelligent aspect. We are the most competent for sure in terms of ability to do things. Our competence is increasing by the day what 1000 people or 10,000 people could not do a thousand years ago. Today one man can do. That is the level of competence because of technology. We have that. With this level of competence and intellect, one important thing is we must be functioning consciously. If we function unconsciously and compulsively, we become a destructive force. All this destruction has happened not because of some evil plan. When you mentioned a company and said, is it them? This is why I don't want this narrative to grow. It is not happened because of some evil plan. This has happened in search of human well-being. In search of human being. Human being is trying to be happy. Human being is trying to live well. That is why they turn the planet upside down, isn't it? In some ways, but it's also profit. People want to think that is the only way they can be well. Those who are making losses are the well. Yes, sort of. But a lot of them, they're already well. They're greedy. They've gotten past the points of being well. Now they've gotten connected to the idea of accumulating vast sums of money. No, that is being judgmental, calling somebody greedy. Because if I have one meal a day, which is my normal, I think I'm doing fine. If somebody else has one meal a day, he thinks he's very poor. He wants to. The guy is having two things he's poor because somebody else is having three. One who has a little home, he thinks he's poor because somebody has a big home like this. So what is greed and what is not greed? I won't tell you what greed is. If you make choices where you know that the thing that you're doing, whether you're distributing a product or whether you're causing an action that is going to be detrimental to human beings, but you cover up the data to hide the fact that it's going to be detrimental because you want to maximize your product. or causing an action that is going to be detrimental to human beings. But you cover up the data to hide the fact that it's going to be detrimental because you want to maximize your profit and you don't care about the negative impact it has on people because you're only thinking about money. And you're already substantially wealthy. That by definition is being greedy. Right? See, by definition, it's like this. Somebody is dreaming of a million dollars. He thinks that is the ultimate goal in his life. But a guy who has a million is wanting to be a billionaire. Right. One who is a billionaire, he looks at somebody who has hundred billion dollars. He thinks at least that much he must have. Right. So I'm saying, in fact, in fact, being judgmental about this, human well-being is sought from outside. That is the whole problem. See, human experience essentially happens wrong with him. Whether it's your joy or misery comes from within you, isn't it? Maybe somebody or something can stimulate it from outside, but still it happens within you. Joy and misery happens from within you. Pain and pleasure happens from within you. Agony and ecstasy happens from within you. Every human experience happens from within you. But in pursuit of happiness, we're turning the world upside down. Because this is the case of a, you know, there was an old potato farmer. One day he wanted to eat apples, so he went to an apple tree. But by habit, he started digging for the apples. Till the tree came down on him because he's a potato farmer. So right now, human beings have become like this. They have gotten used to this that they think by getting this, by getting that, by having one more thing and one more thing, they're going to be happy. Yes. But human experience happens from within. If you take charge of your interiority, being peaceful and happy is a natural consequence of that. But for convenience and comfort, we do things outside. To create impact, we do things outside. So this experience of, if human beings were naturally joyful by their own nature, they would only do what is needed, nothing more, nothing less. But right now, they're in pursuit of happiness. You can't stop them. Yeah, they are in pursuit of happiness, but they're also, again, in pursuit of profit because it's a number-based system. So it becomes like a game. And you get connected to corporations. When you're in a corporation, there's a diffusion of responsibility. Because you don't think about your own involvement, and what the corporation is doing, you think about your role, what you do as a job, and then you try to maximize profit. And it's a game that people get wrapped up in. Yeah, but that is, doesn't make them happy. You're absolutely correct. No, no, it's in pursuit of happiness, but what's in pursuit of success? See, most human beings cannot be happy if they're not successful, isn't it? There's a lot of that. Yes. No, they get medicated to help them get happy. That's a lot of people. I mean, what percentage of people are not following by the principles that you're espousing, which are very natural and very healthy. And they instead follow this corporate structure, the corporate guidelines, they follow that path, and they're not happy. So what do they do? They medicate themselves. No, today we've come to this place where if you want to be peaceful, you need a chemical. You want to be joyful, you need a chemical, you want to be helpful, you need a chemical. Well, you want to be ecstatic, of course, there is a chemical. Right. So what is the consequence of this? Why this is happening? One thing is in this generation, one thing that's happened in people's minds is the heaven has collapsed in people's minds. The heaven. Yes. How so? See, I've been talking to people 50 years ago if I spoke to people, and I asked how many of you want to go to heaven, almost 80% would raise their hands. Today you go to your university and ask them how many of you want to go to heaven? They'll say, they think it's a ridiculous question. All right, nobody will raise their hand. So in their minds, heaven has collapsed, there's no place to go. So they want to do everything here. All right. I said. So they have not found how to be joyful and ecstatic within themselves. So chemical usage initially became alcohol, then it became chemicals, it's getting stronger and stronger. And so many people dying of those things every day and illnesses, and it's costing a nation and the world a lot. It's not just in one country, it's going across the world. Law enforcement agencies may be controlling it a little bit, but they can never control it totally because the consumption is mass-based. It is more people maybe, consuming these things than people eating bread. It's becoming like that. So this whole moment where it's going means, if you do not raise human consciousness, if you do not teach people how to sit here, feeling absolutely blissed out within yourself by your own nature because this human mechanism is the most sophisticated chemical factory. If you were a good CEO, you would produce the chemicals that will give you fantastic experience. If you're a lousy CEO, you're giving yourself a bad experience. Yes. Now you're buying chemicals from outside to fix that. All right. So essentially you're a bad manager of your own system. You're not taking charge of this. Why does that happen? Because your education, your society, is talking about conquering the world, but never thought you anything about how to take charge of this. Do you agree with me? The most in this room, there's so much technology here. In this room, the most complex and sophisticated technology is within your system. Yes or no? Human system. Yes. This is. Have you did the users manual? There's no users manual. There is. There is? Yes. Where is it at? It built into the machine. Oh, how do I get it? You need to pay attention. You're reading an engineering. Read that carefully. I'm reading it. I'm in the middle. I'm at part two. There are pointers as to how to read your own users manual. Yes. Let me take you back to this concept of heaven. You know, when you're talking about people in universities, that you say how many of them want to go to heaven, the problem is they don't have any evidence of heaven. And so when a lot of these young people that are atheists or agnostics, they don't want to buy into anything that they believe is connected to fairy tales. So they're connected to some sort of an ideology that they believe was manufactured to control people and to keep people in their minds. That's right. They have it in their minds. In their minds. But it's also because heaven is connected to religion and religion is connected to atrocities. There's a lot of people that think of religion, they think of the evils of the Catholic Church or they think of, you know, what religion has justified the horrors of history, the things that people have done in the name of religion. So a lot of younger sophisticated intelligent people don't want to believe in anything that there's no evidence for. So when you say how many of you want to go to heaven, say show me a video, tell me where I'm going. Have you ever met the heaven? I am not asking that question. I know. Offering a ticket. I'm just telling you, heaven is collapsed in people's mind, which is a good thing because... It's a good thing. It is because the idea that this is not the place to live well. There's another place where you live right. It's a wrong idea. Right. This is the place to live well. You can have heaven right here. Yes. And who told you you're not already in heaven and making a mess out of it? No one. I think that's possible. We are in a heaven making a mess out of it. We also right now. Right now, too. Whether we want to fix the soil or we want to fix the human mind, we're only trying to see that you don't mess up the heaven in which we have landed. Yes. I could agree with that. I think the problem is the term heaven. When you say it, people think of a biblical heaven. They think of a place that you go in. No, no. Every religion has their own kind of heaven. That's the whole thing. I'm saying before Bible came, there have been heavens in other places. Yes. Yes. I think I found this thing good about this soil is, see, people may even have separate heavens to go to, but we all come from the same soil. Our bodies go back to the same soil. So this is a unifying factor irrespective of one's religion, caste, creed, whatever else. So in your mind, this concept of heaven relates to like a harmony amongst yourself, the people, the living things around you, including the soil. See, essentially it's like this. If you feel pleasant in your body, we call this health. Yes. If you feel very pleasant in your body, we call this pleasure. If you feel pleasant in your mind, we call this peace. If you feel very pleasant, we call this joy. If you feel very pleasant, if you feel pleasant in your emotion, we call this love. If you feel very pleasant, we call it compassion. If you feel very pleasant in your very life energies, then we call this blissfulness. If you become very, very pleasant, then we call it ecstasy. If your surroundings become pleasant, we call it success. So to create pleasantness in the surroundings, we need the cooperation of people and forces around us. Without everybody's cooperation, you can't create a pleasant atmosphere. But pleasantness of the body, pleasantness of the mind, pleasantness of emotion and energy, is 100% your business, isn't it? So if you're feeling ecstatic, you are in heaven because your idea of heaven is a very pleasant place, isn't it? Yes. This place, this planet earth is very pleasant except for the human beings who create unpleasiness among each other. Well this sounds like a great concept, but human beings are very complex. There are emotions or complex, there needs and desires and there trauma and pain and insecurities and mental health issues. How does one get to that spot? What you're saying sounds wonderful. I mean, you're a guru, you're a literal guru. So when you sit here and tell people these things, they go, well, that sounds easy for that guy. No, look at that. It's not wise. It's not easier. You got a great beard. It is not easier difficult. It is a question of wrong direction or right direction. What is you went to an apple tree and you're digging the roots because you're a potato farmer. That is the only problem you have. You're the source and seat of your experiences within you. What happens within you? Should it happen your way or my way? Tell me. Your way or my way? No. What happens within you? Should it happen your way or my way? Well, it's within me. When you say within me, do you mean my thoughts? Your thoughts, your emotions, your body, whatever your chemistry, your energy, your energy, everything. What happens within you? Should it happen your way or somebody else's way? Well, I think if your way sucks, maybe you should listen to other people and maybe try their way. See, if it happened your way, would you keep yourself blissful or miserable? You would keep yourself blissful. That's so wise. If your wise and your mind was working properly, but if you have mental health issues, that's exactly what I am. If you're filled with trauma, if you're poorly educated, you're starting from a deficit, a severe deficit, we don't think correctly. No? No. That is not the problem. The original problem, the root of the problem is this. Let's address one step at a time. See, right now, the simple question is, what happens in your mind, your emotion, your chemistry, your energies must be your way, isn't it? It is yours. Yes. It is your choice must be your way. But it's not happening your way right now because it's in a compulsive reactive state. So, anybody can cause anything within you. So, if I decide what close you must wear, what food you must eat, what you should do every day, you will call this slavery, isn't it? The government. Don't go there. So, right now, someone else, something else can decide what happens within you, isn't this the most horrible form of slavery, that someone can decide whether you're happy or unhappy? Yeah, that's not good. That's not the best part. So, the problem is just this. An intelligence which needs to be conscious is unfortunately unconscious and compulsive. So the only problem that you have is compulsive reaction to life around you. What is needed is a conscious response to life. So this simple thing, people have not handled from their childhood. Right. So, when you don't handle this one thing, everything will be wrong, everything will be accidental. Do your success and failure both are accidental? So what do you say to someone, maybe they're 30 years old, and they've had this life of mistakes and regret and maybe alcoholism or gambling or some other problems, but they want to be conscious, they want to be blissful, they want to be enlightened, they want to be a happy person, filled with love. What path do they take? What steps do they take to correct the journey they're on? Why is it, though human beings are not the strongest creatures on the planet, compared to other species, why is it the human beings are dominating this world? Simply because of our ability to use tools, isn't it? And our intellect. Our ability to manipulate our environment. Yes, but even then if we didn't have knowledge of using tools, the buffettles would have mouthed us down, all right? Yes. So your intellect, they don't care. It's your ability to use tools, you made an arrow, you made a gun, you made so many things. Yes. Yes. Everything. All instruments right now, microphone or telephone or whatever else. These are all instruments to enhance. We are this much because of our instruments, we become that much. Right now there is one little screw here in this furniture. I will ask you, you're a strong guy. I will ask you to unscrew this with your hands. You do it, you may lose all your nails, I will allow you to use your teeth, maybe you lose some of them. It's going to be a problem. But it will be right there. But if I give you a screwdriver, boom, do it easy. In a minute you will get it out. So this is the power of the tool. So as there are tools for doing things in the external world, there are tools to handle this because you don't have a tool kit. This machine which is the most complex machine is going crazy. Right now you're eating an engineering, it's a tool kit. You just use the tools. Don't worry about the philosophy, don't worry about belief system, don't worry about your concept. Somebody is concepts, your beliefs, somebody's beliefs. Just use the necessary tools. Being peaceful, joyful, loving is a natural outcome of that. Okay, well what are those tools? Like the scenario that I laid out, you have a person who is 30 years old, they have a history of trauma in their life. They're very unhappy, very depressed. Maybe they're alcoholics. They try to get their life in order. Today I want to understand this. The use of foundation and the scenario in the engineering process that we are doing around the world. In 2021, I think 2021, I think 2021. Our video views are 2.2 billion. 2.2 billion video views? Yes. That's a lot. Yes. Why? Because it's worked. And because we have worked. It has worked. We have over 16 million volunteers working with the foundation. Why are they doing this? Because the only reason is it has worked. What is it that's worked? I did not teach them a morality. I did not teach them a philosophy. I did not promise them miracles. I did not pull gold chains out of thin air and give it to them. No, nothing. Simply tools to fix themselves. Well, also. Just how to sit, how to breathe, how to manage yourself. This is all. You're entertaining. That's also one of the reasons why you have that many views. How many views do we have? If you are a guest, put your poll here in my comments. On YouTube, I guess. Yeah, let's just go with YouTube. No, no, it's okay. That's all to it. How many views? I don't know. Say four billion. It's okay. Probably about the same sounds about right. Yeah, and we're not teaching you shit. No, that's not true. Other people are that are on there. But I think that I see what you're saying, that it works. But what I would say is one of those tools, this is all very like mystical. No, no, no. It is called for people to grasp. There are mystical aspects also, but that is not for everybody. But I mean, this conversation only for those who are interested in those things, who want to push you that aspect. For the rest of the people, for somebody, if their back back it goes away, his life changes. For somebody, if his headache goes away, his life changes. Somebody drops his all-called consumption, addiction is life changes. Somebody, some compulsive thought that may be drives him crazy. That goes away. These are simple things. These are just a small screwdriver, his only needs. He doesn't need a total overhaul. Mysticism is a different aspect. It is like you're not just interested in living well. You want to know the very root of life. Yes. That's a different aspect. That's not for everybody. That is only for those who seek that. But for common people, all they want to do is they want to live peacefully, joyfully, with some sense of purpose to whatever they're doing in their lives. For this, it's very simple. You're talking about a case of a 30-year person and 30-year-old person who has this problem, this problem, this problem. Yes. I have millions of them with me. On 30, 40, 60, all kinds from 16 to any age. All right. So if we did not work, they wouldn't be working for the foundation. We are a volunteer organization with 5,600 full-time volunteers and over 16 million part-time volunteers. Everything is done by volunteers. Well, obviously you're doing something, right? It's working. That's all I'm saying. So what is it? When you say it is working, people don't know how to sit. Right. People don't know how to eat, what to eat, when to eat. They don't know. They're just eating, like, instinctively. See, instinctive existence would be fine if you had the intelligence of an animal. With this level of intelligence, if you function instinctively, you will be destructive to yourself and to everybody around you. That's what is happening in the world. Instinctively is fine if you have an animal. Well, I listen, I have an animal. If I left a lot of food around, he would just eat himself to death. Who? Animals? Yeah. They won't do that. My dog would say, dog has become like you. I inspired by you. But if you were a problem, why don't they? Why don't they leave? Why don't they need them more? That's true. That's true. Yeah, humans have really messed dogs up. They've turned them into people. Dogs are actually the human version of animals. So when you say it works, though, like for a person that is listening to this, that is seeking some sort of a path to a better life, what would you recommend they do first? The simplest thing they need to understand is human experience is cost from within, not from outside. Right now, see, somebody can abuse you. Let's say, they're just words. Right now, I'm going to abuse you in a language that you don't understand. You know, India has 1300 languages. I can choose. 1300? Yeah. Wow. I didn't know that. So I'm going to use some Indian language and abuse you with a smile on my face. You think I'm saying something very sweet? Go ahead. Yes. So, my abuse is not hurting you at all. Right. Your reaction, which is going to hurt you. Got it. Right? Yes. So in whichever language it is, whatever nonsense it is, it is only your reaction which hurts you, not my words ever. Right. But you think my words are hurting you. This human's change within you. You need to understand it's your compulsive reaction to life which hurts you, not what other people are doing. If somebody hurts you physically, that's a different matter. It's a survival issue. You need to take care of that properly. Okay? Physical hurt is different. Physical pain is actually very good for you. Because if there's a good pain, I'll come. If there was no physical pain, most people would not know how to survive. Because there would no one know what not to do. Yeah. In the name of tea, even though there is so much pain, see how tattooed people are, how poked up they are all over. If there was no pain, yes, they've got all kinds of holes all over the place. All right. Third, I'm saying I'm not commenting on their fashion. I'm saying it hurts. But in spite of that they're doing, if there was no pain at all, they would have pulled out their intestines and walk on the street like a handbag. All right. Probably. Yes. Yeah. If there was no pain, people would not even know how to survive. So in that sense, pain is good for them. It prevents them from doing something absolutely destructive towards themselves. So physical pain is a survival mechanism. That's a different aspect. But rest of the pain is caused in their own mind. Can I, I can cause physical pain to you, but can I cause mental pain to you? You can initiate something. No, I would go nonsense. All right. I need to total nonsense, but it's you who causes that pain within yourself by reacting in a certain way. Okay. So if I initiate things in a language that you don't understand, you're just fine. It doesn't work. Right. This is not my words or my actions which are causing pain to you. It's your compulsive reaction, which is causing that. This is a beautiful concept. But for a lot of people, they develop these patterns of behavior and thinking that are very difficult to break. So how does one come up with the practices that would allow them to consistently continually understand this and apply this to their life? The patterns are formed not only in the psychological structure. The patterns are formed in the chemical structure of the body. The patterns are formed in the energy structures of the body. The patterns are formed in the karmic structures of one's system. So the memory patterns establish themselves in every way and make you that kind of person. All right. But that that kind of person you are is something that you created unconsciously. If you can create something unconsciously, you can also create the same thing consciously, isn't it? So you can fix the same thing consciously. No, I'm saying if you create one kind of persona unconsciously, you can also create another kind of persona consciously, isn't it? Yes, you can make a conscious choice to create a healthy persona. So right now, because the patterns are so well established, it is like a rut in the street or a road or right? If there is a deep rut in the road, even if you steer it this way, it drags you that way. So that is what is happening in people because they have formed patterns, strong patterns, even if they once in a way think, oh, I must give up the drink, they come off for two days and again, they slip back into the same thing because there is a chemical pattern, there is a karmic pattern, there is a psychological pattern, there is a compulsiveness built into the body itself, the whole system. So that is working that way. there are various tools and technologies has to how to break these patterns, but they must be willing to subject themselves, you can't force them to do it, it is not something by force, it can only be done when somebody is willing when they have a genuine desire, then there are tools. If you don't have the desire, even if I give you this crude driver, you'll turn it the wrong way and tighten it further and saying, right, I see what you're saying. So what actions should someone take besides recognizing that the way they react to things is a conscious choice, that they choose to either be upset or not be upset or to react to this external, no, no, upset, not upset that is not the point. No. Are you a conscious response or are you an unconscious compulsive reaction? This is the only thing. Or response. So response means right now I say something that you may not like. Now you can respond the way you want, not because of what I said. You continue to say what you want. This is your response. You don't have to react. If you react, you in some way unknowingly you become enslaved to me, isn't it? That's what a lot of people love to do, right? That's what they start fights. They always reacting. Yes. The thing reacting is the way to live. Yeah. Well, if you react, you become somebody's slave. I must tell you this. On a certain day, a yogi was coming this way, coming to Jorog in show. On the way, somebody stopped him on the street and abused him in every possible way. He listened to everything carefully, not ignoring them, listening to very alert, listening to every word of abuse. Then he looked at the time and he said, see, I have a show. I need to go. I have finished that and come back. If you have something more to say, you can tell me then. Now these guys don't know what to do with him. If these are that kind of people, they will say hundred things. If you say one thing, they will next thing is they'll beat you. But now if you say hundred things, he says, I'll come back for more. You don't know what to do with him. Why he's like this is, he's decided that he is the master of his destiny. No matter who does what, he will go where he wants to go. Intelligent man or no? A man who goes where he wants to go, no matter what anybody else is doing to him, that is a smart man, isn't it? It's definitely a better choice than just being a reactionary. If your reaction, you'll go away their way. Yes. Somebody will take you their way. Somebody will take you this way. Somebody will take you that way. Such a person will never achieve anything that they wish to in their life. You might get lucky. See those, those who achieve things by luck always live with the fear of losing it. Yes. They panic, right? They're always worried and they get greedy because they're scared. Yes. This game by chance and it may go away by chance. Yeah, they have family. If you're done it by knowing what you're doing, if you lose everything today, you can create it again because you know the mechanics of how to do. Right. And likely you won't lose it. You won't lose it. So what should a person do? Should they start taking yoga? Should they start thinking a certain way every day about their life and the way they're responding to things and whether or not they're reacting or being involved. He's getting abducted by a UFO. That's a flying sauce. I get you. What do you think about flying sauce? What do you think about like going to a common vegetable yoga? Okay. So we'll get to that. We'll get to that. Okay. Right now we're trying to fix the soil. Yes. We'll go to one of the places. Let's go with yoga first. So the word yoga in United States, it scares me because here yoga means you must look like a leftover noodle twisted out like this like that. Right. The word yoga means union. Union. Union means right now we were talking about the soil. As you sit here, you're just an outcrop of soil. You may not realize this because you're sitting on a chair, you're wearing shoes and because you can prance around. But if you were made like a tree, you would clearly understand your part of the soil, isn't it? Yes. Or most people will understand when you bury them. Then they know they're part of the soil. Otherwise they just don't know that they're part of the soil. I think they came from somewhere. A lot of people started talking. I'm from some other planet. This talk is also going on. But essentially you're part of this, but you're not experiencing it that way. This is not only true with soil, this is true with the entire creation, with the cosmos itself. Today, modern science has come to this that as you sit here, every subatomic particle in your body is actually in communication with everything else. Is this an image of cosmos that you have? This is random stars and occasionally you see a shooting star. So this is a part of everything. If you don't go on to go that far, at least this is a part of the planet. There's no question about that. That's very clear. But such an experience is not there. If can I tell you? At least this is a part of the planet. There is no question about that. That's very clear. But such an experience is not there. Can I tell you how this happened to me? Yes. So when I was four or five years of age, I suddenly realized I don't know anything. I don't know anything means I don't know anything at all. If I look at a glass of water, I don't know what this is. I can drink it. I know in how many ways I can use it. But I don't know what it is even today with so much scientific exploration. We still do not know one atom in its entirety. We know how to use it. We know how to break it. We know how to use it. We know how to make a bomb out of it. But we don't know what it is. Even today we don't know what it is. So if I found a leaf, I'm just staring at it for five or six hours at a stretch. If I sit up in the bed, I'm just staring at the darkness for the whole night. My dear father, being a physician, started thinking I need some psychiatric evaluation. He started saying this boy is staring at something all the time. It looks like he's lost it. My problem is I'm looking at this. I still don't know what this is. I'm not able to shift my attention to anything else. In this condition, this and me to school. My mother said, don't look here and there. Pay attention to the teacher. So I went and paid attention to the teacher. The kind of attention they would have never received in their entire life. I'm paying absolute attention to the teacher. Initially, I kind of understood what they were trying to say. But after some time I realized that they're just making noises. I'm making up the meanings in my mind. Even now it is so, isn't it? Language is a conspiracy between two people. The moment I talk another language, I'm just making sounds as far as you're concerned. So when I just heard, they're just making sounds. I'm the one who's making up the meanings. I stopped making meanings. Our after our teacher, after teacher, they come and make noises and noises and noises and go. It became so amusing to me, a big smile spread on my face. They were not amused at all. You were five when this was happening? Yeah, there's a minute of school when I was three and a half. Did this accelerate over time? Did it start off slowly? Yes, the thing is I don't know one thing from the other. I look at the sky, tremendous things. I look at the tree, I see every leaf and it drives me crazy. I can't figure out where this coming from, what's happening. Endless amount of things. If I look at a pebble, I'll keep on looking at it for hours because I don't know what it is. Because there is so much to it. If you take an atom, you can spend a lifetime looking at it, still not knowing what it is. That's the nature of the creation. All right, it's that complex. So my schooling went on like this and I slowly started going there only when it was absolutely necessary. Otherwise, I had my own excursions going. So about 11, 12 years ago, this school where I studied over 50 years ago, they come to me and say, so the Guru you must come, it is our 125th anniversary of the school. You must come and speak. I said, see, why me? Because I was not just a not good student. I was not even a student. I was barely there. Why, why are you asking me to come? I'm not a good example for any of your students. They said, no, our school has produced ministers, our school has produced cricketing stars, our sports stars, film stars. You're the only mystics so you must come. It's so right. I went and stood up to speak in the same quadrangle, the oppressive buildings around me. And I looked at this classroom and I suddenly remembered and I narrated this to them. See, I was around 12 years of age and one teacher came and those days because I don't know anything. What's there to talk? For days on end, I don't utter a word. I just go to the sports field. I play intensely any game that is there. And classroom, home, I don't say a thing because I don't know anything. So what is there to say? So this teacher is asking me some question. I'm looking at him. I know his past present and future, sitting there. But I don't know what he's talking about. Initially, I hear the words, after some time I'm just seeing him like a blob of energy. Like that. And I know that guy thrown through, but I don't know what he's talking. About 35, 40 minutes he tried to get an answer from me. I didn't say nothing. So he came, held me with a shoulder, shook me violently like this and said, you must be either the divine or the devil. I think you're the leader. So till then my problem was I didn't know what is this, what is that, what is that, what is that. But it was clear, this is me. Suddenly this guy confused me about this also. I looked at myself, what is this, is this divine devil? What the hell is this? This question had never come to me till I was 12. I had a question about everything in the universe. But this was clear, this was me. Suddenly this guy confused me about this also. Then I tried to stare at myself, it didn't work. I started closing my eyes. Initially it started with minutes, it went into hours, it went into days. I just closed my eyes and sat for days on end. This changed the whole experience of my life when I was 25. I just burst into an experience where suddenly every cell in my body was dripping ecstasy like that. Suddenly. Yeah, I was sitting on a rock and just I burst out like this for the first time in my life, adult life. Tears were coming, tears and me were impossible. I lived like that. So I was just wondering what's happening when I thought it's 10-15 minutes when I came out. It was four and a half hours. My shirt was wet with tears. That what's happening to me, am I going off the rocker or something? That's the only thing my skeptical mind could tell me because I was a superscriptic about everything in the universe. I had a question about everything, about the family structure, about the social society, about religion, about politics, about economics, about everything. So what do you think was happening? I'll tell you. Then I talked to my closest friends, hey, something is happening to me. I'm just blissed out. You know, if I just talked to them, tears are coming to me. I said, what's happening to you, man? What did you drink? What did you pop? This is a question. Then I knew there was no context to my experience. So I spent studying more and more time by myself. And I realized if I just take my hands off my mind completely, then I see that every cell in my body just bursts out with blissfulness. Then I established this properly within myself. How to do that? Then I sat down and made a plan. At that time, the world's population was 5.6 billion people. I made a plan. In two and a half years time, I will make the whole world ecstatic. Here I am 40 years later. It took me time to realize people are so deeply invested in their miseries that even if you offer them the best thing, they will go round and round and round around that, not getting the point because they're too deeply invested in something. They don't realize as you sit here and through your misery or joy, life is slipping away. Every heartbeat is life going away, isn't it? It's not the clock ticking. It is life ticking away. As we sit here, moment by moment we're getting closer to our grave. People don't understand their mortal. This is the biggest problem. On a daily basis they're not conscious. That as I sit here, my time is running out. I need to make the best out of this. If I am conscious that I'm mortal, if I know my time is running out, I would keep myself in the best possible way. I wouldn't have time to quarrel with somebody. I wouldn't have time to do nasty things to somebody or to myself. I would do the best to myself, but naturally when you're feeling wonderful, you do wonderful things to everybody around you. A happy person, a very joyful person is naturally a pleasant person to everybody. When you're feeling nasty, you will share it with people. Of course, the same nastiness. So this process I decided we must somehow share this with people. So I started building devices. I was practicing yoga since I was 12 years of age. It's a simple form of yoga that also I got in for all the wrong reasons. All the wrong reasons? Yeah, in the sense I was around 11, 12 years of age. This was my story about the well. Yeah, you know the whole story. So I got in for the wrong reason thinking I'll become a superhuman like him, but it did something else to me. I'm sorry, the people saw that here. You know, this is an ancestral home where we are about 35, 36 of cousin brothers and sisters who live in different cities. We all come and converge in our ancestral home for the summer vacation, usually 30 to 45 days max. So it's one roll-a-king place. All the kids totally out of control and doing all kinds of things. The young boys, one of the things is there's a drinking water well in the backyard, which is about eight feet in diameter. About 150 feet in depth in summer months when we go there, it's at least 60, 70 feet below. The ground level, the water. So we jump into this well. You have to go straight. If you go this way, your brain will become a smear on the wall, actually. You have to go straight. Does that ever happen? It's happened to other people, not to me. My brain's still here. You. You know. No, not in our house. It didn't happen. It's happened to other boys. And when you want to come up, there is no step. Anything you just have to hold the rock and come up. You know, you're just about one centimeter, half an inch is what you have in the rock grip. Your entire weight is on these four fingers. So your nails will start bleeding out of sheer pressure. So I could come up pretty well. I was coming up very well out of that. So I'm very proud and I can do it better than people. So one day we're doing this act and a man who's over 70 years of age was watching us without a word he just walked and jumped into the well. I thought the old guy's finished. But he came up faster than me. I didn't like it. I said, how? He said, come unto yoga. So I followed him like a puppy. So I got into yoga for all the wrong reasons. I'm saying this because even for wrong reasons if you do the right things, right things will happen to you. This is a beauty about this world. So this was, how old were you at the time? 12. So this was along the same time that you were having these realizations about the nature of things. It was, they all sort of came together. Like it's a very fortuitous sort of. When I look back and I look back, it's all like a set plan. All right. At that time it was all wonderful accidents happening. Yes. That's a thing that happens though sometimes, right? When you're on the right path, like wonderful accidents do sort of seem to happen. See, the thing is just this. If you're designed to fly, if something is designed to fly, if the stronger the wind is, the higher it flies. You know? I'm a licensed helicopter pilot. Oh really? Yeah. Everybody thinks winds are a bad thing. winds are great only when you're landing if it's crosswind. It's a little bit of an issue otherwise. If without headwind you can't really fly. All right. Too much. A storm is a different thing. But headwinds are good. That's why they are playing flies. All right. It's because of that there is aerodynamics and it flies. So if you're designed to fly, this is what is important. What yoga means is you get yourself geometrically correct. What being geometrically correct means is. See, every physical creation in the universe has a geometry to it. If the geometry is in such a way that it has least amount of friction, then it functions at its best. When would you say, suppose you start your car engine and you said, cut, cut, cut, cut, cut. Would you say this is well engineered car? You start it. You don't even know. You can't feel the engine. Then you said this is a good car because it's only unless you make a drawer, you can't feel the engine. That means everything is going smoothly with least amount of friction. So it is a geometric perfection which does this. So everything that is physical in the universe needs a certain perfection of geometry to function at a certain level of competence. So this geometry, today there is something called as constructional theory. They're making it. Yogic sciences are deeply invested in this. That is, how an atom is made. How an amiibo is made. A single-cell organism is made. How you are made. How the universe is made. The fundamental design is not different. It's the same design. The complexity and sophistication is multiplying many, many fold, but essentially it's the same design. So this is what today we're calling as the carbon chain on this planet. Whether it's a microorganism or a tree or the atmosphere or the water or a human being, everything is one chain. If you break one link, everything could collapse on your head. That's what we're talking about when we talk about soil. One link has become very weak. If you don't strengthen that, the entire chain could collapse because a chain is as strong as a individual link. And this one link of the soil has become super thin. If you push it any further, the whole thing, the very chain of life could collapse. So it is a geometry which keeps it going. For example, this planet is going around the sun. There is no titanium chain or a cable holding it to the sun and swinging it around. It's just a perfection of geometry. If you just get it off its path, finished. It'll fly off somewhere else. It'll burn itself out. Only because of certain geometrics, it's a certain geometry. They're all... They look like perpetual machines. They're not perpetual. In our experience, they're perpetual because our life's been so small. But otherwise, it's not perpetual. At one time, it was not there. At some time, in future, it will not be there again. That's a different matter. But right now, it has hit a certain geometric perfection that it keeps going as if it's forever. So, yoga, one aspect of yoga is this. To get your body to a geometrically, congruent state with the rest of the creation. If you're geometrically congruent, suddenly your experience is not that of an individual, but that of being universal. So, to put it very, very simply, it's like this. Say, we can do an experiment. Can we? Sure. Just put your hands together. With your eyes closed, what you do is you rub your hands very briskly for 30 seconds. Now hold it three, four inches away from each other. Something happening between them, huh? Yes, sir? No, do you feel something? I feel the heat of each hand. Not the heat. More from friction. No. Isn't there a sensation between them? Yeah. Yeah. So, right now, see right now, what is the difference between you and the chair and which you're sitting? It's only the sensations which tells you, how do you know? This is me, this is not me. Right. Here there are sensations, here no sensations. Right. Initially what you call as myself is a certain boundary of sensations. It's a sensory boundary which determines what is you and what is not you, isn't it? Yes. This water, is it you? It'll become a moment I drink it. If you put it into the boundaries of your sensation, it becomes you. Yes. And that's how this whole thing has come. Right? When you are born, you are this much. Now you become this much. It's the food that you've eaten, what are that you took and everything into the boundaries of your sensation. Now you experience it as myself, 100%. Right. So if you lose 10 kilograms, would you think that 10 kilograms of me is gone? No, isn't it? Well, you were if you look in the mirror. No, no. In your experience, your experience is exactly the same. Exactly the same. Exactly the same. Because what is in between the boundaries of your sensation is you. Right. If you do anything vigorous or intense, suddenly the boundaries of your sensation is you. If your sensation is breached and you experience something more, why there is such a big draw towards sexuality or people are rubbing each other all the time. Is just this. Right, but each other. Yeah, in a way. I'm saying it is because somewhere for one moment, there is something more than what they are. Right. Somebody or something which is not themselves becomes a part of them, at least for a moment. Yes. So this breaching of sensory boundary is yoga. If you sit here and if you can spread your sensory body as big as this room, you would experience everything in this room as yourself. See right now your heart, your liver, your kidney, the five fingers of your hand. This was not you some time ago, isn't it? You and you are a baby, your finger was this much. Now it became this much. That means these fingers the way they are, they were not you just some time ago. But today they 100% you, isn't it? How did this happen? Because this material got accumulated within the sensory boundaries of your sensory body. Sensory body, if you make yourself exuberant either because of joy or blissfulness, sensory body expands. If you expand your body in such a way, it's as because the universe, you will experience the whole universe as yourself. This is yoga. So the twisting, turning, holding the breath, doing this, doing that, all these things are to loosen up the body in such a way that your physical body and your sensory body are not stuck to each other. Sensory body can expand. Today you know if somebody lost a limb or something, they have something called as a phantom leg. Even if the leg is gone, they're still experiencing the leg because the sensory body is still not there. So essentially physical body is acting like a scaffolding for the sensory body which gives to experience of life. If your sensory body was totally dead, you wouldn't experience anything even if you had your body. So if your sensory body expands, you will experience this whole room or this building or this town as yourself. So this is what yoga means. This is the purpose of yoga because once you experience somebody or something as a part of yourself, nobody has to teach you any morality, be good, don't harm them, don't do this, don't do that. These teachings will be irrelevant for you because anything that nobody ever thought you, this little finger, don't bite it off. It is a poor little finger, nobody had to tell you this because it's you. What you experience as myself with that you have no conflict. This is what yoga means. The mechanism of getting there, there are various mechanisms. But actually 112 proper technologies as to how one can get into that space. 112. Yes. You talked about in your book that I was reading, you talked about the different kinds of yoga and you told a very funny story about God getting them all together. That's a 4 yogis. Yeah. Do you mind telling that? What are the different types of yoga? Say you can do employee or body and perform action on yoga. This is karma yoga, karma means action. Using action to attain unity with the existence. If you use your intelligence to get attain unity with the existence, then it is called as Nana Yoga, yoga of intelligence. If you use your emotion to get there, that is called as Bhakti yoga, yoga of devotion or emotion. And if you use your energies by refining and expanding your energies, if you do it, that is called as kriya yoga, the science and technology of expanding one's energies. So these are the only four ways you can do because these are the only four things you have. Rest is all imagination. You have a body, you have a mind, you have emotions and you have energies, life energies within you. Beyond this, rest is all made up in terms of your beliefs and imaginations. These are the four realities. You can only work with what you have. You cannot work with what you don't have. So these four things, is there anybody who is only body, no mind, no emotion, no energy or only mind, not the other three, all of us are a combination of the four. It's just that in one person the body may be dominant. In another person the mind may be dominant in another person, emotion like this. Different combinations of the same four ingredients are there in different human beings and different persons. So accordingly yoga has to be mixed. This is why the significance in the Eastern cultures of having a life guru who's looking at you and making the right concoction. Let's say you came to me when you were 20. Naturally your body would be very dominant. We would give you one type of yoga. Now you returned when you were 40. Now maybe your mind is more dominant, maybe your emotion is more dominant, maybe energies more dominant, body could have receded a little bit. So accordingly it has to be mixed. So it is not like a common prescription. Everybody do this, everybody do this, this is not going to work. It needs to be mixed the right way. Otherwise it won't work. This is one reason. A whole lot of people on the spiritual path feel. First three months there seem to be going somewhere after that they are stagnant because nobody to gauge that and tweak that thing according to their needs. So they need a guru, they need someone to see. the word guru is a four-letter word today in America. Because it's not a fake one. That's why I'm a certain guru. It has eight words. We tell a story about God getting all the girls together, all the different types of yogis together. Okay. So this is an a certain day. Four yogis are walking in the forest. One is a Gnaana Yogi, yoga of intelligence. One other is a karmayogi, body yoga. Another is a Bhakthi Yogi, emotional and devotional yogi. Another is a kriya Yogi, master of energies. So suddenly a stomp picks up and they start running to find a shelter. The Bhakthi Yogi who has, you know who knows the geography of temples in the area, says, let's go in this direction. There's an ancient temple there. So they all ran there. Then they found an ancient temple where the walls had collapsed long time ago. Just the roof and in the center there's a deity. They all rushed into the temple, not out of love for the deity or God, but they just to escape the storm. Then the storm started lashing from every direction. So they got closer, closer. There was no other place to sit. So they all four of them hugged the deity and sat down. Suddenly God appeared. They all wondered why now we did so much yoga, your income. Now when we're just escaping the storm you turn up. So they looked at him, why now? So God said, at last you four idiots got together. I've been waiting for this for a long time. Body going one direction, mind going another direction, emotion another way. How will anything happen? These four things have to come together. This is very important. But today the way it is happening the yoga, it's become very more, more like a exercise. If you want exercise, there are so many ways to do it. Go, have a swim. Maybe play tennis, maybe climb a mountain. You'll get much better exercise. Yoga is not for exercise. It'll also give you that. It'll give you fitness also. There are different types of yoga. For fitness there are certain kinds of yoga. You must come. We can do this with you. It's called Angamarthana. That means mastering your limbs. Without any equipment, you can master your limbs in such a way that you become very resilient. People are asking me, Sadhguru, you're 65 years of age. How will you do this 30,000 kilometers on a loan motorcycle yourself riding like this across 26 or 27 countries? I was just joking with them and I said, see this is an advertisement for a yogit back. You will see, I will write. How did yoga get started? What do you think was the origin of it? Because it's an ancient form of, however you want to call it, an ancient practice. Like what, and it's obviously very beneficial to so many people to practice it. How did it get started? See there is nothing in the universe which is not yoga in the sense. There is nothing in the universe which is not one with everything else. Except human mind. This is what we are talking about soil also. There is nothing on this planet which is unconnected. There is nothing in this solar system unconnected. There's nothing in this universe unconnected. So everything is in yoga. The question is only whether you realize that or not. If you realize that, if you experience that, then we call you a yogi. Yogi means not somebody who is twisting and turning. Yogi means one who is experiencing the union right now. That though you're an individual, your experience has gone beyond your individual nature, you're experiencing the universality of your existence. Your individual nature is a psychological condition. See physically, this is what we've been talking about soil, nourishment, everything. Physically, if people don't understand this, if you close these two holes, you know? You know, souls? Yeah. Yeah. Keep your mouth also close, close this and see. If you're not connected with the oxygen bubble around you, you won't exist for two minutes. So where is your individuality? I'm saying physically with food, water, with everything else we can say it in so many different ways. But physically, you know, there is no individuality to your body. Only psychologically, this individual nature, we have taken it too seriously. Simply because it's the magnanimity of creation that which has given us an individual experience. Actually, in this cosmos, we are like a speck. If you look at the solar system itself from somewhere a million light years away, the solar system itself is a tiny speck. In that planet earth is a micro speck. In that micro speck, Texas is a super micro speck. In that, Austin is a super super micro speck. In that you are a big man. This is a serious problem. Mm. Right. You take yourself seriously when you're really connected to everything. You think of yourself as an individual. When you're not, you're really a part of everything. Your individuality is just a psychological thing. You want to see a funny meme, the points to that? I love that same, triply meme. Do you know what memes are? I think so. Yeah, there are funny things that people, it's like a kind of a new form of comedy. But this one relates very closely to what you're saying. And it's this right here. You are here crying in the shower before work. Pointing to the outer regions of the Milky Way galaxy. Yep. So, right, this tiny micro micro super micro speck. Yes. Things is the center of the universe. Right. This is a serious issue. It's a big problem for a lot of people. And you know, what's the function of that though? Like why does the human animal think that way? As I said, this is the magnanimity of creation, though you're a tiny speck. You have an individual experience. This is the greatest gift that we have. We can sit here even wonder about the universe, not knowing where it begins, where it ends. All right? Yeah. So this is a tremendous gift that we have been given in individuality, but you're taking it too seriously for this, the only curious that you're always conscious that you're mortal. For time, you're on a limited lease of time. it too seriously. For this, the only cure is that you're always conscious that you're mortal. Your time, you're an unlimited lease of time. If you know this, you will not take your individuality seriously. You will enjoy it, the way it is. The promise our culture thrives on individuals taking themselves seriously. This is why the most affluent country on the planet, look at the amount of misery people are going through. Yes, a lot. I remember this. I was in 98, the first time when I came to the United States. I went there to the US Embassy in Chennai to get my visa. So, you had to, at that time, you had to go at like 6 or 3 in the morning. It would start at that time, 7 o'clock, they will start seeing you. I went there because the Consul General fine lady she had heard about me. So, instead of just doing at the counter, she asked me to come to her office. So, I went there and they asked me, see, you're going to the United States. We have heard so much about you in India. But if you want to teach in the United States, you need a teacher, you know, yoga teacher certificate or you certified. I certified as for a certification from my guru. You would have cut my throat so I don't have a certificate. I live yoga. I don't. I don't. I'm not certified. Then we had a long chat and then I was coming out by about maybe 745. Then I see outside the US Embassy, outside the compound, one young man, young boy like maybe in his early 20s, sitting and crying bitterly, crying his heart out. I couldn't ignore him. I know my car was already there and then I got off the car and went to him and asked, hey, what's the problem? He's visa got rejected. The guy so bitter, he could kill himself, he's in that kind of condition. I said, why, man, India is a big country. He got lost here only. You will go to the United States States and get lost somehow. You can also get lost in this country and try again if you want to go. I'm not saying you should not go. But okay, they didn't let you go. So what about it? But that's not how it is. People think going to United States is everything. Ask the people who are living here. How many complaints they are miserable because they are here. They're crazy. That's what I'm saying because human misery is not in India or America. It is within you. One thing to struck me from your book was that you didn't read a lot of the writings on yoga until you're much older. You were practicing yoga, but you hadn't read read any of the ancient texts. I have never read any ancient texts, not even now. Really? Yes. You don't have any desire to find what they were thinking. Because my own clarity has never failed me. I don't want to confuse myself because we don't know in these many thousands of years who all have added whatever nonsense they've added to it. Right. That's a problem. Like human being. Oh, period of time, you know, every scripture has been muddled with who I peered this. But anyway, all scriptures, it doesn't matter where they got the information from how they received it, but written by human beings. All right. Language is written by human beings. There's no question. People may say, God dictated me, but still, even if I dictate something to you, you can still write it wrong. Yes. So I'm saying those books I never read, the only book I read is this. Your body. You sold this experience. You. Whatever. This mechanism, which is in my in my experience, because nothing else is in your experience. Just see this. You can't experience what's here. You can only experience what is here. Do you find that that's kind of contradictory in some ways to your existence because you're what you're doing is expressing your experience to other people? No, no, no, I'm not. You're not. No. I see some experience. What did that do over next. Okay. Yeah. Name of the park. Okay. So I'm never, you know, here and there when people ask questions, I may say something, but as I said, there's no philosophy. There is no teaching. There's no belief system. Just methods. Yes, but you've given it like this. You read like this. You do this and this. This will happen to you. You experiment. What it is you do it. If it works, you keep it. If it doesn't work, throw it and more. But do you see that you've written all this down for people to learn from? No. You haven't? Why'd you write it down? I have not written down anything. What is in the book? You have books. What is in the book is more like a brochure. A brochure. It's a, you know, 300 page brochure just introducing you. That's not we will never write down what you have to use. That has to be transmitted. Right. But you are writing your own personal experiences and people benefit from that greatly. That is more for inspiration. A book is for inspiration. Not for instruction. And you don't think that there's any inspiration to be gleaned from other people's experiences? There is of course. In spitzy, if you're looking for inspiration is one thing. If you're looking for instruction, don't look in the book. No. No. Inspiration is different to get you fired up. Once you're fired up, you want to know, now don't go on reading books that will not get you anywhere. Action. You have to start delve deeper into yourself. For that, we can give you methods how to go deeper. See, when it's like we were talking about the screwdriver. Yes. How to do the thing, you know, with the right kind of tool. If you use the wrong kind of tool, I give you a spanner for the screw, which is in the furniture. It's not going to help. It's a tool, but it's not going to help. The right tool, right. That's all. That is all my work is to give them the right tool. I will not use the tool for them. They must use it only for a few who completely give themselves for them. I may also turn the screws for them. But largely, we just give you the screwdriver. It's up to you. But even when you were younger, you didn't seek inspiration from some other people's experiences. No, somehow it didn't work like that for me. For me, everything was a question mark. I'm saying, if I see a leaf, it's a question. If I see, I look at my father, it's a question. If I look at my mother, it's a question. They were wonderful loving parents. But I had questions about everything, nothing negative. Just a question. Because question is a tool to dig deeper. Question is a not a way of insulting somebody. I ask your question. This is not to corner you to insult you to do something. Question is the only way to dig deeper, isn't it? Like, you know, like people have their experiences, their opinions about everything in the universe. For example, before coming here, a whole lot of people calling on Sadhguru, don't go and Juru go and show, where are you going there, Sadhguru? You know what he is? I said, whatever he is, let me go and find out what the hell he is. Why are you telling me who he is? All right. Well, no, no, he thinks this, he thinks that. Well, if he thinks I'm a chimpanzee, I will prove I'm a very good one. I'm saying, I've worked in prisons, you know, like we have a program called Inner Freedom for Imprison, both in United States, we worked. But then we stepped out of US. In India, our programs of mandatory in all the South Indian prisons. Really? Yeah. And I've worked with really hard core criminals who have been convicted for murder and more. They have done terrible things, but when they are with me, they're such wonderful guys, lively and fantastic guys. But if you meet them and they're angry or dissatisfied, they may be terrible. If you meet them when they are happy and joyful, they are fantastic people. So I'm saying, every human being has opinions about everything. This is one thing I've done in my life is people who are with me for 25, 30, 40 years with me right next to me. It's very difficult for people to understand this. I am not formed a single opinion about them. Every day I look at them fresh. This is very important. Yes. So when I sit here, I look at your fresh. It doesn't matter what you have done because what you are going to be tomorrow is what is important, isn't it? When you're experiencing these prisoners, do you think that that's part of the problem with having had a horrible past, having been a criminal, having been a murderer, is that you can never really get past those experiences and a lot of people's eyes. They don't experience you fresh. See, the societies are made in a certain way. We're unfortunately certain people can't fit in. Not necessarily because it's an American thing. This is a good guy, this is a bad guy. I don't look at life like that. It is just that in a given moment if somebody makes one wrong judgment, he utters something or he does something in that moment that may end up in the prison. I've met hundreds of them, thousands of them. Most of them are absolutely wonderful, guys. There are few who are mentally pathologically somewhere else. That's different. But rest of them, it's a given moment. They make wrong judgments because that's all they know or that given moment. Do you think that the practice of yoga can reform people? Oh yes, of course. I will tell you. I will tell you this. Say when I first went into the prison in Kawakwambatore to teach, don't mistake me. And it was very difficult to get him. I discovered that in the heart of Kamaetu of Siddhi, there was a prison, central prison. So I said, let me go and see who is inside. I want to work with them about 28 years ago. And then I found it took me over two years to get inside. It's so difficult to get in. You need qualifications. I was not qualified. It took all kinds of permissions to get inside because this was a high security prison. Then once I got in, everybody said all the prison officers who knew me, that's how they were all your wasting your time here. Every Sunday, Christian priest come. All these guys do is mischief on Hindu festivals, Hindu people come. They do more mischief and Muslims come more mischief. Other kinds of service organizations come. More mischief is all you will get. You'll just waste your time here. Please don't do this. I said you just give me two hours. So there were 12 wards in the Kawakwamto prison, each with about 200 prisoners. So I took the long term prisoners, one ward with 200 people. So when I went there, they wanted to put them in the, see normally, prison means they push them into one hall and sit down here. So the good way is come. I said, no, just I want to meet them on the ground outside. So they are all sitting there like this. Okay, the bokhuz this guy was coming. They have a certain, there's an anger and angst against the society which has locked them up. It's very difficult for people to understand what I have not, not once I've gone into prison and come out without tears in my eyes because everything seems normal on the surface. There is pain in the air. Just this is so important for a human being to be free, you know? Yes. Just nothing else. Food is good. They get food better than probably their homes. Everything is controlled. They're all very fit. Actually much more fitter than the outside people. But there is pain in the air. Just it's so painful. So I went there and we played a game with them. They were just surprised that I'm playing a game with them. We played dodge ball with the guys. Within about 10, 15 minutes, they forgot their prison like little children, they're screaming and yelling and playing like crazy. And then I told them, see, I want to stay here for 10 days and work with you. You won't believe 80% of them in two hours time, they're crying. They said, don't go, you stay with us. And then we started the program since then continuously last 27 years. Programs have been going on. Most of them are, you know, school dropouts. They're not really very literate and educated. But they wrote thousands of poems, one guy who killed three people in the courtroom. So he was in the courtroom. He killed three people. Some vengeance issue, so he's on the death row. See, prison is quite a normal society during the daytime. It's evening six o'clock. They have to go inside and the doors are locked. Even if the medical emergency, nobody can open those doors unless a magistrate gives permission. The local officer cannot open the gate. Even if the guy is dying inside it cannot be opened no matter what happens. That's the law. So he wrote a poem which stuck in my mind. He said every day when the cell door closed, I thought this is my grave. But now I see it's become my Bodhi tree. When the door closes, I close my eyes and I'm in a completely different space altogether. This is my freedom. And now after about six years, he was executed. Wow. And we also took local industry and promised them that when they come out, there will be jobs for them. Those who can come out after a few years because in India, life term is 20 years, not life life. And in 20 years, if there's good behavior, 14 years, they'll get a remission. So many of them who have been there for murder, in 14 years time, they will come out. So nobody gives them a job. Everywhere, everybody looks at them suspiciously. So we set up the local businesses to include them into their factories and businesses so that they're not going to come in murder every day. It's just happened once in their lifetime. So how does yoga reform these people? This is all it is. Tell me if you're feeling very happy right now, will you go and beat up Jamie? No. Even if I was mad. Even if he's somebody that you don't like. No, it's not him. Anybody. Oh, anybody? When you're joyful, will you go and simply beat up that guy? No. No. Something nasty happening within you anger, your anger is frustration, something. That's when you do ugly things, isn't it? Yeah. This is true for every human being. Yeah, sure. So you just label somebody as a criminal. What you need to understand is there's a deep rooted unhappiness or frustration or something that's built up because of social reasons or parental reasons or genetic reasons. There's so many. Okay. Not one aspect. Somewhere this life is unhappy, frustrated, angry. Now it wants to do something unpleasant. If this life is feeling very pleasant, why will it do unpleasant things? So this is all. We have focused too much in this world on trying to produce good human beings. Good human beings have a cost-terrible things. People who think they are good, they have done the worst possible things. Right. There's a lot of them. Thinking they are good. But if we focus on creating joyful and sensible human beings, a whole lot of trouble will go away in the world. This is what you guys about, that you're pleasant within yourself. When you are feeling pleasant, you do pleasant things naturally. Yeah. So you create this environment where people learn to be pleasant or you help them not an environment. It is you understand human experiences coming from within me. See, right now, let's say we are working together and I'm oppressive, whatever, and you think you're unhappy because of me. But if you realize, see, my unhappiness is my doing. You will undo it, isn't it? You think your unhappiness is because of me. It goes on and on because it's under my control now. The day you realize my unhappiness, the source of my unhappiness unhappiness is me, not somebody else. And you take charge of that aspect. There is a method to do that. Once you do that, you're happy. Once you're happy by your own nature, then you will do what is most needed. Because once you're very happy, you have no pursuit of happiness. Your life is an expression of joy, not in pursuit of happiness. This is the shift that needs to happen in the world. Right now, people are in pursuit of happiness. If your life becomes an expression of your joy, rather than being pursuit of happiness, you will start, stop squeezing the world away or squeezing it. This soil, this environment, this problems, everything is in pursuit of human happiness and well-being. Do you think that the physical practice of yoga, meaning the exercise aspect of it, alleviates tension and allows people to relax enough to look at their life in a different way? If they do it properly, yes. When I say properly, say people are trying to do it like an aerobic exercise. No, we teach what is called as classical yoga. You don't have to do all these very difficult postures and all that. Most yogis master only one posture. People don't know this in this country. Only one. Like what posture? Anything, they will choose one posture and they will just master that. So actually in the, you know, the traditionally what yoga says is, if you master one posture, that means generally two hours, 40 minutes. If you can sit one way without any sense of discomfort, irritation, agitation, nothing in your system, this is your posture. You just master that one posture. Then the rest of the yoga is internal. Physical body is only that much. So, most yogis just have one thing that they do and they can do it for hours. Yes, if they can, if you can sit here, see what it means, sees your body is not in the way. Your body is not in the way. Yeah, that's it right now. You want to be happy, but your thought is in the way, your emotion is in the way, your body is in the way. So once you put the body away, you must understand, in yoga, there is no such thing as mind. There is physical body, there is mental body. If your body is not in the way, suddenly you discover that even your mind is not in the way. How do you think they figured this out? This is getting back to this. You kind of want to round that, but this happened over 15,000 years ago. Right. The first yogi, he's referred to as the Adiyogi. Today to honor him, we have set up 112 feet tall bust of Adiyogi in India. You must look him up. 112 feet. Look him up, Adiyogi. What part of India is that? In southern India, in Quambatore, in Tamil Nadu. So this is 112 feet because he gave 112 methods as to how? So this is what to say. This is a thousand years ago, I figured this out. Over 15,000 years ago. We are saying this over 15,000 years ago because of they talked about certain celestial happenings. Those happenings have been confirmed today as well or 15,000 years ago. I call an agrific proof of something like 12,400 years. That's Adiyogi. 112 feet tall. Great hair. That's a crazy statue. This was designed by me and built by all volunteers inside the centre. So is that a building? So can you go inside of that? You can go inside, but there's no building inside because it's metal. It gets very hot inside. Wow, that's beautiful. The idea was when I designed this, it took me two and a half years to design this face. You're not seeing the face very clearly. Let's see if you can get a picture where the face is clear. It's very beautiful. So I wanted intoxication, stillness and exuberance on one face. So it took me two and a half years to design this face. What do you think? It has this quality thing. I think you nailed it. How was this constructed? This is all metal? It's all metal. How was it made? So we made this, it took us some 680 tons of steel. Now we are doing another one near Bangalore, the same one, but now we are doing it with almost 170 tons less because now we figured out the design much better. Wow, wow. That's incredible, though. I mean, it really is gorgeous. And that's all, is it welded together? Like how is it? See, you can see some patchwork here. You're not seeing it, but actually the metal pieces are all about this much size. We could have removed that, we could have, you know, braised that and removed that. But when I looked at it, the roughness of it looked better than a smooth face. So I just left it as it is. So there are patches. So you can see the construction material. Not really that visible, but you can see for an observer, you can see that which gives a kind of roughness to the statue, not very smooth. So this yogi that devises a hundred. So when he came, he appeared somewhere in Himalayas and people saw that he was dancing wildly in ecstatic states, completely oblivious to everything around him or he sat still for days on end, weeks on end, he just sat still unmoving. So initially, a lot of thousands of people gathered some miracle is happening, but slowly because he didn't perform any miracles. No fireworks happened. People got bored and they left only seven disciples hung on because they saw the greatest miracle is the man is not getting up for food, water, toilet, nothing. That means he's beyond the physical nature. He's just sat there for months on end sometimes. The only sign of his aliveness was tears of ecstasy were dribbling down his cheeks. That was the only sign of life. Otherwise, he looked like he's dead. So when he came to his some moments when he came to his consciousness, they pleaded, they wanted to learn. What is it that is happening to you? So he tried to be dismissive. He didn't want to be in touch with them, but when they hung on when they persisted, then he put them on a proprietary kind of work. They went through the proprietary work and then he started expounding for many years. What is the science of how human mechanism is made? And you won't believe this? 150 years ago, Charles Darwin talked about evolutionary process. Over 15,000 years ago, he spoke something which is parallel to Darwin's theory of evolution. Even today, every Indian knows about the Indian person knows about this. There are 10 outhars. Outhars means not the movie that you saw. Outhars means a manifestation. So 10 outhars are. First out, is called Machiautar, which means the life was in the form of fish or it was water. It was in the water. The second one is Kurmautar, which means it's a turtle. That means it became an amphibious life. The third one is a wild war. It's called Varyhautar. It, you know, other small things happen, but the mammals came. Then the next one is called Narasimha, who is half man, half animal. Next one is a doft man, woman, auteur. The next one is a full grown man, but a volatile man. He's so angry and so crazy or fighting man that always he went about chopping off people. Do you got so angry and he locked off his own mother's head? So the next one is a peaceful man. He's a ram-autar. He's a peaceful, gentle man. The next one is a loving man, Krishna-autar. The next one is a Buddha. Auteur was a meditative man. The next one, the tenth one is supposed to be the mystical man. These are not individual people to be seen. This is the evolution of life on the planet. If you look at Darwin's theory of evolution, somewhere it runs parallel to this, from water-bone life to amphibious life to this way, half man, half animal, do aft man, like this it is grown. So he talked about this and he said, see, if you want to evolve further, then something in relationship to the earth and the sun must change. Otherwise, physiologically, you're not going to evolve further. But you have a consciousness with which you can transform yourself absolutely and become completely different from what you are right now. Right now you're available to all the forces of nature. Right now in many ways you're enslaved to what's happening around you. You can rise about this and evolve consciously. But physiological evolution has come to a standstill because planetary moment and who you are right now, the planet and the solar system is functioning like a potter's wheel to make this happen. This life like a potter's wheel, you know, potter's wheel. A potter's wheel. Yeah, okay. It's functioning like that. It's got new to this place. So people ask, can we can we develop more intelligence? Can we become bigger than this? He says, no, physiologically your evolution has come to a place unless there is some serious change in the relationship between the planet and the sun that will not happen. But consciously you can evolve. So then he propounds 112 ways as to how you can do it, 112 distinct ways how you can do it. So that is how yoga started. Who do you think this person was? These are the yogi. They called him because he never introduced himself. They called him yogi because he was the first one. They called him adiogia. The yogi means the first yogi. And he's also referred to as Shiva. Shiva means one who is not that which is not in the sense. See today modern science is speaking in this terms in an atom, for example, over 99% of it is empty space. It's brought on your drone electron. All that covers less than 1%. 99% is empty space. So it is in the cosmos, 99% is empty space. See right now you look at this ceiling and you think it's full of star like lights. But actually there's more empty space than lights, isn't it? But because our visual apparatus are in a certain way, designed in a certain way, it gives more prominence to light because that's what we see more clearly. So he said, everything is like this. So if you transcend your physical nature, you become a Shiva. That means you are nothing. But nothing is the most powerful dimension of the existence because it is in the lap of the nothingness. Everything is happening. What you call as everything is just 1%. Do you think this was a real person? A real individual? Or do you think it's representative the learning of yoga and the best way to establish it, to express it was to make it a person? It's a real person because the places where he came, what he spoke, everything is recorded in history, largely by law. Today people are trying to write it down in books because in India, we don't believe in scholarship. We believe in experience, in our experience. So it's always transmitted as a oral tradition for a long time. These days people are writing down in many ways. It was a real person because- It's a spectacular human being if they could do all the things. Absolutely. See, when he came down south in southern India at that time, people were way shorter than the northern people. So they say he was twice the height of an average south Indian woman. So they say he must have been because an average south Indian woman, tribal woman, were like four, four and a half feet. So he must have been seven or eight feet tall that people said he was twice that and they said when he stood next to your horse, he was as tall as the horse's ears. But do you think these are exaggerations? No. What do you think? Exaggerations could be there. But because his physical size doesn't mean anything for his yoga. So there's no point exaggerating that aspect I'm saying. See, if he was a warrior, somebody may exaggerate him. But for a yogi, what is the point making him a big guy, physically? To make him divine. So physically. No, that is the whole thing. See, in India, the Indian culture has only spiritual paths. There is no real religion person. things. See, in India, the Indian culture has only spiritual paths. There is no real religion per se because a religion needs a belief. Right? Spiritual process needs a quest, a seeking. If you are on the spiritual path, we call you a seeker. If you ascribe to religion, we call you a believer. All right? Belief means something that you do not know because an authority speaks you believe that. It could be your father who says that this is the truth and you believe him as a child, then it may be a priest, then it may be somebody bigger or it may be in a book. You believe it because it comes from an authority. But the nature of that culture, the eastern culture, sees there is no authority for us. Truth is the only authority. Authority is never the truth. So that is the essence of eastern mysticism and eastern spirituality that you are always a seeker, never a believer. So you think that yoga just emanated from this one incredibly unique human being that was larger than everybody else that had supernatural abilities that existed 15,000 years ago? No. See, now you are making a superhuman being out of somebody. You're making an eight foot tall person who is not a person with a day in without drinking water. They're having people like that. All right, in every culture. They're having physically large people. But physical size has nothing to do with these capabilities because the capabilities are super physical too. Are they? No. So this is what it's about. Yoga is not about being superhuman. Yoga is about realizing being human is super. That's what is important. So that's the whole thing that he's saying. How being human is so super if you explore your humanity to its fullest, you will become so fantastic. Being a human being itself is a fantastic feat. You don't have to act like a superhuman being. He did not perform any miracles. He did not do anything. He just thought them. How to be beyond the limitations of one's physical and psychological structures. That's all. Do you think if this person didn't exist that yoga still would have been invented without them? Of course, somebody else would have. After that, many, many yogis have come. But he's the, maybe even before there were people, but they did not speak or they did not gather disciples who would take. So he sent his seven disciples in seven different directions. One was sent to to Southern India who is today. We hold him as the father of Southern mysticism. He's our guesthimani who came down south and he did maximum amount of work there. Every human habitation, he touched at that time and brought spiritual process as a living practice, not as a separate practice. Just the way you said that just the way you do things, just the way you address each other, was made into your spiritual process. See, right now in India, if people go to the temple and whatever their favorite deity, if they worship, they will stand like this. If anybody comes also, they'll stand like this. If a dog comes also, they'll do this. If they see a rock also, they'll do this. They'll see a tree also, they'll do this. For the people just listening, you're holding your hands together and prayer. It is not in prayer. Well, this way, whatever you're doing with your hands. Yes, this is done to everybody. Yes. All right. Okay. So because spiritual process is not alien to the life that you live, the way you live has to become spiritual. It's not that you have a spiritual practice and you have a separate life. It is the same thing. You, you integrated into your life. So he did that. Another one stayed with him. Another one came to the northern part of India. Another one went to Central Asia. There are, you know, there are certain footprints of his. Another one went to North Africa. Another one to South Asia. Another one, another one came to South America. Wherever these yogis went, suddenly those cultures where they went saw a sudden upsurge in the knowledge of geometry. Wherever you see extraordinary sense of geometry, which is not in line with the tribal existence that they had, that means a yogi came there. Sense of geometry meaning like the structures that they built. Yes, structures that they build artifacts they created. The way they arranged things around themselves, suddenly they had a different sense of geometry because yoga is essentially a cosmic geometry. Cosmic geometry. In to align yourself in line with the cosmos so that it reverberates as the same, which brings us to UFOs. Say there is some substance and a lot of imagination with this UFO business. Because we are always thinking life, you know, like all this, I'm saying there's not with any there are many people who could have experienced something, who could have seen something. I'm saying generally the popular imagination of a UFO or craft will come on land, somebody will come out of it. So you're thinking like this because that's how human beings operate. All right, that we will go land somewhere, then the door opens, we come out. How do you know that's how they also do it? That's not how it is. I have a living experience with certain extraterrestrial life forms. Yes, there are a whole lot of videos which I've spoken about. I have a reputation of being very logically correct. Now I don't want to lose it by talking about it to everybody. But in exclusive groups have spoken in detail. I've made other people experience these things. Very profound experiences of life, which is not of this planet. But it's not like a craft will land, they'll open the door, they'll come out. This is all your own thing. You pop the car, you open the door, you lock the door, you came out. This is your thinking. All right, it is not necessary. Other life should operate the way we operate, which is nothing like where we are. It's something totally different. So people have seen things here and there. Some of it could be mistake, some of it could be exaggeration, some of it could be just total lies. But definitely some people have seen some things. Some people have experienced something. There's no denying. Everybody will not be lying. There is no denying. It is there. But we are thinking just the way we are, they will also be. All we can think is a little bigger years, little bigger eyes, maybe three eyes in self too. This is just exaggeration of what we already know. Leave the imagination aside. Is there life beyond us? It would be very pompous to believe that in such a vast cosmos, we are the only evolved life on the planet in the universe. It's self a very pompous belief system. Definitely there is more life. And, you know, it is, it is done. We have done things with it in the past. We've done things with it. Yes, we have done some experiments with such life. We have made people experience this very strongly. When you say, we, who do you mean? We have a group, we have done certain things with you. Yes. So how? I don't go into it. Why not? I have a repetition of being very logically correct. Well, if you're logically correct about extraterrestrials and wouldn't that be beneficial to people that are here? Yes. No. Why? There are, see, our logic is related to our existence, the way we are made. Yeah. The way the existence is made doesn't fit into our logic. This is the biggest mistake that modern societies are making. You're trying to fit the existence into your logic. No. Your logic has place in the existence. Existence cannot be, you can't fit it into your logic because your logic functions between binaries of two. You and me have to be there for logic. The whole spiritual experience itself is not logically correct because the experience of life is beyond two. There are no binaries in spiritual process. When I use the word spiritual, I am not using the word spiritual, the way religions are using. They're talking about a spirit, which goes and comes and whatever, not in that sense. If you experience your life beyond your physiological and psychological construct, then your spiritual. So you mentioned it, which is already the most difficult thing to do. Now to talk about it, you feel like would somehow or another discredit you. I don't understand that because just because there is only thus far that your language goes. When you speak something, human languages, I have to be logically correct. Otherwise you cannot speak. But how are you experiencing this thing? Can you just tell me how you're experiencing these things? See, in certain spaces, there are very strong presence, which is when you feel the texture of that life, you know it is not like anything that we know here. Obviously it doesn't belong here. It has a different source than the life that we are. When I say the life that we are, see, this is the yogic sciences. This will confuse people if you go that far because people are thinking, you guys, for backache, you guys, for health, you guys, for slimming down. We've raised up a lot of us. So yoga means you know the texture of life. Unity. That is one thing. I'm talking about the texture of this life. If you know the texture of this life, see, people ask me, how do you know all this? I don't know anything. There's only one thing I know. I know the nature of this piece of life from its origin to its ultimate. Because every other life is in some way built the same way, people think I know every other life. No, I know only this life. But fortunately every other life from a single microbe to a human being to every other creature in some ways a reflection of this life because it's all connected, even the evolutionary sciences are saying the same thing, even the religions are saying the same thing. All right. So in that sense, I know the texture of this life and that life and every other life here, but there are some lives which don't have the texture which are totally different. And how are you experiencing these lives? You want me to say something ridiculous. No. No. I don't think it's ridiculous at all. No, no. If I say something which is illogical, it will seem ridiculous. I don't think it's illogical. It will be logical because it will not fit into the framework of human logic. Well, the framework of human logic is based on our own experience and interpretation of the life that we live. It doesn't mean that other people have an experienced or interpreted something that is beyond our comprehension because we have an experienced it personally. So you're just logical. We have done experiments where we attracted certain certain life which doesn't have any texture of earthly life. And how do you conduct these experiments? We, I used certain people to invite them into their bodies and what happened there is totally unbelievable for people because I'll tell you a simple thing. I invited a certain life into one person's body. I kept the weather was already like nearly zero kind of sub zero kind of atmosphere. It was in Tibet. And I kept a bowl of water about three inches above the head. And when this life entered and I tried to hold it within that body, you won't believe this bowl which is three inches the person is lying down on the ground on wet soil. They just put a bit sheet and this person is lying down. This bowl is about three inches above the head on the ground. The water started boiling now over 200 people watching the water boiling. Because it created so much heat then I let it go because it could burn up the person. You know, shoes out that person in some ways because the moment it felt trapped, it created such heat, the water is actually boiling three inches away from the film. From a distance they've filmed it, bad filming. You know, they were not really looking for it. But it is there. And how many times has this happened? We did this about two times we did it properly. Another time we did a mild one. After that I thought I will go spend time there which has never happened. And above all it doesn't serve any purpose like that. It doesn't serve a purpose. It doesn't serve a purpose. It is more to know. It doesn't serve a purpose as to how you can use because it could be... I have to admit I was stepping into an area where I don't know a damn thing. So you could make a mistake and take somebody's life or your own life or something like that. Whatever these life forms are that you're experiencing, there are only you can only experience them through another person's body. No, no, not like that. Only because I experienced I wanted to demonstrate it to the people who are watching. And how did you know that it was a thing? Like how did you know that you could experience it that way and exhibit it, put it on display for the people who are watching? Well, see your whole perception right now for most human being is limited to five senses. Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. This is how you know the world. If something has no smell, no taste, no touch, you will know. But there could be an infinite number of senses that we're not aware of that we don't possess. So these things are faced in many places, but there are certain places where there is an unreasonable level of concentration. So one place is this Kalash Manasuro region in Tibet. In the last two years we wouldn't be not being able to go because the Chinese have closed this because of this corona, why is it or whatever? Probably next year it will open up. Last year we went, we viewed Kalash and Manasuro from 8 to 10 kilometers away at the Nepali border we went there and even from a distance what it does to people is unbelievable. So it's just one concentrated hot spot. Yeah, of activity. Yes and that too. It's like rock work. Exactly at 2.30 in the morning. It starts. Boom activity like that for about one and a half hours, one hour 40 minutes like that. After that it just goes down. It's almost like a busy airport. Boom, boom, boom, boom, things are happening. But not like crafter anything, just bunches of lives, just up and down, things happening for about one and a half to two hours max. Do you think they're extraterrestrial? Do you think they're interdimensional? Do you think they're spirits? They're not spirits. No, no. Anything that's related to the planet we will just know immediately. It's not a... It's something that's from somewhere else. It is definitely from somewhere else. And you know like these are crazy things, man. Why do you want me to speak about this? No, I don't think that that crazy. I think they're only crazy because we have an experience them. If you try to explain many of the things that we take for granted because they're normal to someone who's never experienced them. Like if you try to experience fire to someone who would never experience fire, it would be the craziest idea that you could run across them. That there's a thing that's not alive, but it consumes things and it could kill all life on this planet, but it could also serve a purpose to heat your home and cook your food. This is what I'm saying in yoga. There are three types of fires within you. It is jaturagni, jaturagni means the fire of stomach and the reproductive aspect. These two fires which keep your survival going. Chitagni is the fire of your intelligence which propels a human being to do so many things. Bhutagni is the fire of five elements of earth, earth, water, air, fire and space. These five elements which is the composite of what everything physical is. So these three fires only if you keep them in control. Right now, for example, we're talking about the soil. These whole civilizations have been built because of our gastronomic fire and our intellectual fire. The same gastronomic fire, if it's unquenched, it can burn the world down. Right now, you and agencies are predicting that by 2035 there will be dozens of civil wars across the world because food shortages will cause that because this fire is not met means people will set fire to each other. How did you know that these entities or whatever these things are that you experienced existed? So I was talking about five senses. See for your sense organs to experience anything, you need a contrast. Only because there's you know darkness. If it's all dark, you would know what is darkness, what is light. Only because there is night, you know what's a day. Only because there's a woman, you know what's a man. Everything is by polarities. If there are no polarities, your eyes, your ears, your anything, your five senses cannot function. So it is based on the information that these five senses has given you, that your whole logical intellect has developed. Without this information, this will not do anything. It's only from the data that you got by seeing hearings, malign, tasting and touching, your intellect is functioning in a certain way. So right now you can see this part of my hand, but you can't see this part. If you see this part, you can't see this part. This is the nature of your vision, isn't it? Now, if you hear that sound at that moment, you don't hear the silence. So everything is like this, you see only a part of it through sense perception. Because of this, your logic is all in pieces. So with logically, if you arrive at any conclusion, it is like I gave you a million piece jigsaw. You found five pieces, you put them together and say, oh, this is a bear, this is a bear, oh, no, you're in Texas, this is a horse, you said. Because with five pieces, you arrived at some conclusion, this is what intellect means. This is why in your gig sciences, we don't attach any significance to what you think and feel because out of a million piece jigsaw, you found a few pieces and you're making your conclusions. It's not of any relevance for one who wants to know. It may be of relevance who one wants to survive. It may be of relevance for one who wants to win a race with somebody else. Okay, your horse, you figured out the horse better than somebody else, you win the race, but it's not of any relevance for someone who wants to know for a seeker, it's of no relevance. So how to go beyond sense perception? How to know life beyond sense perception is the entire aspect of yoga because as long as sense perception is on, you and me distinctly separate. No way that is you, this is me. Only if you go beyond sense perception, we were doing this, beyond your sensory limitations, if you go, something that not you becomes you. Right now with food it's happening, something, see, when it's on your plate, you call this my food, when you eat it, you say it's me, isn't it? Something that's not you became you. So this is your girl that you understand the sense perception is dividing the world and this division is needed for your survival process, but this division is no use for you to know life, the way it is. So the yogic sciences are focused on how to transcend the sensory perception, how to suspend your senses and simply perceive life without the division. If you do that, everything that is here will be in some way known to you and there is so much here that people don't see. If you talk about it, you look like a mumbojambod, you know, which doctor, so you don't talk about these things. But how did you know that it was going to be in that area? It's not that I knew it's in that area. I had heard stories about that place, but I thought I'll just go there one time just to see because it's a magnificent place by any standard. It's a beautiful, beautiful place. So it's a little over the lake is around 4,400 feet above means he level. The Kalash peak is almost 19,000 feet. So once I went and the magnificent nature of that, see the mountain is a place, this is a yogic tradition that when Yogi gets to know certain things, he knows he cannot share it, his experience. He cannot share it because nobody will understand it because it cannot be understood, it can only be experienced. So what he will do is he will store it in an energy form in a place where there is not too much human footprint at the same time. It's not completely inaccessible. There are many places like this in India. There are places like that in other parts of the world also. One fantastic place that you must visit is in United States is Matotipila. Where's that? The Matotipila is in Wyoming. Wyoming. Near what rapid city, yeah? They call it the devil's tower. You heard of that in many Western models. It tells towers that from closing counters of the third kind. I don't know about that movie, but in many Western movies, it's always there. It just tells us. Yeah, that's closing counters of the third kind. This is called Matotipila. In that Steven Spielberg movie, that's a very significant place because that's where the aliens land. Oh, is that so? Yeah. So this is a powerful, powerful space in America. This is one space I found which is naturally tremendous. And see, this is Kalash. Wow. It's a, it is something else. It's, it is the greatest mystical library on the planet. That place. Yes, Kalash. So what do you think is going on there? What do you think is going on there? It is. One thing is, Adiyogi himself was there. He lived there. So he stored all that he knows there. And many other yogis later on, many Buddhist teachers like Padma Samba and Manjushri, all these people and even the Jain monks, they all went and stored their energies there because the knowledge that they know, they don't want it to be lost. It can't be transmitted to people because you will not find the suitable people to do that. So you place it somewhere, where in future somebody who has the capability will access this. I'll tell you one experience. I'm going into the mumbo jambaw world. Why man? I came for so. The same mumbo jambaw. I came for safe soil. You're getting me somewhere else. Do you want both? I don't think it's mumbo jambaw. See, this happened. What is this thinking the years I'm not good with years? It must be 10, 11 years ago, maybe 2008 or even before that. I'm sorry, 2003 or 4. I started running temperature. I was in India. No, first I was in California. I was in Los Angeles. I started running temperature. And I come to speak in the Thai group. There is an Indian group, entrepreneur's group. And I spoke there and the president of the Thai group invited me to their home again to speak again to another exclusive group. I'm speaking there. I'm running very high temperature and I'm you know, my clothes are all wet with sweat. So one man raised his hand. I thought he he wants to ask a question. I said, fine. He said, you need to go to the emergency room right now. I said, yes, I know. I'll finish this talk and go. Then I finished the talk and then I went to the hospital like I was running very high temperature. So they gave me this that and they said, this is some kind of typhoid. So I met one wonderful doctor who was a tropical medicine expert. He said, this is some strange kind of typhoid. So he gave me a whole lot of antibiotics, this, that I took that and then I went to UK where I had a four day residential program. All the four days I was running very high temperature. But I finished the program in this 40 years. I've never cancelled one program because I was not well. I've never done that. So I went back to India. I had a television shoot. I had shoot 52 weeks of material in about four to five days. So from whole day I'm shooting and if I sit down for 30, 40 minutes of shoot, I'm like my whole, all my clothes are wet with sweat. I have to change my clothes because I'm sweating so much. And then after shooting the whole day on the second or third day I came home and I was like feeling like my brains are getting fried up so hot. Then I took the thermometer and put it, it said one, not seven. Wow. I don't know, man. I'm killing myself right now. So with my entire, my clothes, everything I went and shoot, a student of the cold shower. Then I called the doctor and said, you know, I was reading one, not seven. I stood under the cold shower. So this, the smartest thing you've done in your entire life. If you had been in that for another few minutes, you'd have a stroke or you'd have something for sure. Then they said it's some kind of what malaria and they gave me my real medicine. I had typhoid medicine, then I got malaria medicine, then they said three different types of malaria that diagnosed in one month's time and they changed the medication, changed the medication. And then I went to Australia. I was running temperature. I was in Singapore. I was running temperature. I came to India for two days. I was running temperature. Then I came back to United States. So it was my daughter's vacation. So I told her I'll take her to some lake house. Somebody had a friend of ours. So I said, I'll take her on the lake. So I have a port, you know, I've been port running by now. I have an antibiotic every day running over three, four hours a day with IV port on. I'm riding a boat and taking her around and everything going on. Wow. By then I have done about 18 blood tests and about four MRIs, all kinds of bizarre things they're saying and changing the prescription and giving me this medication, that medication. Temperature didn't go down. It just went on and on. Then I was in North Carolina on this lake house around 2 a.m. I knew that I was just kind of collapsing. Then I've kind of, you know, dropping off. Then I called out and they called for an ambulance. It came and they took me to a local hospital in cashiers in North Carolina and these doctors looked at us. This is, they looked at all the blood tests and this is too esoteric for us. You better go to Atlanta. So I went to Atlanta. There they said it's best you go to some physician in New York. He's the best guy who must go there because by now almost seven weeks I've been running continuous temperature. I've been traveling all over the world. So I went to New York and they said, you know, you must get admitted. We'll check. Then I got admitted by then I can, you know, I'm having difficulty walking and just really go like become weak. Then and by then my lymph nodes have swollen up so badly excruciating pain. So they said they may have to do surgery and they have to do biopsy first and see what is it? Is it malignant or whatever? Then I'm in the hospital next day morning for the, it's a general anesthesia. They have a pre-check for anesthesia. So in that funny gown which is open in all sides, you know, I'm wearing that holding like this inside the walk, holding onto the wall. I got into the elevator to go to another floor. In between in one floor, the lift stopped. A Chinese man got in. So the doctor who was with me introduced, he's the one who is going to do the surgery for you. In one floor, the lift stopped. A Chinese man got in. So the doctor who was with me introduced, he is the one who is going to do the surgery for you. Then the Chinese doctor felt the lymph nodes like this and said it's very deep. You must inform the family. Then I went for the test, for the anesthetic tests, then I said, I'm going home. Dr. Sadnossa Guru, this is very dangerous. You can't leave the hospital. I said, no, I'm going. I said, I'll go. I don't want to go through the surgery. So I went back. A friend had an apartment in Manhattan area. I just closed my eyes and sat for four days. My temperature went down. This swelling went down. In 21 days, I was in Kalash, trekked. You know, my muscle mass had gone down. My legs had become like this. Always I've been walking, trekking, playing games. I had some muscle, not like you, but I have some muscle to keep me going. But my muscle mass went down so much in these eight weeks. I just shanked like that. With great difficulty, I trekked there. I could barely speak. And I sat there for two hours. I took one strand of what is there on that mountain. You won't believe in two and a half hours. I was almost 10 to 15 years younger than what I was at that moment. People around me will watch for it. How suddenly I'm a different man after eight weeks of fever and all kinds of treatments without knowing what it is. So that is the power of that mountain. It's not just a hilly of your health or something. It is tremendous amount of everything that one can know in the universe is stored there in some way. It is your ability to pull it out. But you were covered in Manhattan, right? Yes. What makes you think it's that mountain? See, I closed my eyes and I did what I have to do with my system, which gave me a respite. Yes. But still, I was not fully there. Still very weak and like that. But I just bounced back into an half hours time. But I don't understand what it has to do with that mountain. See, this is what it is. What you think is you is not just contained in the boundaries of this body. If you are willing to open up that boundary, the whole existence is with you. So you opened up your body after all those weeks and you don't think it has anything to do with the antibiotics you were taking or the... And you were going to give me a respite at all. But you never rested, right? I'm very restful even if I'm traveling. But you were constantly working, right? You were explaining all the different things you were doing and that you were constantly practicing yourself. No, I don't tax myself. But that was taxing. You were sweating through your clothes. Yes, that's because of fever. Right. But you have requested this swelling, which they said without looking inside they will do biopsy and most probably they will do surgery along with that, which was excruciating pain just went down. But it went down after you rested, right? Not rested. I sat with my ass close. I didn't sleep. I sat. But you didn't do anything for four days. If you want to explain it, this is why I said, see, I'm going into mumbo's oblause. No, no, I believe you. I'm not... I'm just trying to piece together why. So I'm saying when doctors, every qualified doctor, I say saying that I'm in a state where you will have to inform the family because life situation, life and death situation, you don't recover just because four days you sit there with eyes closed. All right. You don't think so. No, not because of rest. You think there was something supernatural or something else. See, what is the term? I never use the word supernatural because everything is within the aspect of nature. Okay, what would you use? So which aspect of nature are you in right now? That is the thing. See, one aspect of your nature is survival, for example, for every human being. Because of survival, you treat to build boundaries around yourself. Whether it's a national boundary or an individual boundary, your house boundary or your personal boundaries, this all, you know, self-preservation boundaries. Right. But there is also something within you which wants to expand, which doesn't lack boundaries. Why people suffer the prison like that is just the boundaries. Nothing else wrong. It's much bigger than your home, the prison. Actually, you're kind of company. I'm saying, if you're in that kind of life, it's your kind of company, food is good, you're far fitter than most people on the outside. You don't have to do a job to get your food. It's actually very good, but lack of freedom kills a man. Yeah. So I want to go back to the experiencing these different life forms you experienced. You had heard that they existed in this place. Generally, yes, a lot of people who have been there have been talking about it, but lot of talk is of that nature. See, as I said, I am a superscaptic. I don't believe anything that anybody says. You have to do that. Not do I disbelieve. Somebody says something maybe it's true for them. I will respect that, but it's not that I have to believe it unless it happens to me. Do you think that a certain state of mind or being is what puts you in touch with these other life forms? No. Let's see, these two things you're saying in the same context, and that's how normally it's used in the society. People think a state of mind is everything. Right. See, mind itself is a very limited process in the sense. See, right now, generally in the Western world, you think mind means you're intellect, thought process. Right. Your thought process cannot generate anything other than the data that you already possess. Correct? Can you think of something that's not at all there in your data? Imagination. No, your own imagination is just an exaggeration of the data that you already have. Okay. If there is no data, you cannot imagine. So this thing that you experience was beyond imagination. I'll come to that. Okay. See, right now, when you say state of mind, you're talking about whether you're a quanomish or you disturbed or you're happy and happy, or you're able to penetrate something, you're not able to penetrate something in terms of intellect. But all these are dependent because it is like your computer. If you remove the data, it's just a blank screen. So if I remove all the memory that you have, you're just a blank screen, isn't it? Right. So right now, your ideas of right and wrong, your ideas of your nationality, your ideas of your race, your ideas of your religion, your ideas of your family, your ideas of yourself is all in the memory bank. If we just take out that memory chip, nothing. So your whole intellect is functioning from that because you can see, because you cannot see the end of the universe. If you could see the end of the universe, you would say, it's just me here, nobody else. Because you cannot see, because you're here, maybe there are people there, this is an imagination. All right. But imagination is rooted in the data that you already have. You cannot imagine something new. You use two words together, state of mind and state of being, being means this. See, right now, you have a body. But when you were born, you were only this much. Now you became this much. How? The food that you've eaten, isn't it? Now you have a mind. When you were born, you were just, boom, boom, boom, like a little baby. Suddenly you become all this. How? Whole accumulation of impressions, isn't it? Through five senses. What you have seen, what you have heard, what you have smelled, what you have tasted, what you've touched. From this, you have formed a whole lot of information with which you have a mind of your own. How rich that information is makes you look that smart in a given society. All right. If you're well informed, just because you have a good data chip, people think you're smart, not necessarily. So essentially, smart means always in comparison to somebody else. So these days, everybody's saying they have a smart phone. See, when would you call somebody smart? Only if they're smarter than you. So if you say smart phone, obviously it is smarter than you, simply because it has more memory than you, isn't it? And it has more multiple functionality than you. More access to information. Yes. So that is intellect. But intellect is not everything. When it comes to intellect, would you like your intellect sharp or blunt? Tell me, I'm going to bless you right now. You're a blast me. Do you want a sharper blunt? I'm going to go with sharp. Yes. So that means your intellect is a cutting instrument. It's like a knife. The more sharper it is, the better it is. So with sharp knife, you can dissect and know things. So I want to know Joe right now. Shall I dissect him? Will I know him if I open him up? Will I know him that way? No, you're going to have to experience. Yes. That's it. So, dissection may show me how your heart is, how your liver is, how your kidney is, but you won't meet Joe out there. All right. So by dissection, you can know physical things. By dissection, you cannot know anything, which is beyond that. All right. The life in you cannot be perceived by dissection of any kind. So now with an intellect, which is a knife, with this knife, if you try to stitch your clothes, then you will be like today's fashion, everybody's in tatters. So to stitch, you need a different kind of tool to cut, you need a different kind of tool. Right now with the cutting tool, people are trying to do everything. This happened to me. At that time, I was crisscrossing India and my motorcycle, where I was just in my early 20s. And whole night, I've been riding early morning. I come into a small place where there is a street side T-sharp where I had sat down and had a T-end. Those days, this motorcycle chain, you know, if you ride 1,600, 700 kilometers really fast, it becomes slack. You have to remove one today, modern motorcycles have made different leads very different. Those days, like, around 700, 800 kilometers means it'll become slack. So almost every day, I have to remove one link from the chain and I have a spare chain with me always because it'll go off. And in a day, those days, I'm riding 1,200 kilometers per day. Those days when roads were not great. And our motorcycle is 250cc single stroke engine. All right, I'm sorry, two stroke engine. So I, having my T, it's not very difficult to fix the chain, but it's messy. Your hands get dirty, you need soap and everything. I was having T and I saw the opposite. They were a small shack. Here, Moo-Moo-Bharak, mechanical works, he'd written. Strapling young youth, I told him, hey, coming home. Can you fix my chain? He's like, oh, yes, sir, I can fix it. I said, okay, then he came out with a chisel and hammer. I said, wait, I got up and went and I looked into a shack. He doesn't have any other tools. Only thing he has is chisel and hammer. He can fix it, but after that, nobody can fix anything on that motorcycle. So right now, most human beings are like this. They are trying to fix everything with their intellect, which is a cutting instrument. With a cutting instrument, if you try to fix everything, all that you will have is a bruise life. That's what they're having. If they're failures in their life, they're suffering. If they're successful, they're dying of tension. If they're poor, they're suffering their poverty. If they become rich, they suffer their taxes. If they're not married, they suffer that. If they married, oh, don't tell me, all the things that they do, everything, because you're trying to handle everything with the cutting instrument, naturally, you're fully bruised and bleeding by the time you're done with life. So the perception of life is beyond intellect. Intellect is not perception. Intellect is coming out with permutations and combinations of information that you already possess. So you experiencing whatever this life form was is beyond words, because it's beyond anything. See, because words are a product of our intellect. Language is a product of our intellect. That's why I said, if I speak, I'll end up speaking ill logically because intellectually, you cannot think ill logically. If you think, you can only think logically. Somebody may not agree with your logic, but you can only think logically within yourself, isn't it? Nobody thinks ill logically. You may think the other guy is illogical, but he thinks you're illogical, but within your mind, you're never illogical, isn't it? Because the thought process is like that. That is the nature of the intellect. You have to add, two plus two is four. Maybe you added two plus two is five. You got it wrong, but you're still thinking it's logically correct, isn't it? Right. So this experience that you had, whatever it is, we don't have the tools to express it in a way that a person who hasn't experienced it. You have the equipment, you have not even opened the wraps. Everybody has it. There's nobody who doesn't have to experience it to know what this equipment is. No, it's just that, see, where people are invested. That's what they know, isn't it? Yes. So that's all it is. They're invested. Largely, most people are invested in trying to be better than somebody else. Because right from their kindergarten school, their parents, their teachers, everybody told you, you must be number one. That means you always enjoy other people's failures. When you enjoy other people's failures, I don't call this joy. I call this sickness. That is a sickness. And that's a sickness that a lot of people possess. The enjoying other people's failure sickness. Yeah. See, why is it that you enjoy a billion dollars? I'm a billionaire. Somebody enjoys it. Why? Because nobody else has it around you. Let's say somebody who's aspiring for a billion dollars, I'll give you billion dollars. But if everybody else in the town, I'll give them 10 billion dollars. Will you be happy? You'll not be. You'll be very unhappy with your billion dollars. Because your whole problem is you want to be on top of everybody. Yes. Yeah. Why do people have that? What do you think? Do you think that's what was that left over from? See, this is because, as I said, your whole life is limited to your sense perception. Since organs can only perceive in comparison. See, right now, you're six feet tall. You're not. I'm just telling you. First, sometimes, let's assume you're six feet tall. Now, you stand like a tall man. You walk like a tall man. You feel like a tall man. You think like a tall man. You went to another society where everybody's eight feet tall. Suddenly, you walk like a short man. Think like a short man. Feel like a short man. So your entire perception is always in comparison when it comes to sense organs. This is what you guys about going beyond the senses because this thing that you perceive in comparison is only useful for survival process. It is not good enough to know the nature of the universe. These are all only, these are all realms which only interest people who just want to know. There may be no use, but you want to know. So there is that aspect in every human being. Whether you're kept it alive or you kept it buried is a question. That's that old quote, comparison is the thief of joy. I think is that the row? No. Is it? Oh, that's right. I thought maybe Thomas Jefferson originally attributed to Roosevelt. Listen, man, I really enjoyed talking to you. Thank you very much for being here. Yeah, thank you for having me. But you know, this soil is a serious situation. This is a serious situation from March 21st. I'm riding 30,000 kilometers and I am 65. What I see is in the last two years, I've been talking to so many people, influencers, scientists, politicians, leaders, everybody knows there's a serious problem. And everybody knows what is the solution also generally. But I think everybody was waiting for some idiot to come and bell the cat. So here I am. Okay. So next 100 days from March 21st, 100 days, we want the whole world to talk about soil because I'm addressing the COP 15 where 170 nation representatives are there where we're presenting these documents before that we want to raise three to four billion people to talk about soil. Once 60% of the electorate has spoken in the world, that soil is a deep concern to them. Believe me, every garment will get active on the job because in a democracy, the only currency is numbers. Where can someone follow this online? Do you have a website? Yes, save soil.org is there? Save soil.org. Yes, there's an Instagram and Twitter and Facebook. And you have Instagram as well? Yes, we have what is called as you can become an earthbody. If you become an earthbody, every day, you'll spend five to 10 minutes to enhance the message to reach as many people as possible. So people must understand this. People are everywhere. I go, people is, social media is stressing me, tension. This is rubbish. See, many, many great beings have come in this world. But when they spoke hardly 10 people could hear them. This is the first time you can sit here and talk to the entire world. When you have such tools in your hands, if you do not transform humanity, if you do not do what is absolutely needed for this generation, it shows that we don't care I don't want to be that one who didn't care enough to do something which matters because right now we are consuming the soil and food that belongs to the unborn child. This is a crime against humanity. I hear you. Let's make it happen. Let's make it happen. I will help elevate your signal. And thank you very much. I really, really enjoyed this. You gave me a lot to think about. I'm going to continue to think about this. Thank you. Thank you.