Hello freaks We're rocking it late night style. It's 10 30 p.m. Here in Los Angeles, California and This episode of Joe Rody's experience podcast brought to you by audible.com if you've never been to audible.com and you're a fan of either audio books or podcasts or I Mean they have old radio shows. They'll be an Anthony show It's it's really one of the best resources online for audio entertainment More than a hundred thousand different titles and unmatched selection if you will some of the best books though that You could get Including our friend Christopher Ryan's book a sex at dawn. That's on there, right? I believe so, but yeah, there's honestly reading it though. That's what it was and I told them that was bullshit It's an awesome resource and if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe You will get one free audiobook and 33 days of audible service that world war Z. Yeah How was that you saw that right? It's really good and then not so good. It's really good and not so good together I was back to one. He's dreamy as always. Yeah. I want to say too much I don't want to spoil it for anybody. I enjoyed it though. It's an enjoyable film. It's a fucking Hollywood movie man It's a big Hollywood movie Brad Pitt and it's PG 13 because it's a certain amount of fuck realfoot unavoidable Anyway, you could buy that book or get get that book for free if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe You get one free audiobook 33 days of audio service Audio service. That's like that sounds sexy We're also about to you by ting if you go to rogan dot ting dot com You will save $25 either off one of ting's delicious sexy Android phones or their service If you've never used or heard of ting Well, I've assumed you haven't used them otherwise. I'm just wasting my fucking time here Maybe half and maybe you've heard this podcast a million times. She's also possible. There's no other way to do this commercial folks. So I got a pile through what ting is a Self-encompening that uses the sprint backbone. So it's all very high-end service and they try to do it in Like a very reasonable way if you want to Answer you can cancel at any time you don't have any contracts You also get credit on a new service if you don't use a certain amount of your your service They'll drop you down to the next level which is really beautiful if you lose use less than you thought you would ting drops You down to the next level and they credit you the difference on your next bill. Awesome. Love ting Then I used them two days ago At this place that I had my AT&T iPhone and I couldn't get service there and he'd like good enough data service I tried my iPad which is Verizon could same thing pull out my ting device was used streaming on their network From the comedy store and it was this really was doing you just works good at maybe that's why Joey He's always had sprint that's right. Yeah, I guess sprint works in places for eyes and doesn't No one's perfect at this point in time But what they're trying to do at ting is just give you an option an option that's easier to swallow and It's cool company and we enjoy doing business with them and go to rogan dot ting dot com Say yourself some money you dirty pictures We're also positive finally. This is the last one. It's where you got an on it, but on it's just a given I'll try to make it funny Legalzoom dot com is our last sponsor legal zooming dot com is a website that essentially They they laid a framework for legal issues that you would normally have to go to a lawyer for and pay a lot of money and What legal zooming wants to emphasize very clearly is their not a law firm they provide self-help services at your specific direction and They can also connect you with an independent attorney if you need additional guidance What they therefore is to Make it much easier to do things like incorporate or form an LLC you can do it at legal zooming dot com for just six for just $99 Six on an order came six because it's evil legal legal stuff's evil. I was thinking 666. It's really nice They can also help you out with trademarks copy rides patterns if you got a great idea you want to protect Family you can make a will yeah, you know what that's crazy none of us have wheels Yeah, I was talking to my friends the other day about that was like do you have a will no? What happens? Well if you live in California your parents live in California California gets all your shit unless your parents break in your house and steal everything Really? Yeah, I think it's some warning. It's all you're I'm might be 100% wrong But no, but I guess there is a thing if you don't have a will it doesn't on you think just automatically goes to your family But that's not always the case Yeah, I assume that would be a pain to ask This I especially if you're living with someone like if you live in the garage or something like that Mm-hmm or grow as a key to your house and she knows your dad and just comes over and takes your shit That's not another little she cares about you With you yeah, but there'll be like seven girls all butting heads trying to get in the door How's that time? I dare you I dare you Just there was a humble brag. No, no, anyway, we will zoom Legal zoom calm. It's not a law firm remember it's they're just just trying to help you out And I know there's like some code that I'm supposed to use But of course it's not on this copy. I think it's just you the code names road and But let me just make sure you know you should like get it all these guys together Just make it Rogan for everything. I know it would be nice But it's not that way You lose a lot of people that are just like fuck it. I don't know it. I'm just Whatever yeah, probably right. Yeah, it's the code name Rogan I'm sorry. It's right from my face. Not only that's highlighted You especially discount from listening to this podcast So just enter the code name Rogan they refer a box and check out from more savings That's legal zoom calm you always have to say it like that at the end because I'm actually more professional if you just go Okay, that fucking commercials over next. I'm surprised you like a theatrical ending I'm surprised you don't have to do one of those like quick fast talking things like Tom Cigura on their podcast I had something has something similar at the end they have to do one of those night We're really And like it's like it's they really say that yeah, you know it's weird We're well something else would actually say on the podcast. I'm cool almost anything. It's a reasonable ad Right make sense if it's something I would use no we totally use this right I've used this yeah, what does it make sense to me, but that's that doesn't make sense. I'm not reading off any following The font just comes one and they're gonna get it in order all right That comes the last sponsor oh and and it if you've never been go check it out Gaze also fit this equipment. We got a lot of new shit in it if you haven't been into the website before in to the website I don't think you're into a website if you go on to a website And why is it on and not in I mean you're not really on it What are you doing? What are you doing when you go on to a website? You're going on? Are you going in it? You're actually entering it to it to it and then and then what do you do to go in or do go on? So I'm on the website you're on the website, but why is it on because you're on like you're on it You're face mark you're in though you're in the website you're clicking different pages You're like in a book. Oh, I'm 50 pages into my book where you're in most websites like your pictures and stuff So I think that's more confusing to most people me. I'm in most Most people go to a website. They're not in it. Well, you mean like on it Okay To do it harder. Can we be talking you know, I'm being serious. I'm never gonna stop saying retired either fuck you All right, it's trying to take you took away training now. How dare you? That's so hard. I'm digging we talked back to some I'm putting more words back in the vernacular You know what I'm talking about. I'm not talking about diseases dummy. There's some there's a retarded tranny somewhere going Oh, I can't believe you did the voice Onids.com the new primal bells are in if you haven't seen them there We hired this awesome sculptor to draw these angry chimpanzee faces for cattle bells Gives you a little bit of extra motivation when you're working out I like to picture that chimp clamping down on my scrotum with his teeth That gets me through the last four or five reps If you've never used cattle bells before what they are is in my opinion one of the very best strength and conditioning Exercise equipment pieces of exercise equipment you can buy they're a Russian invention And it's like a cannonball with a handle on it and you swing them around and you use your entire body in these these movements And I find that that's what really applies to not just physical Sports but just if physical movement off physical movement like picking things up the ability to move stuff around your house You gain a balance sort of strength whereas a lot of people one of the problems with people who Don't use a professional trainer or don't exactly know what you're doing you can develop imbalances With your body because maybe you use your arms too much Don't use your legs enough or vice versa. It can be it could be a mess One of the best things you can do if you're gonna think if you think about Kettle bells or any kind of exercise thing is to hire someone who's really good who can show you what to do You can learn a lot of stuff from YouTube But you really should have someone sort of correcting subtle things in the way you're moving just to make sure that you have good form Use a lightweight to begin with try to try to be very reasonable about what you're trying to do and then build right You're right down and build and when you do do that you will get an immense sense of satisfaction the sense of satisfaction that you get from pushing your body and getting your body into a good state of physical fitness It's not just a vanity thing. It's really good for your health and You know I Talk about it all the time, but it's very hard for people to stop eating donuts and get off the couch It's very difficult to choose to have a salad instead of a shitty cheeseburger It's hard. It's hard to get your shit together But if you can get your shit together even just a little bit you'll feel better. That's a fact I lost eight pounds in two weeks. How you really? Yeah, and that's after quitting smoking which is like usually a game Wait good fuel you sexy bitch Brian Reiko looking at health. He's Cutting back on his coffee. He's doing all kinds of shit next thing. You know, but taking T plus I need some of that get some We got some I'll give you some I'll bring you some next podcast cool All right, that's the end use the code name Rogan. That's our OGA and and you will save 10% off any and all supplements All right my friends Rick Doblin is here and we are gonna get to the bottom of some shit Please cue the music Logan experience Drink my day Joe Rogan podcast my night You made it I did Rick Doblin who is the head of maps or if you Have never heard well the it's called an acronym where it's maps or is it yeah It is because it's so you say it right when you don't say it. It's an abbreviation as it was or it's we Which I'd figure that out once But it stands for the multi-disses for it is what Google's for but some another I'm not quite I don't totally have it together multi-disciplinary association for psychedelic studies You founded this yeah, and I was surprised to discover it has the most syllables of any organization in the nonprofit world for drug reform Really well, it's a very interesting title multi-disciplinary Association for psychedelic studies. That's what I love about it. It's like you're coming at it from a whole bunch of different angles So his doctors is not just chemists. It's a whole bunch of human beings Yeah, and I had learned from a previous nonprofit that when you want to create a nonprofit It's good to try to make it as broad as possible The purpose as you see different strategic ways to do things Hmm, so I made it multi-disciplinary which means we could look at psychedelics from virtually any perspective Association to mean that it's publicly supported a nonprofit and I had images of you know tens of thousands of people Banding together to support research in different areas psychedelic was a big choice actually whether we should use the word whether we should use a different word whether we should Use a euphemism and so I felt like I wanted in this kind of second coming of psychedelics into the culture 40 years after the crackdown that I wanted there to be a certain transparency And so I wanted to use the word psychedelics So people knew what I was doing and I was hoping that we can change the cultural connotations from What it was in the 60s of psychedelics rebellion dropping out You know finding your own sort of private utopia somewhere certain kind of Not integrated into the culture and now that's I think the the arc of the story is psychedelics Came at a time when culture wasn't really ready and brought all sorts of things to the surface and over the last 40 years Our culture has gotten ready with hospice centers with birthing centers with yoga meditation all the things with flotation tanks all the things that were Too hard to integrate at the time death and birth and just raw emotions that and also this globalization and growing sense of global spirituality now our culture is ready and I think we can over the next 10 20 years Integrate psychedelics without the connotation of rebellion but to enhance what we're all doing together That's interesting. I like the use of the word psychedelics because you're owning it. Yeah, that is what it's about And you know and it's it's certainly something that people are afraid of or afraid of adding to something Because it will somehow another make it silly or make it oh psychedelics, you know people want to dismiss it and they can much easier Owning it is I think is very important. Yeah, and there's no other word that's even better No, the loosen of gender was used by the government. It's like you're fake. Yeah I don't like that feeling either hallucinogen always makes me feel like I'm seeing something that's not there Yeah, that's the idea. Yeah, it's not real And for folks who don't know anything about psychedelics They imagine like literally like imagining someone in the room with you and that guy it doesn't really exist Yeah, you know, you can't be the difference for the word before that in the 50s was even worse It was psychatomy medic. Oh, which means it mimics psychosis Well, it doesn't some people it's a bit careful It does it does bring in all parts of our cell I think we all have those kind of parts where they're not really integrated and it seems Extreme and you let the emotions carry you. Yes. So that the safe plays we have to be careful I think is true But the bad trip the difficult challenge the death rebirth that's in all of us as are the psychotic states I actually had when I felt was probably the most psychotic or Deluded state of my whole life was doing LSD in a flotation tank. Wow Yeah, I can imagine so self-examatory anyway Yeah, you know, I'm not an LSD person I never have tried it because I've never trusted anybody in the right way to get it But I've done a lot of time in the tank on especially on high doses of animals edible weed Yeah, you know that insanely uncomfortable feeling that you get what you get you get an examatory about shit You did in high school like really in depth. Yeah about shit You did in high school. Yeah, and the tank does that on its own. Yeah, so the tank with that together. It's who? Yeah, imagine acid and the tank would be a similar experience. Yeah, well, I grew up reading John Lily Well in the 1971 leap self Yeah, but it was before that was programming and met her programming and the human biocompewter And that was so technical and complicated I had to spend like a whole day on each page or something just like him figure this stuff out it was so early computer Discusion and language about how the brain in operates. Yeah, he was a real pioneer like a real pioneer I mean that dude was out there. Yeah, but he went too far out and he wasn't grounded in his last 30 years were kind of a sad tragedy I would say wasted potential Is that because of ketamine gets he got involved heavily with ketamine which has some pretty disaster? It's his results. Yeah, can we mean is the most addictive of all the psychedelics? Yeah, and I physically addictive Not so much physically Which but more this reliable escape that be and this delusion of superiority. So is there withdrawal? Not in that same way as heroin or it's not like physically. It's just a psychological addiction more so there's a In attitude and and but what I think was the problem with John Lily more than before the ketamine Was a certain kind of brilliance that was unbalanced and he was kind of arrogant And I don't think he was patient and he was way ahead of his culture You know way ahead and yet When he saw the crackdown come I think he he sort of took this superior position and just felt like he's not gonna work on a political Struggle or even a scientific struggle to get these tools back he kind of With Drew and even from board. He just had this Somewhat self-destructive aspect to I I read a lot about him and I met him and I actually ended up Trying to do MDMA therapy with him When it felt like he was really going downhill from the ketamine and from cocaine and wow Yeah, that's intense. That is the world was kind of my hero One of them. You know he and Stan Graff and I would contrast them that Stan is doing fantastically as traveling the world is totally together and a major inspiration who was able to integrate into his life Whereas John Lily was you could say arguably as brilliant but Went off the track. Yeah, it's it is possible That's one of those real issues with anything that completely alters the way your mind works Is that you could get into that too much you can get into that more than reality and lose your grip of this world? Well, it is reality It's just a different view of reality And I think that the grounding part and what we emphasize in our psychedelic therapy is that it's the integration work More than the experience itself that produces long-term benefits Then you can have these unusual experiences, but what do you bring back from them? Right and how do you integrate that into your daily Practice so that it's anchored so that you can try to get there without the drug It's like this evolution process where you learn something and I found at least for me the psychedelics or something That I can work with through a lifetime through a lifespan that I've learned some people say when you get the message Hang up the phone and I felt that there's been different messages at different stages of my life and That I'm more able although it's still really hard You know to hear those things those the self critical stuff like what you did in high school or what yeah, you know how you try to hear the message underneath the criticism and I learned that a lot during and I began experience So I've seen that these experiences can have these lasting Changes but that they don't always and they don't have to and particularly when you have these experiences that are unbalanced and the drug starts Wearing off and you haven't come to a new balance and during those periods the best Solution at least is to continue therapy and do another Session and that's where people often back off and they kind of freeze something in place That's at such a deep level. It's hard to get to that deep level to move it forward Yeah, it's um it's a very personal thing isn't it like where you start from to you know for some folks? It's like they've already they already have issues with reality itself They have issues with being grounded with being calm and I mean it's Some people you could just you know you could just get them high or they could have you know some sort of psychedelic experience And they would be able to assimilate it into their life and they would benefit from it almost immediately Where's other folks almost needed to be I think the education is one of the big ones that we're really lacking in this Crunchy when it comes to these things and the word shaman is such a such a loaded word Yes, because it's like healer, you know, and someone says they're healer all sudden you are okay You know what other dumb shit are you gonna say next? You know our whole euroth therapeutic approach is based on the idea that there's an inner healer And it's the support that we provide to help people heal themselves So there's a power dynamic often in shamanism or sometimes the shamanism The only one that does the drug and then heals you Hmm, it's not teaching you how to heal yourself so that we have this idea that like the body heals itself if you get a cut The psyche has these self healing mechanisms and brings things kind of to the surface so that it's not so much Reality and psychedelic state. It's almost like reality and more reality And we know that from FMRI brain scan studies that were recently done in England with still sibin that what it does in the brain Is different than what we had been thinking and we had been thinking that it makes the brain speed up that that you know Something's work even faster that that your perceptions are going and actually what it does is it makes parts of the brain slow down But it's the filtering parts of the brain so that we have enormous volume of Perceptions coming to us at any one time and that's kind of what you can see in the tank to that when you start quieting everything down you can really You know thinking different ways, but we have this enormous amount of information and we only narrow and look at some of it what we need to do either for survival or for We focus and the Controlling the filtering parts of the brain are what still sibin slows down So that they work less well so you get more of a flood of what's already there What is the mechanism the filtering parts of the brain when you say the filtering parts of the brain? What what are those well? They're generally linked in what's called the default Network the default mode network there's And here becomes kind of a Practical side of the work that I do which is basically trying to develop psychedelic drugs into prescription medicines and marijuana so from the FDA's point of view You have to show something safe and efficacious, but you don't have to explain how it works So therefore I haven't really focused on that so I don't know the answer to your question Because it's neuroscience, and I don't need neuroscience to know the exact Hmm quadrants of the brain so I've kind of got People I work with and other people I rely on another scientist To do that part it helps if you have an explanatory mechanism Right, but at the same time it's not necessary So what I've done is tried to be strategic and tried to focus on the stuff that's essential to move the culture forward to create legal context For psychedelics to show that they can be used responsibly. Why I was asking more from my own application I wish I could answer you I know how is one of that I read that very study about Acquiring areas of the mind. I thought it was really fascinating and I attributed it to The the idea being that we are filled with noise You know that our mind is filled with noise our mind is filled with concentrating on a bunch of shit That's not really important and that that gets shut off and then you can sort of tune into whatever the fuck it is that you took and Whatever it is that you took that's doing something and yeah, I don't see it so much that stuff is not important But it's not as important. I mean you need to do certain things to get through the day Right, so you need to have a narrower focus Maybe now important wasn't even what I should have said. It's just it's not that it's not important It's just sometimes there are things in your life that aren't that important But they take primary focus. Yeah, they take center stage, you know, whether it's an argument You got with a friend over almost Nothing something that could be addressed, you know really easily and quickly probably But whatever it is it's bothering you should I say something because I really feel like I'm being slighted and now Fuck with you all day until you actually have the conversation with the person and it could be a million other things Could it be financial issues that you have it could be something's wrong with your house And you have to pay to get it fixed and all these things just constantly chip away at your ability to focus on the now and to enjoy Just enjoy the experience of life itself. Yeah, I've never really felt comfortable kind of meditating to try to let all those things go Because I get into this state where I have this idea of something should I do I should do and I think those things that you mentioned are really important How you relate to your friends? Those are were those are the most important things of life Yeah, not the least important But I've always felt like when I'm if I were to be meditating this idea will come up And I'm supposed to just let it go and I thought why don't I just do it? I'm more outer focused and for me The jogging and being stoned or like meditation. Oh, it's definitely meditation. Yeah jogging stone is a trip Very different than then just exercising But I think that this idea of creating a space like in the tank or like a therapeutic setting where you're not paying attention to all those daily things Yeah, where you can sink deeper to Other questions of life that that is really important. You have to kind of consciously create a space for that. Yeah The the things that always come up in trips For me that they're the uncomfortable things are always things that I really should be working on anyway It's always like maybe I've hidden in balance and I focus too much on this and not enough on that or whatever it is Those those moments where it hits you. It's like you shouldn't know that anyway and if you if you knew if you were living in a harmonious way We wouldn't have to tell you this all right to get it over with figure that out and every trip that I've had that That where that's happened. There've only been a few of them that are really lit. We're like super uncomfortable Just really bad, but those always I benefited from those every one of them. No, what do you mean by bad? I don't mean bad. I mean uncomfortable like especially with the eating eating marijuana the eating marijuana thing A lot of folks do not give that the proper respect and that's why they freak out and call the cops You I'm sure you heard the great video of the police officers You stole marijuana from someone they pulled over and then they pot brownies and then got so high They panicked and called the police The call the ambulance Ambulance is right there have you heard that for Brian That's right here. Oh sure play it just for the good for a goof because it's fucking ridiculous These poor people what they didn't know these dirty cops is that marijuana when it's processed by your liver When you eat it it produces something called a leaven hydroxy metabolite an incredibly psycho active material It's not like the THC high at all. It's a totally different experience in much stronger And that's why a lot of people think that like the aid of cookie that it was laced like oh my god so many laced this was something No, you're taking a totally different drug. Yeah, we do harm reduction at festivals to try to imagine a post-probition world so at Bernie man boom other festivals where we provide An organized teams of therapists and others that work with people that have difficult trips and people the most people come sometimes Is for eating too much marijuana. Yeah people don't realize how this this this easily can be as strong as any psychodellate You take and that's not bullshit. Yeah, and listen these poor folks I'm in 911 call you will hear telling where the information has been removed My folks Yeah, can you please send us you I? Think I'm having an overdose that is still my wife. Okay, you and your wife. Yeah Overdose of what marijuana. I don't know if it had something in it Please send rescue. How old are you? I'm 28 29 years old and my wife is 25 please come 26 yes, please see you guys in drinking also What you guys been drinking today, too? No, that's it You know, and then you left into the house. No, please come okay You guys like if you guys have fever anything no, I'm just I think we're dying You guys have I don't know we made brownies and I think we're dead. I really do How much did you put your brownies? I don't know I wasn't bad who made the brownies? I? My wife and I did to come here I don't know. I don't know. Is it in France? Who made the Brownie? My wife and I did. Cuba come here. She's on the living room ground right now. Is she really? She's barely breathing. Is she awake? I think so. Okay. Can you laugh? Hardin. Can you laugh? Yeah, I could feel she's laying right down in front of me. Time is going by really, really, really slow. Okay. I'm not sure if you don't hear me. Do you know how much I'll make you buy? You put in the Brownie? Hardin. How much do you buy? I don't. Just please and rescue. You know how in the way, but I'm trying to figure how much you bought and put into the Brownie, sir. It's probably like a quarter-ounce total. A quarter-ounce total from the Brownie. Can you guys eat all the Brownie? Yeah, we did. Hahaha. Okay. I need all of them. How am I? Why? Why is that funny? I'll tell you why it's funny because you can't die from it. Okay. The only way a pot's going to kill you is if you take 25 pounds and you drop it off of a CIA drug plane and it lands on your head, that's how a pot's going to kill you. You could probably get a heart attack out from that. What did you do? I think you could kill you. Good movie could kill you if that's the case. You pussy. Yeah. The other question is why did they think they were dying? And it's not just because their heart was racing or things like that. The... It's like these filtering parts of the brain that the pot, when you eat it like that, it's kind of very powerful. It is like tripping, quote. And so your sense of who you are. He was pretty logical. He was pretty good at answering the questions. He had some problems with some of that. But I think people confuse ego death with physical death. And ego death of letting go of who your narrow sense of who you are and opening up into something very scary. And so people have defenses and they convert it into, I think I'm dying. Right. Because it feels like that you, the you is dying in a way. That's interesting. But I mean, don't you think also he's just fucking panicking and thinking that he overdosed on a drug and just shitting his pants? I mean, not even an ego death. Just an absolute fear of the fact that you don't know what the hell was in there. Well, he knows. He made it. It was pot. He knew what it was. He just got taken by surprise. But he's not. He doesn't know if there's anything in it. Well, that's what you said right before. Before his people start thinking it was lace with something. But it's not. So I mean, I think the guy thought he was dying. Well, I thought he was dying on weed before I come back. It gets really physically without your dying. Yeah, because I had something in my life. I always thought I had something wrong with my heart. So I had a kid. I would pass out and black out. And just like fall to the ground. I had to take the stress test as like I ate your old kid, you know, taking running on the treadmill and stuff. No, they could never find out what happened. You know, then it would happen again like four years later. So like growing up, I always had this thing like, all right, I have a baboon heart type shit. Like it's like it's a broken heart or there's something with a valve that they just haven't detected. And so when I smoked too much weed, I immediately thought I felt my heart and I'm like, all right, my heart is fucked up. So it wasn't that the weed was killing me, but it might be doing something to what I already thought had a problem with my heart already, you know type thing. In other words, you were panicking like a little bitch. Yeah. And you thought you were going to die. When you feel your heart double beat, you know, when it just like, bub, bub, bub, bub, bub, bub, you know, that starts doing shit like that. You certainly mind fuck yourself. Yeah. And I didn't know you had that thing though. I didn't know that you blacked out. Yeah, blacked out five times in my life. Wow. You know, and they've tried everything. They've done tons of tests. You know, it's only been like the last maybe five years. Five years that I just don't give a shit about that anymore. You know, I don't know what happens. I don't ever get panic attacks anymore. And any more, it just went away. I mean, I've been using a lot of molly lately. So maybe that's what you're talking about. You probably look good evidence for MDMA therapy. Oh, that's the best. I believe in that a million times over assurance or anything, especially when you're with a loved one. You just definitely saw a minute. I don't think over. I don't think it's a competition or a race. I think they all have their own little impact. Yeah, we're talking about psychedelic medicine. Psychedelic spirituality. And it's the whole range of drugs at different times at different places. But we do not know. The other thing about psychedelic, there's a lot of states that can be achieved naturally. And I think in the pursuit of psychedelics as a discipline, as something to truly legitimately study, I think one of the things that they're going to open up is what yoga does to the body. Yoga does something. Intense, come on, Brian. You're a good class. Okay, stop. If you take a really strong yoga class and you get through it, you feel like you're high. Yeah. And I am aware of friends, long-term yoga practitioners, long-term meditators who have found that it's not either or, that you can, when you're practiced in these ways too, you can have a psychedelic experience. You can go to a deeper place. And then you can work, you have a better sense of where you want to be. And you can work sometimes for years to ground it and integrate it. And it's this flow back and forth. So I think the over-reliance on psychedelics can prove to be harmful. Because you're not doing the integration or with John Lillie, you're escaping. But the idea that you will stay somehow or other, you know, pure and do things all on your own. And you can kind of slowness or ecotism about that. It's not inappropriate to admit sometimes that we need physical catalysts. We need help, we need tools. Sometimes our defenses are so strong. Well, I don't think it's an either or situation. I don't think there's anything. For whatever reason, we have this idea in our head that taking something to get somewhere is a weakness. You know, there's a lot of people that believe that. Taking a drug to achieve a state like, you can't deal with reality. They're weak, you know. Yeah, there is that. But then you switch it to cars. Like you take a car to get sick of playing in the car to get here. Yeah. No, you could definitely look at it that way. I just think the idea is very strange when we know that, look, our bodies of these weird biological machines that were constantly feeding different things to, were constantly giving different kinds of nutrients. We experiment with the diets. We experiment with our carbohydrate balance and our protein, but we experiment with all these different things. But when it comes to taking a plant, especially something like mushrooms, that's we've documented many thousands of years of use and to decide all of a sudden that this is a weakness and that this is just unnecessary in society as if our society is perfect in every way. And, you know, no need for self-examination here at all. Yeah, well, we're actually an anomaly as far as society goes. Because most of them have the use of drugs, the use of altered states in some kind of sanctioned manner. It's repressed and prohibited throughout our lifetimes. We kind of have a sense that maybe that's the way it's been large parts of human history, but it's not been that way. They're encased in religious rituals or different kind of cultural context, but they're not prohibited and they're respected. And I think that's where we've lost touch with that. And there's so much coming from people finding it on their own through various methods that the culture is changing. I think it's definitely changing. And I think what's really crazy is that the people who are suppressing psychedelics, the people who seek to suppress it, are the ones who need them more than anybody. Well, exactly. So, we're starting right now that we're doing it again, with MDMA for Postman Stress Disorder. I like to be a point to Brian. Yes. You're the Postboy kid. Congratulations. Just the first one for tonight. So, we're working with veterans and then we've also expanded it now to work with firefighters and also with police officers. And I had pretty much given up hope about getting a police officer actually to volunteer. So, we've had 15 people out of 24. The 15th is going through screening. The first 11 were... 11 of them were vets and three were firefighters. And now we have the first police officer that is going through screening. So, the people that are repressing it in some ways they do need it the most. And how to help them relax about it, at least to let others or to explore themselves. But at the same time, I've been trying to get my father and mother to smoke pot since I was 20 years old. And they've never once done it. But they're totally supportive of what I do. They think it's tremendous, but they will not. There was one time when my mother had some pain. She had fallen down in her leg, it was really in pain. And she said she would try marijuana for pain. And I got home like a week later because she was in a different city. And she said then she wasn't in enough pain anymore. Oh, wow. It was too slow. Poor mom. Well, you know, there's a lot of folks that are a prisoner to that propaganda that was just really shot home from the 30s on. It's a pretty incredible feat. When you stop and think about the effectiveness of marijuana not just for people, like as far as like a drug and not just for psychoactive properties, but just the plant hemp itself. All the amazing benefits it has for us. As far as nutrition, construction methods, making paper and clothes and all these different things. The fact that somehow, they kept that from the public and kept it into wraps and kept it from really from the average person's database. Most people just ask him about marijuana being illegal. What about hemp? Oh, it's the same thing. People don't even know what the fuck hemp is. Well, what they should know is that the largest hemp importing country in the world is the United States and the largest hemp exporting country in the world is China. So why is that? We've kept it in our legal. We're importing it, but relating other people to grow it. That's the largest producer of pharmaceutical drugs is United States. That's why. That's really what it boils down to. Pharmaceutical drugs, without a doubt, don't want marijuana to become legal. And one of the doorways from marijuana to become legal is them is people figuring out how incredibly effective hemp is for so many things that we use other stuff for. Besides the psychoactive properties, it makes a fantastic protein powder. The company that I'm involved with on it, my friend Aubrey and I, when we first met Aubrey up in the same way. When we first started talking about hemp, we thought, well, maybe we could get a farm in this country and grow this hemp seed and then use it for the protein powder. Completely non-psychoactive. When we found out you can't even do that, like even though hemp is legal, I didn't know that it literally can't be grown in the United States. We buy it all from Canada. Yeah. One of the people on MAFs' board of directors is David Bronner. And so from Bronner Soaps, his grandfather started. And he's been very active in the hemp. That's that hemp oil soap, right? Yeah, they use hemp oil in a form of working, writing like a crazy person, or a raw inventory on Netflix about the mine. Yeah. But really, what's it called? I think it's called Dr. Bronner's Magic Soaps. Soaps, yeah. I'm a friend. He's all he uses. He's a friend. Well, David and his brother Mike have built this business from, their father was kind of obsessed. They are their grandfather. And they knew that. So they took this biz over when it was really fragmented in like a million or two a year in sales. And they've built it up to over 50 million. 50 million. And they sell soap. And not just soap and other products. And they don't advertise. They don't advertise. What they do is they do now. Bronner soap. Well, kill it. Go get it. Well, actually, local, what they do is a social justice with activism. They do. They folks on Fair Trade and other things. But what David did about four months ago or five months ago is he constructed a cage, a metal cage. And he had someone drop it off with him inside in front of the White House right across the street. And he was processing hemp plants. He had gotten real hemp seeds. He had grown it in the United States. And he was processing it into hemp oil. And he did this as a protest. And the cage was to prevent the police to slow them down while they tried to stop him from doing it. And he actually got convicted and had to do public service. But what he was trying to show is that hemp, which can be a food, which can be any number of different things. And can be grown in the United States, it was a crime that just making it into hemp oil to put on his bread was enough to put him in jail and to give him penalties. It doesn't make any sense. And it's insane that it continues to go on. It's one of those prime weird aspects of our society where you look at it and you go, well, there's got to be a reason. So it's search for a reason. And you look for a reason and it literally doesn't exist. Well, I think there are real strong reasons that go really deep that make us easy to miss them. But I think the natural fear that each of us has for when our social controls are relaxed that will become whatever we will become. You talk about even in the temptation thing when things come up. It's just people are scared of the compromises they've had to make to live in society and of their basic urges and what happens when they're not in control. And that's what these drugs represent. And the 60s also represent it. Not only these people that let themselves get out of control then they want to leave and drop out and then they want to change things. And it was a difficult, people are scared of their own. I feel it in myself that I'm scared sometimes of my deep desires or... Oh. Oh. That you just created a meme, sir. Too late. I feel like I'm scared of my deep desires. I didn't hear some 1970s music playing over that. Yeah. So I think that's a big part. Speaking of that, Jim Kelly died today, man. The Great Karate Master. Jim, Jamie, Cluebion, Hadoop, Amanda, the dragon. Rest of peace, Mr. Kelly. Sorry. Yes. No, no. It's important to think about how short our time is. It is, right? It really is. That's why we got to get all these anti-weed people high. Or at least help them see more human rights. More freedom. Why should they tell us what to do? And I think the other part of it is that the drug laws have been used for social repression against minorities and either Mexicans or blacks or hippies and that letting loose of that avenue of control in the power system. And I think what we're needing to do to integrate these things, to legalize marijuana, to legalize gay marriage, these kind of things where people see it's not going to tear apart the fabrics of society that people can make contributions. And that people can also learn to deal with their deep desires so that they're not so scared of them. Yeah. We've made some massive headway as a culture because of that. The gay marriage thing, the fact that I had a hoe got it before California. That hurt. That really hurt. That was like, how dumb are you, Fox? And the name of the bill that eliminated the ability for gay people to get married, the marriage. What was it? The fence of marriage. The fence of marriage act. Oh, God. How about if you really want to defend marriage, I'll be stopping people from getting divorced. See how that works out. You really want to defend marriage? Tell people they have to stay together. That should be a t-shirt right there. Yeah. For real. You want to defend marriage? Marriage is ridiculous. This is coming from a person who's married. It's a stupid idea. It's a legal contract that you signed with another human being and then you're going to bring it in and punch other people if it doesn't work out. And they get to dictate where your money and property goes. So why'd you do it? Because I love her. She's an awesome person and it makes her feel better. And I don't give a shit. We have children together and I'm not going anywhere. You know, so I actually love being married to her. I love her as a human being. She's a great person. But the whole involving the legal system part of it is so dumb. It's just so ridiculously dumb. It doesn't make any sense to me. And I understand completely the need for child support and for some folks needed to be written in stone where they have to pay and things along those lines. But I'm not that person. And I don't think that I need to be regulated. If I've done nothing wrong, I don't think I need to be signed up to some system to prove that a relationship that I'm in is valuable to me. It just seems stupid. It's almost seems like it's, if you trust someone, it's like I do trust you, but I'm going to need that shit on paper. It's like, I wonder since we're sort of male in more positions of power. Maybe marriage often is to more protect the woman. Oh, maybe. I mean, I certainly think that there's something to that, you know, a woman wants to feel more secure. I've heard women say that. I've heard women completely outside of them, eavesdropping in on a conversation. And women were talking about, you know, I felt like much more secure in the marriage, once we were married, it doesn't make any sense, but we were together for 10 years. But once we got married, that I felt like it was real. And then I could relax. I had that part of my, you know, but that's their own social hang up. You know, I think it's just some tangible point movie shit. Any different after you got married? Absolutely not. I felt like I did something that I always thought was ridiculous. So, you know, it's like, the idea behind it of committing to a person and giving you all to a person, that's all beautiful. The real problem with anything where it's two people is, who knows what those two people are going to be like five years now? Who knows what they're going to be like 10 years from now? And I've seen it and it's ugly. I've seen people that got along great. And then one person took a left, the other person took a right and they're stuck in the same house together. And they don't like each other anymore. And it gets really gross. And then when they have to separate, I've seen what happens when they use the legal system against each other. I mean, I wrote a whole bit about it because I saw my friend who had to pay for his wife's lawyer. He was, they were going to war and he had to pay for the enemy's general. I think it's ridiculous. I think the idea that if you're taking care of the woman, you should pay some form of alimony, yeah, definitely. Child support? Yes, definitely. You know, split property that you got when you were together, I'm for that. I'm for all that. And for all that. What I'm not for is this gross system where the lawyers play off of each other and try to stretch things out because that's how they make the most money. And they ask for outrageous amounts so that you come back with like a little bit less. And it becomes this mad hustle. And like I said, I am in no way saying that I'm not, I'm not pro relationship. But I've watched someone's life fall apart because of a bad divorce. Whereas if they just broke up, it would be cool. But she dragged him through the mud legally for like a year and a half, two years, emptied his bank account out. And it was horrific, like targeted him. And that can happen when you're legally attached to someone. It's just where you could be like, okay, we're broken up, right? Well, I don't want to be with you anymore. You don't want to be with me anymore. So we'll just go our several ways. No. Well, we're bringing the words together. Yes. Well, they did think that's what was even squirlier. There's not even any kids involved. Well, why do you have to pay for this person? Well, it's like when you described that somebody takes left the other person aches right. I think that when we started trying to think about MDMA for couples therapy, because that's one of the main people reason people use it is for relationships. Yeah. But not all relationships stay together. So trying to do a study, a scientific study of MDMA with couples, if you decide that your success is how many of them stay married, that's not necessarily the smartest thing to do. So what we felt was that it would be if they make a mutual decision, and whatever that decision happens to be, if it can be they stay together, they split up. If there's some kind of mutuality about it, the MDMA helps them to listen to each other and to communicate, and they can make a mutual decision that would be considered a success. But we haven't gone forward with that research because politically having a difficult relationship is not a disease. We need to work in a disease context so that we can get prescription approval to have legal access in a medical context. That's a real issue. That was the issue with Modafano. Do you know what that is? Yeah, it's one of my co-vigils. I used that. New vigil. I'm using that right now. Are you really? I am son of a... I am. I'm my... That's that shit that I've given you. That's the... Keeps your way. That's a shit, yes. Well, Tim Ferris, who I respect very highly, had a very interesting point about it. I don't believe there's any biological free lunch. And that's why he doesn't... He didn't even put it in the four hour, whatever, for our body because he was worried that people would just start chewing on my candy. Well, I happened to know somebody that uses it for narcolyphs. He uses it twice a day for about, you know, three years. That's what I would hear others say. The reason why it's prescribed for narcolyphs is because they initially created it for performance enhancing purposes. And then the government's like, you can't just say, I want my brain to work better. You have to have a disease so they go narcolyphs. And that's how it got approved. Right. Apparently it works for narcolyphs. And I'm not going to work for narcolyphs. Oh, people fall asleep all the time. They're conking out. Would this stuff... Does this keep you awake? Yeah, but it doesn't... It's pretty transparent. It doesn't add a lot of other things. So it's very weird. The military is actually shifting towards... ...it away from speed and infinins. Oh, that's smart. Speed fucks you up and makes you do shitty things. You actually make terrible decisions. Poor decision-making capabilities. Almost worse than alcohol in a lot of ways. Yeah. And it's... ...mode definitely is also for jet lag. It's for shift work. Mm-hmm. And, you know, the only reason I took it tonight is because I would cut in a gay pride parade. And for Cisco. We gotcha. We didn't get out of town. We gotcha. And so I just wanted to... How it used to... How easy is it to get prescribed something like that? Because as an example, I just got off cigarettes. I wake up to... You know, I could barely get out of bed. My whole day is just like... Can I just lay back down? I take one fourth of an Adderall in 20 minutes later. I'm just like, how much work can I do? I can... My brain's like... A lot. Being... That's a completely different sort of experience. But for something like that, it's also given to people that have like weird shifts, you know, jobs, entertainers and stuff, you know. You're talking too much. I can get you in prescription. Oh. Okay. You go to a doctor. You tell your... Don't worry, I got a doctor. Okay. Jesus. No, my main question. What do I do for the no-person I guess? What do I do? Is it something that's hard to know? I know people have done it. You know the doctor. I feel so good. I'm sleepy. I think this is something called New Vigil. I think maybe that'll help me. Boom. Bang. Boom. Shumbam. You're out the door with a description. I'm trying to give out prescriptions, man. Doctors are trying to give you prescriptions. You want to hear something fucking crazy? There was something in Montana that they recently released where Montana has, you know, X amount of people living in it. One-fourth of them are on OxyContins. No, fucking crazy that is. I need to verify that because someone told me that today, OxyContins. I guess I just never tried to go get prescription medicine ever. Well, I think there's a time when if it's possibly helpful that it can be okay to do it. I prefer trying to do things on my own without it. Then only if it's beyond my capabilities or something that I think enhances it. I think the idea of jet lags, if doctors do want you to have a relationship to what it was approved for. But around 40% of the prescriptions in America are called off label where doctors prescribe it for things that it's not been approved for. Oh, I see. And that cannot be stopped. And what's not bad? What's some of the things that this drug is used off label, I guess. Well, I think it's off label people are just taking it for performance and handling some reasons. Yeah. That's why they're doing it. That's the big reason that I always hear and the big diseases is narcoops. The concern is that people have performance and enhancing drugs, but they're willing to hurt themselves in order to do it because there's no free lunch. But with medefinal, there are ranges of use of certain drugs where it doesn't seem like there are harmful consequences. The Montana Gazette, the Billings Gazette is the one that printed this. It is one out of four. That's unfucking believable. Montana has just under a million residents one out of four have an oxycon prescription. It's incredible. Huh. Is that pain? I wonder how they... Listen, I have gone in for operations before and they gave me all kinds of shit that I didn't tank, but they'll give you whatever you need for pain. Even if you tell them it's nothing. I went in to get a deviated septum and it's kind of uncomfortable thing. Stuff your nose and they crack it and break it and widen it. I had a really fucked up septum and it was kind of... I literally my nose was useless for most of my life until I had this operation. But my doctor gave me two different kinds of painkillers. And I was like, this doesn't even hurt those. Well, it's going to probably tonight. Tonight you're probably going to be in some significant pain. Never came. It was weird. I had this stuff stuffed up my nose. But there was no pain. But meanwhile, if you're a person is easily addictive and you take one of those and you go, God damn it, I can't sleep and then you take two more of those. And the next thing you know, you go into another doctor and tell them you're in pain. You get a second prescription and you're off to the races. Yeah. We had one of the veterans in our PTSD study took one dose dropped out of the study. And under the influence of this medium dose of MDMA, he started feeling that he was taking pain meds, not just for the pain, but he was kind of getting addicted to pain on them. And he didn't want to do that anymore. War wounds, things like that. And so he decided that he didn't need the pain meds anymore. And he also felt like he had come to terms with the issues that had caused him to be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, that he accepted these things. And that he could go forward without PTSD. And so he dropped out of the study, but we said we want to ask you at two months and 12 months or follow-ups how you're doing. And his PTSD was still gone after a year. That's amazing. The PTSD use, the use of MDMA for PTSD is one of the ones that was discussed recently by this soldier who wrote this very eloquent letter and then committed suicide. But he was talking about the DEA pain treatment. Just read that letter on the airplane here. Yeah. I assume that was what he was talking about because it's a big issue with veterans. I assume he was talking about marijuana. Well, it could be that as well, but I thought it was MDMA. Probably both. But the MDMA one has been discussed a lot by friends that I have that have been military. They know it helps. And they want to know about it. Right. The one where you hear a lot of people going through very traumatic things and then they get over it. They're okay. They understand it and accept it and that's it. Yeah. They've heard about it anyway. We had a meeting in the Pentagon where we were trying to get formal cooperation and they expressed that their biggest fear was that if they were to cooperate on an MDMA study, that the word would get out more so than before and that a lot of people who were in the military who only a small number number of them will get into clinical studies that they would go out on their own and get stuff that was impure or not in a or pure but not in a safe place and that they're that would cause more harm. And they said that shouldn't stop the research but that that was the concern and what we're thinking of saying. What we did say is that the word is getting out and we've had articles in stars and stripes and the Marine Court Himes and military.com about the results of our studies. I think they owe it to the soldiers and I think that if they wanted to start a kickstarter to have MDMA clinics pop up of legitimate stuff, you just government approved and test it all throughout the country. It would it could be user funded. We are going to do that with the Indy Go Go Kickstarter doesn't take medical issues but Indy Go Go does. Okay. We are going to try to do it to crowdsource support for the study. do that with the indigo go kickstarter doesn't take medical uh... in the go go does okay and go go we are going to try to do it to crowdsource uh... support for the study with veterans firefighters and police officers great idea the thing about uh... the psychedelic so that people understand what really talking about with the psychedelic medicine is it's only use a few times right not like the drugs that we're talking about that people get prescribed every day or several times a day it's only part of a psychotherapeutic process with more non-drug psychotherapy sessions and what they can integrate from it so our three and a half month program for PTSD uh... treatment includes only three days of mdma i think people need to understand that all these things are tools that have been denied us and uh... that the ice joke about it that like marijuana is like a hammer you know you could you can hammer nails with it or you could just hit yourself in the dick if you're fucking crazy right just because you have a tool doesn't mean you're going to use it properly and when you smoke too much pot and freak out and when you you know take acid jump off a roof yes you've done it improperly but you're dealing with this incredibly complex thing that is really not being explained to the general public the the dabbling in psychedelic says all sort of done with anecdotal evidence passed on by friends or books that you've read or all these you know and it's unnecessary at this point we have enough information is enough data is enough online at maps dot org right now and that's that are we we are doing drug development in the open we publish our protocols we publish our data we publish all of our timelines of our relationships with regulatory we publish our review the literature we have a treatment manual that describes what the therapy component is that's there with our adherence criteria we're trying to make uh... all of it publicly available and at the same time that's the pressure that's coming on the pharmaceutical companies actually to release more their data but the important thing is that the dia is not stopping mdma research the fd is not stopping we are able to do psychedelic research in the united states and most countries of the world where we want to we have studies right now in israel switzerland canada and we've done i'd be in research in mexico and new zealand i waskore search in canada so that the only thing that's really politically blocked right now is marijuana research it's hilarious it's shocking and that is you're getting true you're getting all this research done and this is this is very new like two decades ago this was not possible it was impossible and when did it start being possible well actually what happened was and i did my uh... dissertation at the harvard kenny school government i got my masters in psd there and the part of my dissertation was on how this happened who at the fd a change things and was it other places as well was it a social consensus and it turns out that in the late nineteen eighties there was a lot of particularly ragan had been before pro business there was a lot of concern that the fd a was too slow evaluating drugs that they were mostly trying to block risks and they didn't care that much about treating illness and so the fd a set up this group called the pilot drug evaluation staff which was that they would pilot drug evaluation methods to try to speed up the drug review process in this group needed drugs to actually work with and so they looked around the other part of the fd a and they kind of cobbled together different kind of drugs and they looked at the people that had control over scheduled drugs and marijuana all the psychedelics and they had been suppressing things for decades and they said sure we'll give this up and so this new branch came they didn't but they also were more science over politics so starting in nineteen ninety the first study was approved with dmt by rick straisman and we had tried for five studies before for years before with mdma all rejected but once this new team got into place uh... then they had to review our study mdma for cancer patients with anxiety and there was a nineteen ninety two advisory committee meeting to determine whether the fda would go forward with psychedelic research and they did it beer crackling a brilliant way they had the dta there they had the uh... office of national drug control policy they had the national and drug abuse they had representatives from all of these branches and they proposed an idea and their idea was that the regulations that they put on the major drugs for the pharmaceutical industries that the risks of the medical use of psychedelics in marijuana were no different and so they would treat these drugs as if they were drugs being developed by the pharmaceutical industry and the same procedures would be fine and the dta night a the drug czar's office they all thought man you put it in there they'll it'll never get out again because who can act like the pharmaceutical companies and so they all signed off and fda got this policy in nineteen ninety two and then they approved our first study with mdma which was a safety study and then they started proving studies was so silent and then expanding our own you may study his into patient populations so there's a twenty year history now and a lot of track record in data and now we have data on the benefits side not just on the risk side so that we can talk about balancing before people could say there are no benefits there's these risks therefore nothing's permitted so the dynamics have completely changed and we've demonstrated so far over eight hundred people have taken mdma in clinical research all over the world and you know nobody's going uh... nobody's had a serious uh... adverse event that left them harmful nobody has become addict as far as we know them dma nobody went crazy so we've demonstrated there are safe places are study with lsd and switzerland for people who are dying was twelve people and eleven of them had never done lsd before so it's not we're trying to show that it can be brought to people who are not from this culture not used to this but it can be helpful to them in a controlled setting with supportive therapists and with a lot of integration preparation work and people aware of uh... other studies of the john's hopped in study on so aside and now that's gotten a lot of steam because uh... these people many years later experienced great personality benefits that stuck with them yeah that was uh... the study of so i've been in people who were spiritually inclined to see if they could have a spiritual experience uh... that actually there was the classic study that that's modeled on was called the good friday experiment and it was done in nineteen sixty two and it was one of the best things that Timothy leery ever did and i ended up doing a twenty five year follow up to attract these people down but basically in nineteen sixty two lots of people thought that psychedelics had some genuine spiritual potential and martin leer the king was getting a p-h-d at boston university and his mentor there was revern howard therman the ste namick black minister who's just fantastic and he agreed to have Timothy leery and rammed us and others twenty people and ten guides come into their church on good friday and doing experiment and these were all students from and over in the logical seminary and half of them they all got pills half were still siren thirty milligrams which is pretty strong and the other half was nikatina gasered which gives you this hot flush and it acts quicker so that was going to be their double blind and then they went through the good friday service and wallter panky who did this study was a doctor minister and getting a p-h-d at harvard and he had spent a year going through the world's mystical literature to develop a questionnaire for what the mystical experience was extracted all specific mentions of you know jesus or moses or it's just more this abstract what is a mystical experience administered this questionnaire and nine out of the twenty people had uh... either a partial or full mystical experience and eight of those nine had the sill siamen and so the conclusion was that for people who are religiously inclined in a religious setting you can have uh... psychedelic drugs sill siamen does precipitate what seems to be a genuine mystical experience not a hallucination but in the mystical literature the real test is called the fruit's test is what does it bring back what are the fruits of this experience and that only comes with time and multi-panky who did the study died from a scuba diving diving accident nineteen seventy one and so he would have done this but in the middle eighties when i was uh... getting my undergraduate degree i decided to track these people down for my senior thesis at new college of florida which is this experimental school and my father was really helpful my mother was too i i identified nineteen other twenty and was able to interview sixteen of them and what i found was that the people who had the placebo most of them didn't remember it that vividly but the people who had the sill siamen had very vivid memories of parts of it and at the same time they said that they considered it to be a genuine experience that had non-drug mystical experiences since they preferred the non-drug mystical experiences because they were more uniformly positive they lost their fear of death and they felt more focused on the here and now and on social justice because they had this unit of experience that help them identify with the planet with the people with not so much the other divisions that divide us they saw deeper unity and so they were more social justice minded and activists and i think that's a little bit of a key to the sixty's is psychodelics go right they inspire people to try to make a better world and we can do that not in an oppositional way but we can do it with in the heart of the culture and that's the challenge that we face it's really interesting you said that what they had was a real religious experience or real mystical experience uh... one of the the things has been on my mind uh... over the last few months when it comes to psychodelic experiences that when people want to tell you all you just something is going on your imagination you create your visual cortex is getting stimulated by this drug and it's creating a bunch of hallucinations it could be that but it also could be something else it could be you are experiencing some divine state of consciousness you are in contact with some other form of intelligence and either it's a hallucination or it's this other real experience but either way you have the exact same experience whether you really went to a place and talked to super-spiritual highly intelligent beings or you imagined you did you're still having the exact same experience and it's incredibly vivid that's the one of the weirdest aspects about any sort of psychodelic experience is that they're almost more real than reality itself and i think because of that it's even more important that we keep our critical faculties in a way because we are always a filter and our culture our so i don't think we're ever seeing absolute reality or the truth and i think that's where you get in danger where people think i you know god spoke to me god said this or i know this right for sure because there is our our filter that we're seeing it through but you try to see as much as you can but i think we have to be aware that and be cautious and see how it works in life so under l.s.d. therapy and md.m.a. therapy we tell people don't make decisions while you're doing the therapy in a way for a couple weeks after or you know at least under the influence it's is for exploring not for deciding that's interesting although some things do get changed sometimes they have yet you have like a really uh... obvious reaction well you know you're very aware that okay you know this is this is what needs to be done and i need to do this right away yeah that's happened yeah and i think uh... one of the more vivid examples for me was when i was sitting for someone uh... who is doing md.m.a. he was a physician and during the experiences arm became paralyzed completely paralyzed that's why i know you're high yeah and now it's stopped working and we're like it's not you know permanent and it's it's psychosomatic you don't really need to you know we don't need to take the hospital he was a doctor but his arm is paralyzed and over time he told the story that lasted a couple hours but the story was that he as was with his mother and his siblings at the bedside of their father who's dying in all this life support and they had this discussion about whether they should pull a plug or not uh... and because he was the doctor and they decided that they would and so he actually pulled the plug and the complicating thing was that he hated his father and he wasn't really sure was this his anger at his dad or was this what his mother really wanted so as he explored this emotionally complex issue and realized he really didn't kill his daddy did what his mother and his siblings were saying it was humane the feelings started coming back to his arm wow so that was the arm that pulled the plug is there real plug that actually i thought it can be but you know whatever that depends on it i don't know but later that because like pulling the plug is the expression but what a fucking stupid life support systems we're really like you go back there and unplug it you know that's how they come on well we never we don't want to kill people so we don't have an off button so you have to just pull a plug like really so the expression is true you said something that i thought was really interesting too where you said that in the nineteen sixty's you don't think people were ready for it i think a lot of people were i think that the culture wasn't and i think even uh... if you read the electrical aid acid test and you know that there's ways in which people are damaged and left behind and that's something where i felt they weren't quite ready for that is not the case always just with life in general there's always going to be people that are damaged and left behind well i think one of the beautiful things about the marines in the military is that they don't leave anybody behind and i think that the site that we should adopt it we should be the psychedelic marines i love it in a way don't leave anybody behind that's really good advice except there's some really annoying people out there and if you get hooked up with them and you know for whatever reason they can't carry their own weight psychically psychologically emotionally they're really fucking needy at a certain point in time you need to cut you to cut ties can't fix the whole world i think that's really can't you know you can't and you can tell people that they can is crazy talk right you did some people that are just broken animals you can't fix them unfortunately it's not you it's not me but we both know people who we would say you know what if you had like if there was a show like uh... in one of those fix me up shows you know they have those like home improvement shows or weight loss shows if you had a guy who's just a complete fucking mess and they said just rick double and this is your assignment for the show you're going to take this guy and elevate his consciousness and and just make them a much better person do you think you do it with a complete idiot well i think the beauty of it is that people have to do part of it themselves yes and if they're and they own it and that's where they become empowered and if they want to fix them without them taking the courage and maybe there's ways you can help them through drugs or through their political ions to they have to have that path in mind right they have to be willing to take certain kind of steps forward and so that i think that is the beauty that we can't heal everybody that they have to heal themselves i think there's also a very big danger as a human being in almost embracing the fact that you're not going to improve because it takes away all the pressure of trying to improve all the self-examination as soon as you say i don't go fuck you know i don't give a fuck do you really not give a fuck or do you is is that your psychic shield to keep you from examining all the holes in your life's game because that's more likely the case well we talked about the uh... uh... army better in the committed suicide who wrote that letter and one part of that letter was that he had felt like he would never get better you know and i just kept thinking if he could have had an empty-a-make experience would he still have been able to find a some hope and a reason to live or would he still have committed suicide and those are the questions there's he he talked about twenty two veterans a day or committing suicide seems like he was dealing with physical pains well i think there was uh... a bunch of different things and that's where he was upset at the DEA i think also at uh... pain meds and how they regulated pain meds so i i think mdma actually in combination with morphine it's been used in dying people uh... enhances the pain control so mdma has pain relieving qualities and when you combine it with more pain when people are you know in hospice settings things like that you have better pain control and you don't need as much morphine and you start waking people up so that they're not tranquilized out and you open their heart so that people can have these beautiful pretty much pain-free experiences there's a woman wrote a book uh... honor thy daughter about her daughter who died in early thirties from cancer and how she had gone through a series of second-out therapy sessions as she was dying with uh... mdma and mushrooms uh... lst mdma combination but that it really enriched her daughter's life and she felt she needed to write a book about it said let people know so i think that the use of these drugs when people are in pain it's not just mental pain there's a whole link between mental pain and physical pain and mdma actually does help in this kind of i see psychedelic medicine psychedelic hospice will be pretty common i think twenty thirty years from now and will look back and think that you know it made sense fifty years ago i did absolutely does i mean i think that's one of the best uses for them to give people like uh... i remember larry hagman who died uh... was on cedar and uh... did die recently great guy uh... or never got to meet him but i i really loved his interviews he was so candid and and just warm and friendly and he was talking about the importance of uh... an acid trip that he had the where it uh... it took away his fear of dying yeah the joy bakara and cnn that was fantastic that was fantastic energy it really was because uh... he wasn't saying it like he was a coke he was just uh... it's even is explaining what it did and why did that and you believe them you know you really did believe them yeah i spent years trying to meet him because i knew that he had done LSD therapy in the sixties and he wrote about it in his autobiography and my mother-in-law actually sent me this message saying larry hagman is done lsd so then i started trying to find him and eventually i did meet him and we got to be uh... friends and and he was a donor to maps and he wrote this uh... he helped us in a lot a lot of different ways and he was so human that he would be from jr and known all over the world but when you were with him he just was present present and he wasn't you know he go inflated and he he was just a really nice person and uh... i felt that that he had this idealism and this uh... joy from his whole life but he also really valued uh... his psychedelic experiences his experiences with mdma his experiences with marijuana and it was kind of ironic that someone who was so valued by the culture uh... couldn't be open about that but he had to keep that hidden well he did for a long time until until he wrote that but yeah yeah the joy beha are experienced but i think also it's like the uh... the atmosphere for an actor actors get picked for things and if you're very controversial i mean for every charlie sheen and of course we're dealing with two thousand thirteen we're publishing get away with being his crazy coke snorton horror monger and lucky just wears it and owns it yet for that to be uh... a thing twenty years ago for an actor it could be a career killer and when he was doing dallas i mean the the consciousness of the the public's opinion on on psychedelic was very much different than it is today yeah well he was uh... in dallas when mdma first became a party drug was used at uh... the stark club of which there's a documentary that sort of the explosion of mdma the transformation from mdma as a secret quiet uh... therapeutic drug used uh... underground isn't quite right because it was still legal but it was using a quiet way for fear that if it became known it would become illegal and then in dallas it started being used and distributed by different people in nightclub settings and that was the place right else was the place and there's a dot that's interesting about the star club and there's interviews with larry hagman in there and what he's talking about is this uh... discussion he had with one of the police officers in dallas and they were saying that larry had caused them to lose lots and lots of money and he's like what do you mean i i could you lose lots and lots of money said well after mdma became illegal we were going to bust the stark club and we had this whole tactical team and everything was set to go and then you and some friends came in the party there not necessarily taken to make and so we didn't want to bust larry hagman from dallas that's a little and so we had to call off the bus and then come back and do it another time more times more rather evidence at times of change yeah because today they'd be psyched to bust larry hagman it was like some dude like that like don't make a larry hamman make it well some other people just there he didn't necessarily have anything to think about some but he was so nice he let us auction off a dinner with him uh... as a donation to maps and this couple and also and he and he wilded that too so he had a dinner but that the deal there he made is i had to come along uh... and i was like that would be great i was about to do that wow what a great dinner yeah and who do you guys need dinner with well this group of this family from canada and that they they were just ordinary people but they had one of them the woman had struggled with cancer had they were uh... just love dallas and loved i dream of jenny and that's right he was on i dream of jean yeah and we had such a nice time at the dinner they also bought the dinner with andy while who was he the boss on i dream of jeany now he was the astronaut after he was the other that he was the main character that's what i think love with barbie that's right yeah always get him confused with the which i get i dream of jeany and be which confused there there is and be which was the one where they had a different dude like they killed off the dude and brought in the same yes yes that was same name different guy i think now that larry is the gun i can share that he had a bond that was made like the bottle that jeany lived in there's that that would be with a lot of money and we got to smoke them put together in this jeany bottle and he said that somebody had talked to about marketing it and making lots of them and he said no he didn't want to have that done yeah well that's too bad we're gonna make it now but then the family he was so nice with this family and just and also with me just treat us as like you know part of his family we had dinner's kitchen that when it came time for the dinner with andy while that the family invited larry and he came so i would with uh... uh... friend of his to help him travel and we ended up just a few months before he died uh... going up and see planes and stuff onto this island were andy while it was and having this really wonderful experience that's awesome yeah i think guys like him that do do those sort of interviews that's that's really really important thing because the public's perception of people who do LSD is almost entirely limited to fuck-ups and you know and crazy people and wild people or they used to do acid oh this guy used to do acid he did acid back when he was just off his rocker you never hear about a positive drug experience like that from a very respected person right and that that's what we need is the coming out of loads of people like that who are retiring baby boomers i think time is on our side there's all these people who are more fearless because they're not worried about what they tell their kids are they're not worried about their jobs they've made a reputation and they can talk like steve jobs i had a wonderful opportunity uh... tried for years and finally i have a half hour conversation with him about our LSD study did he give you a like a half an hour on an iPhone and go ready so start twenty nine twenty before i had an iPhone and uh... you didn't have an iPhone you met him had a very i didn't meet him it's just on the phone and uh... at the end of it he said you know send me a proposal but uh... i didn't ever heard back he wasn't known for being philanthropic but i had gotten a letter from elbert Hoffman to him uh... on his uh... after his hundred and second birthday and uh... i said it was the one or two he was incredible and he was married for seven years the same person uh... he led i mean elbert Hoffman to to pivot just a second was such a perfect example we're so fortunate that he's the one that invented LSD because he was everything what i'm trying to talk about in terms of integrating he was a big successful chemist for a major pharmaceutical company sand dosing he made drugs that sold hundreds of millions of dollars he lived more less in the same place yet wife for over seventy years he had children very normal very normal very important guy was his wife a pink dragon we i was fortunately uh... able to be with the elbert when he tried to mdma for the first time wow home was in the credits they sent his eighties that's it right now it was uh... there are late seventies and so what he said was uh... finally something i can do with my wife because she had kind of a scary experience with elbert you're a lot of people have yeah i've done any tough test with the candy flipping like mixing uh... you know i'm acid well i i believe that that actually has incredible therapeutic potential uh... however we've not actually tested it because in the scientific world you want just one variable if possible and so to combine lc and mdma which drug are we trying to make a medicine and are right always gonna combine them but but once it becomes legal that would be i think maybe a bit for well that's the question you know maybe it's ten years before these drugs can become medicalized legal and medical way i think that that one uh... you really think it could be sooner i think it's possible now more than ever well but there's a certain track of data that you have to produce a certain set of requirements they were on the track of doing but it looks to me like it's eight to ten years even you would certainly know well i have always been wrong and i've always underestimated how long it takes you were talking about earlier gay rights i think they equate because when i was a kid uh... i remember i was living in San Francisco uh... from uh... seven to eleven and uh... i was around a lot of gay people and uh... it was completely normal because i was just what i was around and then when i moved to florida when i was eleven my friend candy kanditos are cuban kid his dad was really pissed off the newspaper slams it down and he's he's mad that uh... that the fags wanted to get married that's what he kept saying believe this shit is facts when we get married and i remember i was like eleven i was like what why do you care what your grown man like this is what i was stupid some grown men are and i like that's a weird argument like that's a strange thing so that was you know along as time ago forty five years old now so thirty four years ago and uh... the i didn't know it's not yet this but it's the idea that that back then it was it was really something that people thought yes it was really uh... a subject of you could you could be public about it and not feel like an ignorant asshole where it's today if you say that you're against gay people being married like you're nothing but a fool right nothing but a fool if you see you you want to sleep in case you're crazy with religion and you want to sleep in some other it's possible to cure person of being gay and if they believe in the scripture that's you know that we i can't talk to you you know that's that's a different animal but if you're a rational person and you accept the fact that people are born gay and you you have an issue with them marrying their lover like you're a crazy person yeah i think though that people who are irrational there that's the question how do we and i think there's a way that they're fearful of something that blocks the rationally who are irrational. That's the question. How do we reach that? And I think there's a way that they're fearful of something that blocks their rational thinking. And if you can somehow or other help them, and I think a lot of people who are so anti-gay or scared of their own gay feelings, it's kind of a cliche, but I think that's often the case. But I think what drove me early on into an interest in psychedelics is that I was so terrified World War II and the Holocaust and how people can be so blind or be willing to be so driven by your rational factors, that I thought what can we do to try to help get to heal that? Because some people, they can be quite powerful and they can, how do you respond? And that was the dilemma for me. And I finally felt that growing up with the Vietnam War, that that was something that now I was being called to fight and I decided to become a draforzaster. But I saw the nuclear standoff between the US and Russia and it just seemed like the irrational was so powerful, the demonization of the other and the making of the enemy, that there was, I couldn't figure out how to contribute breaking through that cycle. And it finally felt like this deep spiritual experience of connection and letting people's fears come up where they could look at them more. That that would be for an individual, make us more grounded and less likely to be manipulated our irrational factors. And if millions of people could have that experience, which did happen during the 60s, but if we can expand it, that maybe there's a basis to go through the crises that we're facing over the next couple decades as a species. And as globalization and people are bumping up against each other, that it felt like somehow or other that irrational is based on fear. And how can we help people to counter that with love, with hope, or with looking with self acceptance. And I think that's where the MDMA is so useful that the fear of self criticism of the fear that MDMA helps people to accept who they are. And the LSD and the salsibin, the ayahuasca, the mezcal and the peyote, those the drugs, they are challenging in a different way in that they do this dissolving of the control mechanisms and dissolving of the ego and hopefully people can let go and blend and be strengthened from that. And that's the support that we need to provide to help that to be happening. And I think, you know, just the way that this religious fundamentalism against gay marriage, I mean, right now we have a crisis of fundamentalism around the world. It's a crisis of ideology. Yeah. And it's also a crisis of power because once someone gets into a position where they can espouse their ideology, you listen to them, that is power. And then they use that power to get money, to manipulate, get sex, to do whatever the fuck they want, not pay taxes, there's a lot of craziness. It's almost like, and they not pay taxes thing. It's almost like their anchor who it's like the government has decided, look, it's probably beneficial if you guys did a good job and, you know, culted up the shit out of some people and get them all whacked out on your ideas to the point where they're complete fundamentalist on your idea. So how about you not pay taxes? You know, how about we help you along there, you know, make it even more profitable, more susceptible to corruption? Well, I think that there is that way in which the government can be influenced by groups. And I think that's something also that we have to be wary of. So mass. But at the same time, we have to work through groups and work through government. So I think this, one of the first things we learned at the Kennedy School is there is no the government. It's like your body, there's no your body, there's all these different organ systems, they all work in different ways. Well, we find out about that when the government goes after itself, like when this general portray thing happened, we found out the CIA and the FBI don't necessarily see eye to eye. Right. Right. And that's where our strategies built that the FDA is putting signs over politics while the other forces are trying to either slow down our black research. And where it comes with marijuana is that there's a government monopoly on the supply of marijuana that can be used in federal research. So even though there's no monopoly on the supply of marijuana, the only kind that's been grown under DEA license is controlled by the National Association of Drug Abuse and Internal Awareness. You want to get to do research to make marijuana into a medicine. The FDA will give you permission. We have a permission to do a study with marijuana in 50 veterans for post-traumatic stress disorder. And our distinction is that the marijuana is more about treating symptoms and the MDMA is more about curing is getting and then you only need MDMA a few times. So the marijuana people sort of needed every day. But we have FDA approval and NIDA and the Public Health Service rejected the protocol and refused to provide the marijuana for us. And they only can review protocols for marijuana because they've got sitting on this monopoly. And we were 12 years lawsuit and we won and won and then we lost in the first circuit court of appeals to break the monopoly. But that's the core reason why we're not able to make progress with marijuana research and we are able to make progress with psychedelics. What are they afraid of with marijuana? I think they're afraid of the whole drug war collapsing that the marijuana is incredibly demonized. It's widely used. Most there's a lot of people that know that it's not so dangerous. And I think it's the symbol. It's a symbol of cultural rebellion. And that's where it was embedded in certain people's minds. And even though it was made illegal in 37 with the marijuana tax act, then it was illegal shortly after prohibition ended. And it was illegal during the depression and mostly it was Mexicans and blacks that smoked pot. And so it was a way to repress people who were competing for low age jobs. It was a way to block the hemp industry, various things like that. But it largely was a minor thread in American history until the 60s and whites were when people started kids started smoking pot. And you had this massive explosion of pot. And then pot and LSD got associated with cultural rebellion. And now all these years later, you know, there are many people that smoke pot that are at least out about that. And it made a lot of contributions. So I think it's more now about fear of parents for their kids is shifted. But that's what's driving what's left of the drug war is parents wanting to protect their kids. And also all these vested interests that have the prison unions and things like that. But I think that dynamic we're trying to is shifting also. And so there's a way in which those of us who are interested in enhancing our lives with these drugs in positive responsible ways need to do so, need to speak about it, we're possible. Yeah. And need to demonstrate that it's not about tearing down the society. It's strengthening. It's all of us coming together to face these incredible challenges. And we need all the inspiration and we need all the creativity and we need all the energy that we can get. Well, unfortunately for some people they really can't speak out about it because they get drug tests that it work. That's a big issue. I mean, the idea that something that stays in your body as long as marijuana gets tested when the psychoactive, the time in which your body brings it back to baselines less than 24 hours. I mean, basically just have trace metabolites that stay in your system for a long-ass time. But they're not psychoactive. So you're at work, you get, you smoke a joint on Friday, you're at work on Monday, then you take a piss test, you piss positive. They're penalizing you for something you're doing when you're not at work that really is not going to affect work. You can also be arrested for driving under the influence. Yeah, from metabolites that you took from part a week ago. Right. It's nonsense. It's so crazy. The idea that that, first of all, the idea that they have some arbitrary level that they test you for and they say, well, this is, you can't operate a marijuana vehicle, a marijuana vehicle, this is a furniture system. It's been proven. What test have you done? Well, where's the science behind that? When you look at the science, the experienced marijuana smokers are not debilitated by in their driving. And there's been a lot of driving tests that have been done. And what they show is that when you are drinking alcohol and driving that you are impaired, but you don't think you're impaired. And so you are more reckless that under marijuana people know that sometimes their instincts, their reaction time might be slowed. So you take compensating action. So people are more careful when they're driving and more aware. So in driving, not in simulators, but when they're out in driving roads and cars that and in simulators too, that marijuana is very minimally affecting driving. And you become paranoid. So you drive a little slower. And you react a little slower too. Do you really think you react slower? Well, I physically. Is there any meaning? No, I mean by that, that, no, because I've a lot of look at all these basketball players that, you know, you know, it's just, yeah, you know about that? Jujitsu? I didn't. Huge in the Jujitsu community. Massive. No, for me. A massive amount of people smoke pot and then go train. It's so much so they have t-shirts rolling, all-stones. Rolling stones. They have all these different, I mean, it's so common in the jujitsu world. Yeah, I play racquetball. And so I kind of have combined marijuana racquetball and train myself to be really quick reacting. Yeah. And sometimes I play my best games when I'm stoned and sometimes I don't. But sometimes, you know, you have a fuck. But I can never tell ahead of time whether it be better or not. But that's for me. But I think with driving that what I meant by reaction time is that you don't take precipitous actions. So the classic thing is that you're going somewhere, I'm thinking about something. I don't turn where I wanted to turn. But then I just like call my way, find my way back. I don't like jerk the wheel. I do want to clarify though that that's you. You're intelligent guy and you have your shit together. I think for most folks, it's, you know, I don't like driving time. I don't I'd rather be sober. Yeah, I'd rather be sober. I don't like it. There's a lot of things that I don't like to do when I'm high. I don't mind it. But I don't want to get pulled over and I'm high. And I like I've talked my way out of, you know, some cop being upset at me for being high. Like, dude, I'm telling you, I drive fine. I'm good. I don't want to be involved in that situation. And I don't, I think I'm, I would be kind of a hypocrite if, uh, if I said that and like, or if I, if I had a problem with some people getting high and dropping, but I know some people are impaired. There's, there's such an drive. There's some people that freak out. I don't even drive when you're impaired. Yeah. Yeah. And when you're freaking out, I think even if it's only psychologically, even if your reflexes are still there, you're still impaired. You know, you're freaking out. Oh, my God, you have to exit. Don't drive like that. Please. That's not very responsible. Yes. I'm driving, I think, go ahead and hand. I did have the, you talked about being high and having to talk to a police officer. Um, I was actually going to visit John Lily. And the chemist friend of mine had separated the isomers of ketamine. And I was going to, um, bring that to John who hadn't tried the different isomers yet. Um, this is in Florida. And it was way long time ago. And, um, I was, um, I had a Porsche 914, which is a small cheap car, but just says the open top. And so I was going from Sarasota, Florida to Miami. And it was just such a beautiful night and the moon was out. And I was stoned and I thought, okay, I'm going to speed. It's just beautiful. I'm going to get a ticket, but it's okay. And I thought, okay, as long as I'm just going to get this ticket, well, why don't I just think about what I could tell the police officer when the inevitable happens. So you're thinking about this as you're planning for your ticket? As the inflammatory ticket is what, what could I tell him about that would somehow or other the, um, be okay? And I thought the first thing is don't deny that I'm speeding. You know, don't, don't contradict anything. But the main thing I thought is what do we have in common? You know, and the only thing I could think of is we're two guys out in the road on a fried lonely guys on a Friday night out in the roads. And so I'm not a blow this guy to get out of tickets. I'm always saying, I'll dare you. And I know the story was that I was on my way to see my girlfriend. Okay. And I was good call. And I was late. Okay. And officer, I am speeding and I'm sorry. And but that's what I was doing. And so it happened. I got pulled over. Right. I told this story. And the guy was like, you know, I'm going to let you go. Just tell her that it's from me that you owe this for me. That's a nice guy. You can get lucky and get a nice cop. Yeah. I've had that have a mate on. And then with John Lulley, um, you know, he, one of the ice mares is more active than the other. And so, you know, that was interesting. But I also did get the sense that he was too much into the ketamine and too much into this other state. And it started trying to think about how possibly we could help him because he was such a major contributor in a hero mind. And one of the people that was a dolphin trainer that worked with him with some of his dolphins had this sense, uh, Roberta Goodman had this sense that, uh, he was also going down hill. And so we are arranged to get together with them to do MDMA therapy. And during that, he kind of became very much, um, into his body, but he had abscesses from where he was shooting himself. Oh, God. He was in terrible shape. So he was shooting ketamine. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In a muscularly or do I mean, he would do it IV sometimes. He would do it in, he would get, he just was so trying to be out of body in another place that he wasn't taking care of himself. Wow. And he was, and, and it was painful to him. And so he kind of bounced into this awareness of what he was doing. So he had infections. He had infections. Yeah. He was hurt. Wow. And he, um, he didn't want to stay there and deal with that. And so what we, we couldn't help him, you know, right? Because he didn't want to deal with it. We also was probably dealing with the reality of a decaying body. And he was an older man. And he probably figured, you know what, this, these states of mine, I like this better. You know, I'll just ride this bitch into the wheels fall off. I mean, there's a lot of people that take that approach as well. Yeah. And I know it took guys spent so much time in altered states of consciousness. I don't think it's unreasonable to like prefer that. You know, I think it is. I think it is because I really think when you get this, deeper sense about how life is so precious that you can have these other states of mind. But that it should be inculcating compassion, a sense that you have to contribute to make it a better world that this kind of self-destructive. But is it ultimately futile? I mean, isn't it? We live, we die. I mean, this guy is feeling his body giving out on him. And he says, you know what? I'm just shooting at him. So the boat hits the rocks. Well, I think giving makes people happy a lot of times. People are depressed. You know, if they serve or help others, I even thought about that about the vet that, you know, if there was some way, you know, he felt that he was a harm to his family and that he was doing them good by killing himself. And I think if only there would have in some soup kitchen or something that he could have felt that he was contributing, maybe that would have been. And we kind of addressed that. Didn't he? Though he was talking about all the widows that he had created and that he didn't feel like he had the right to exist. Right. But that's psychological material to work through. That's not, you know, necessary. And I think even- That's a hard thing to say, but you're saying it from coming from someone who's an MDM experiences. And I think unless somebody has, they really would listen to this, like a straight person, not me and not gay, but I mean, a square. A guy who's never done any drugs and blah, I've, you know, really not been into drugs and I've took some purpose at St. College. If that person heard that, they would go, what is this guy talking about? Like the guy had post-traumatic stress disorder from murdering people and, you know, committing war crimes and he's openly spoke about it in this letter. And then your tell him he's going to take ecstasy and he's going to be able to work through that, like, what the fuck are you talking about? Yeah, that's a really good point. In fact, people have accused us of like you're going to try to help people just forget what they did. And you can make mindless soldiers who will commit war crimes and then they get a drug and they feel better and they go back. And so I think that's a really good point you're asked because it's not that people say that was good, that I can accept, that was good. They don't reframe what they did into something good, but they realize that they, it's done. If they accept it, it can give them the chance in the rest of their life to make up for it. Not that you can in any way, but it gives you a way to go forward in a positive way. And I think that if we do this in Marines, let's say, my guess is that it will make them more sensitive about those kind of occasions where they might be reckless with their machine gun or something. Yeah. It might make them more careful. I don't know. These are like unknown questions and it's really important, but the process of dealing with post-traumatic stress disorder is to more live in the present, to let the past inform you not to deny it, but not to be so oppressed by it, and to accept what you've done. And I think once you accept that there is that evil in all of us, that we have to, like those, you know, that we all have the capacity, under certain circumstances, that you can accept that. And what we hope is that people then can move forward and recognize that they still have some life. And every day they can make choices. And every day they can try to be helpful to somebody or not. And I think that's what we're talking about. The healing, it doesn't make them look back and say, that was okay what I did. I think we're in a very strange period of human history where we know that we have all these issues. We know we have massive government corruption, we know we have massive financial corruption. We know we have the great majority of people who don't agree with the war acts that are going on, whether it's drone attacks or what have you. And we wonder like why is our society so far behind? Why have we achieved such great technological military heights? But yet socially we're so fucked up. And we have all the tools to fix that. And what that's what's really insane. It's like individuals have found their own unique situations that through yoga or through MDMA or through meditation or even some through religious chanting and learning how control of your breath can change states of mind. People gun that through jogging. You were talking about smoking pot and getting high. I know a lot of people who think things through when they're jogging and let things go when they're jogging too. I think there's many, many, many pieces that we can use to try to fix this problem. And they're all documented. We're not living in the dark ages anymore. And I think this is one of the first generations that's been around that's experienced that. Then there's that many tools. And I think right on when you talked about how we're overdeveloped intellectually and underdeveloped emotionally and spiritually. It's not even that we're underdeveloped. It's just we're not developed at all. You know what I mean? It's like most people are acting on momentum or imitating their atmosphere. Yeah. Well, we're developed some we think from the primates or pure instincts. Yeah. I mean, as a society, it's pretty crazy. I mean, groups are, you know, that's what I thought about, you know, Hitler's Germany, that you've got a culture that's insane. We're not, we're right North Korea right now. Yeah. They're all programmed. And yeah, so that there's a way in which if you look at our technology, which is miraculous. Yeah. But we, and we have capacities now to alter the planet with global warming. But we don't have the emotional and spiritual development to cope with the technological changes. And in a way that's been productive, this kind of separating out the intellect from religion and morals, you know, because religion and morals have sort of squashed the intellect and didn't want Copernicus and Galileo and just whole history of things. But is that really religious or is that just the people claiming to be religious human beings? Yeah. Right. It's just the ideologies behind these ideas that didn't want to relinquish power. Yeah. Albert Einstein talked about how true science and true religion are not in opposition. And that the scientist is also, you know, in a state of wonder and spiritual appreciation. Yeah, because people that think that religion is ridiculous or that God is ridiculous or the concept of a higher power is ridiculous. You know what else is ridiculous? The whole universe itself, the fact that there's a floating ball core the size of the earth called the moon, just floating in space above us. How heavy is that stupid thing? Is this floating above us? Oh, and without it, our world would not exist because our temperature would not be regulated enough that we could live in coal climates and hot climates. It wouldn't be predictable enough. It would be fucked. I mean, that's crazy. That's way crazier than some guy who built everything. You know, big bang. That's crazier than anything. The religion has ever come up with ever. That the whole universe was smaller than the head of a pen and then exploded 13 point whatever billion years ago and created the skies above and everything you say. Yeah, what you said is a futile. You live and you die. And I think that those moments of wonder or appreciation for just how miraculous, mysterious, and comprehensible are those moments of love that there's a way in which they make life worth it. I agree. And I think that there can be, I don't want to use the word religion, but there can be a way of living the life with wonder and with sharing knowledge and with just looking into what we have learned, rock solid about the very universe we live in and respecting that and worshiping that in a way. Not like I'm not talking about a deity, but about like a great wonder, like the great wonder that it really is. There's a benefit to that. Yeah. And taking that into the pain, I think is being able to take the loving energies into the places that need healing and that that's where, so just having a spiritual meditating on top of a mount up and trying to, you know, get off the wheel of suffering and stuff, that seems like a very egotistical way, actually. And having the sense that while we, some of us are privileged in all different ways to really be healthy and be wonderful without and in wonder without being so threatened that there's a lot of people that aren't and that we have to not only feel those moments, but then try to somehow, as Martin Luther King talked about, the Arkham history, make some contribution of some way that helps it for others too. You know, it's also ironic, one of the weird things that's going on with society is that as our technological capabilities increase, we also fill our skies with light pollution and we can't see the stars. And one of the best psychedelics experiences I ever had outside of doing a drug was I went to the keck observatory and Hawaii on the big island and we drove through the clouds and as we were driving, like, you wonder if it's going to be cloudy days and you won't be able to see anything. It takes a while to get up there and I was like, damn, looks like it's cloudy, but then we drove through the clouds and you realize, oh, this thing is so high up there that you actually drive past where the clouds are. This is nuts. And we went up to the observatory and the view is just insane because the big island is set up for the observatory. So all the lights that they use for street lights are a very special type of diffuse lighting that doesn't give light pollution off. So you have this incredible view of the stars where you see the whole Milky Way like a movie, like those pictures of space. And somehow or another, it's just above us and you're looking at it. It's so unbelievably and magical. I was staring into the impossible. And I remember being upset that I couldn't see this every night. That's up there all the time and not seeing that and just making it this blank screen. By doing that, you sort of like lose, you lose the feel for what's really going on. Yeah, we're out of touch with that a lot. I had this bonding moment with in some ways my opposite, my family and I were on vacation in Israel and we decided to go across the Sinai Desert by car to go see Cairo and the pyramids. And we had to work with an Egyptian company and they had people had armed guards because it's kind of dangerous now. And so as we were driving through the Sinai Desert and it was so dark and the sky was magnificent, we asked if we could just stop the car and just sort of walk a bit from the road. There was hardly any virtually no other traffic on the road. The only thing we're military checkpoints every once in a while. And we just went out and so these, it was Ramadan too. And so these Muslims who were with guns to protect us, who were Jewish, we just stood under the stars in the middle of the desert with no light pollution and just had this shared moment of kind of awe at the majesty. Yeah, the view of the actual view that we're supposed to see, I think is really what inspired people throughout history to create the idea of gods and to create this. I mean the insane view that you get of that, just the images of those magical lights in the sky, millions and billions of them. Just to see that is it's so humbling. And to not see that, it's so dead. It's so numb. Like we don't have an appreciation for the fact that we're in space. You watch a documentary. It seems kind of abstract. But when you're on top of the observatory and you look out and you have that incredible view, the stars, you go, oh my God, like we are really in space right now. We're on a big organic spaceship. We're moving thousands miles an hour. In a circle. Yeah. It's nuts. It's weird to see. And what it's done to Stuart Brand talked about a lot about the whole earth, the picture of the earth from space. We're the first generation or two that's ever had that image. And those astronauts that go up in the space station, the special, they all talk about the experience of it. It's being very transcendent. When you take that view of the earth from above and you look down, you see just the nature of the whole reality of a planet and a solar system and a galaxy and a universe. It all just sort of falls into place. You're like, oh my God. But when you're down here and you're not stuck in traffic and the sky's dark, you don't even think about it. But you're on a majestic ride through the heavens. Instead, you're overwhelmed with a mundane bullshit of this person in front of you not reacting to the green light. Come on, asshole. And if you can somehow do both, it's not that you can't that's where I think Lily got wrong. You know, he thought the spiritual part was the more important part. And it's the balance. My daughter, Ellie, is in eighth grade and she had to do a project with for National History Day. And with a couple of her girlfriends, they did a project on Apollo 11, which was, and it turned out that the girl that she did it with, Michael Collins was her grandfather. He was the one that was on the, when Armstrong put his foot on the, and Buzz Aldrich that he was the one that stayed in the capsule. And so they actually got to interview him as part of this. And he did talk about for him what was so amazing, both being up there in space and seeing the earth, but also when he got back. And they went around the world and people were, you know, cheering and talking about things. He said that he thought that people would say, you know, look what you Americans did. And wherever he went, people said, look what we did. Huh. Like it was the human race that we went to the moon. And people wanted to be part of that. And he, because it was such a space where look what we did. Like it was the human race that we went to the moon and people wanted to be part of that. And because it was such a space race with Russia, he sort of we did it, but he saw, Americans did it, but he saw around the world that people said we all collectively did it. That the idea we all collectively are in this thing together that we are a global community. That's really one of the last saving hopes of humanity. And I think the internet is sort of reinforced that idea in a way that never existed. I think nationalism, the idea of nationalism seems so much more preposterous now, especially nationalism and a war sense. Not nationalism. Something wrong would be in proud of the town you live in. Nothing brought warm with cheering for the, you know, your home basketball team. There's nothing wrong with any of that. But what's wrong is when it translates into war. And I think that this is the first culture that is really sort of openly embraced a global society. You know, I think kids today, they're far less likely to buy the bullshit when it comes to us against them or any ideas about, you know, what's really going on with geopolitical struggles. Yeah. We know kids and I ran like they're just, they're kids. They're trying to get out of the under the thumb of the repressive government. My son, Eden, who is just going to college, he was playing a halo. And you can play multi, you know, and he was playing with somebody in Saudi Arabia. That's so crazy. It's fantastic. And I think what we see a lot is the rise of fundamentalism, you know, the Orthodox Jews are nuts. The, some of the Orthodox Christians and Muslims, all these fundamentalists, I think because of the forces of globalization, because it's harder to sustain that we're the one right religion, they're kind of having to circle their wagons and they become a bit more extreme. And so it might look on the surface that things are getting worse. But I think that's this defensive mechanism where they can barely hold it together. And I think it won't end up with homogenous one world religion. One government will appreciate those small things about the, you know, the local town where you are. You can appreciate the differences even more when you feel part of the commonality. You don't have to be scared of the differences because there's something deeper that connects us. I think there's also a problem that people have in the human beings we share chimpanzee, alpha male DNA. And we are always looking for leaders. And yeah, the other problem is once someone becomes a leader, we see those with politicians, dictators, we saw it with the people that came in after Mubarak and Egypt tried to pass all these crazy fucking laws that essentially made them dictators. And then the people were like, what are you talking about? Like this is this is what we just shed blood for. Like in U.S. holes are trying to make yourself immune to prosecution for all these different things that you could be doing. Like fuck you. No, you can't do that. And I think seeing that for the first time, you know, globally, even though right now it may be very frustrating for us and it is frustrating for us because we don't change is coming quickly enough. Change that corresponds with what we know about the world. I think it is, if you look at it historically, if they look back to this time, I think this will be a time of great turmoil and great change. It's just that we measure history in these 20, 30 year bursts. You know, and I think the 20 year bursts that we're in right now is just bananas. Well, I think as I get older and as I watch my kids grow that for me, 10 or 20 years is no longer such a long time. And I think as you get older, time speeds up too. And so it's like those crops that were in the pot. Yeah, they're so you can, but we're not quite so scared, fortunately. And the, um, this idea of having a 20, 30 year plan or even to recognize as all the spiritual traditions talked about is that these great things are not accomplishable in one generation or by one in one lifetime so that we just start the process or we not start it, but we continue. And then we try to pass it on to the next generation. But I think that there is this, you know, intensification and crisis. And in that, I think eventually the, um, the, the fundamentalists will need to find more genuine spirituality, not in this rigidity. And hopefully they'll be able to, um, coexist with, there was these demonstrations of millions of people in Egypt, you know, against the Muslim brother, brotherhood. This is the first government in Israel that doesn't have the religious orthodox as part of the governing body, which is a really healthy thing. This was, who made that quote, history is a race between education and catastrophe. Who's that, who is responsible for that quote, you know, I don't know. Yeah. I don't remember who it was, whoever was, they were bad mother fucker, whoever it was. But that's, uh, that's really what seems to be going on. Was it H.U. Well, that really does seem to be well, of course, it's H.U. Well, God was awesome. Um, I think that that does seem to be what's going on. It seems to be also that sometimes it, it almost feels like people need an antagonist in order to perform with their very best. It's almost like we need a rival to inspire us to reach great heights. Yeah. And it depends how you see them if they're deeper down your ally so that like, let's say in sports teams, you know, you want your opponents to be as good as possible because that will call out the best in you. So in some level, you want the worthy opponent that you don't have to totally destroy. You just are sort of co-volving together. So I think we do need to test ourselves against, against others and against ourselves, but we don't need to see the other side as the enemy to be destroyed. And, and I think, uh, I used to play this game, like a group in Chicago and when I couldn't Lake Michigan and some friends and I would go in there and we'd play the greatest catch game. And each of us, guys, we throw football to somebody else. It was like half in the water. And our, our goal as the thrower was to get it just barely where they could reach it, where they had to make the spectacular dive and show off to everybody how great they were. And then they would have to do it back. And so we're sort of helping, we're, we're, we're like allies, but we're pressing each other to, to do these spectacular things. That's really interesting. Well, that's one of the principles of, of Jiu Jitsu and martial arts is that you're really only as good as your training partners. Yeah. If you train with really good people, you become really good. And that's to you, you elevate to the level of the competition in the training room. It's also the same a lot with, uh, stand up comedians. We're inspired by other really funny stand up comedians. And when you find a particular group, a group of talented people in a town or an area, oftentimes they'll develop a lot of very talented people around them who imitate the fact that, you know, that there's a high level of the art form in that area. It's like Austin, Texas is a good example. It's like there's always a lot of really good guys there. And because there's always a lot of really good guys there, there's always a lot of really good guys there. It's a New York City is another one. But obviously this, much more money involved in like places like New York or LA and being good. So that becomes sort of a factor as well. But are you from off? Did you spend time in Austin? No, I just have a lot of friends there. And I've done a lot of stand up there. But I just know the local scenes always really strong. There's a few places in the country as a comedian that's seen the local scenes are very strong. Denver, they always have a really strong local scene. And that's another one that's pure because it's not really touched the Hollywood in any way. It's just pure stand up comedy. And then there's San Francisco, Boston, LA, New York, little bit of Phoenix, a little bit very limited thing. And you can sometimes, one or two great comedians will be in one area and then boom, it'll blossom. Like Houston was Sam Kineson and Bill Hicks. They were all at this Houston comedy annex. And because of them in this one particular area, it started to take off. Yeah, that's sort of the idea of Silicon Valley. Yeah, sure. Get a bunch of brilliant people get inspired by other brilliant people. They share ideas. They, you know, they pump each other up. And the idea that there's plenty for everybody. Right. And that working together could be much more satisfying. And you're much happier if your friends are doing well as much as you are. Yeah. Yeah. In fact, one of our, uh, Ashana Haley, one of our board of directors who recently died was a brilliant computer guy. And he kept trying to say that we should try to think from abundance rather than from constant need. And that's a, that's a, that's just a, a general principle of life. Family mentalities are a terrible way of approaching life. And that's the way a lot of people approach life. They approach life as if there's a finite amount of resources. And they have to get theirs. And that's what leads to people cheating on their taxes. That's a reason people lying and trying to steal money and stealing money from their employers and chit along those lines. They're coming from, from a, a standpoint of famine, like there's stockpile and nuts for the winter. Right. They're not as comfortable about their ability to generate new resources. Yeah. And that's, that's a terrible mentality. And that is a mentality. And that, that sort of those sort of philosophies and those ideas can be reinforced or they can, the, the opposite can be reinforced, a generous, bountiful mentality can be enforced as well. Yeah. Well, for us, I mean, it's going to be 15 to 20 million dollars to make MDM A into a medicine and the same for civil cyber and our LSD. And we don't have all that money. But it's crazy. I have, but it costs pharmaceutical companies way, way more than that. It should cost the amount that it costs to get one guy high on MDM A. And he should do it and go, oh, listen to me, make it legal. Just stop, stop the bullshit. Yeah. But, but we've had to have that attitude that, that the resources are out there. And once we can demonstrate that we can use them wisely, as we grow, the resources will grow. And so far, you know, we're in our 27th year and that's what, what's happening. How happy are you now that you're seeing all this like really tangible progress? Real tangible progress. Very happy. But, but I'm also, because I woke up to all this in 1971 and 72 right after the backlash. I'm concerned a lot. I'm trying to be very sensitive about another backlash. Do you think that's possible today? I think it's possible. I don't think it's impossible. I don't think it's likely right now. It just seems like the information is just too prevalent. Well, but how would you explain the fact that we can't even do marijuana research? There's a massive repression. And so if... Well, those people should be in jail, that's really what should happen. Someone should realize what's going on and start locking people up and go, let's play your game. Because what you're doing is ridiculous. You're ruining people's lives for something that really should not be your choice. It should not be another person's choice, whether or not they masturbate and it should not be another person's choice, whether or not they smoke pot. And it's really along the same lines. Yeah. Well, I'm not so sympathetic with putting them in jail. But I would like to take the source of their power, which is people's fear that they've generated and others and try to get more. That's why I'm so glad to be talking with you in this podcast that people to try to educate them, to realize that there is a way where we can work together and make things better. I agree, but I think the people that have done things that have put people in jail for things along those lines, for selling pot or for growing pot or for owning pot, that they're criminals. Those are societal criminals. Well, I'd say that they have bridged other people's human rights. Without a doubt. And they have done so with full cultural support. And I think the way to move forward is not to be so punitive for those that did it, although for some. But to talk about evolution and to talk about how a different approach is necessary. And whenever in Alaska, when there was a medical marijuana legalization bill, one of the first years ago, there was this whole idea of reparations to pay people that were in jail. And the polling that was done by the people trying to pass this initiative showed that that was a really weak part. So were you try to impose these penalties on people for past behavior that a time was sort of socially sanctioned? What I meant by that was the people that are actively working, like privatized prison unions, things along those lines, working to keep these drugs illegal so that they profit. And that's creepy. There's some real reprehensible shit that's going on. It's not as simple as they're acting within culturally defined rules and regulations. There's some behind the scenes shady shit that's based on deception. Well, the stuff like that is should be illegal. But I think that corporate capitalistic approach that we have does permit that kind of stuff. And it permits lobbying Congress and it permits this process where people try to get their own interests advanced sometimes over the interests of others. And isn't it fascinating that, I mean, I'm an owner of you feel like this, but the thing that would fix the woes that society has more than anything is a thing that these people are trying to keep from becoming legal. Like that might be the big race. The big race might be recognizing that there are some fantastic tools to change the consciousness of this culture. Right. And I think that idea of thinking about them as tools is really the crucial distinction because they're not good or bad in and of themselves. Right. It's how they're used. And our whole drug policy is there's good bad, good drugs and bad drugs, bad drugs are illegal and good drugs get a burger thing or from the pharmaceutical company. But it's all about good and bad when it's actually how you use it. And even the drug that was demonized the most in a way in the 60s was the lidomide, the drug that was the medical drug that caused birth defects and babies. And the FDA stopped that in the US, but it was prevalent throughout Europe. And now the lidomide has become a medicine and this same kind of shrinking blood vessels and things that's used in leprosy. And it's used in cancer treatment. So a drug that was among the most demonized of all has now been approved by the FDA was certain kind of safety procedures to make sure pregnant women don't get it. But it's the idea that these are tools. And we have the ability to approach these tools in an intelligent way in a respectful way or in a reckless way. And what we want to do is try to change these value judgments and prohibition support people's human rights to explore their own consciousness. They have freedom of thought and to find a way to integrate into a society that's moving forward. How do you do that by getting through the corruption? Because that's the only thing that's holding it back. Really, the only thing holding it back is corruption. At this point, with the amount of data that's been accumulated on medical marijuana. Well, okay. The amount of data that's been accumulated, the government has been effective, the DEA parts of the government in NIDA in preventing what's called the phase three studies. The large scale definitive studies that by law Congress has created FDA must have to prove safety and efficacy. So at this moment, there is not enough data of the kind that the FDA uses for any other drug. And if we accept the idea that the FDA should regulate marijuana and psychedelics like they do any other drug, then we have to acknowledge that there's not enough research for the FDA to approve it. People twist it and say the FDA has rejected marijuana's medicine, which they have not. We just don't have enough research that way. And they won't allow you to do phase three research. Right. And so that's why the states, I think, have enough evidence to make it legal. And patients and doctors have enough evidence to decide to try it. It's just that in our system that we've created to try to make it so that through science, we don't just see what we want to see, but we kind of have a closer view of what's there. There are these procedures that still need to be undertaken for marijuana and also for M.D. M.D. M.A. So that's why I say we're probably 10 years away from making M.D. a main to a medicine. And I think we'd be five, six years away from making marijuana into an FDA approved medicine if the repression would be lifted right today. Now, what are the, what is the difference between the stage that the FDA requires and the data that has been accumulated? Well, for, there's the preclinical stage. So what that means is preclinical, clinical means humans. So there's a whole series of animal studies looking at toxicity that are required by the FDA before you can get a drug into humans. Once you've done that, then there's phase one, two, three, and four. And phase one is working with people who are not patients who are healthy volunteers to try to categorize what the drug does and what it does at different doses. And for certain drugs that are especially toxic like cancer drugs, they have like phase one, a, phase two, where it's a combination where the drug is so dangerous that it only can be used in patients. And so you do these dose finding studies looking at the side effects. And in general, that's what phase one is. Phase two is where you start working with patients and you start seeing what does it do? What is it good for? How good is it? What are your measures? How well do your measures work? How do you do the double blind to make sure you're not seeing what you want to see? What is your scientific methodology for the studies? What is your treatment approach? What does are you using? That's for phase two. And that can take years and years and years. I mean, we've been phase two for MDMA for about nine years so far. Wow. Yeah, starting in 2004 is when we got the first permit. We actually had permission in 2000 from 2000 to 2001 in Spain for MDMA for PTSD. And we had some media attention that was very positive on the radio, I mean, TV and newspapers and radio. And it motivated the anti-drug authority, the forces of repression to shut the study down. And we weren't powerful enough to overcome it in Spain. And that's where it was first started though with a study that we were working with women survivors of rape with, okay. But then you've got phase two. So then once you have figured out your designs and the magnitude and the variance of the effect. How strong is it and how common is it? Is there a large number of people that don't respond at all or do most people respond? Then you can size your phase three studies. So with marijuana, we have enormous amount of information up to the phase two level. And the FDA will have more information about marijuana, MDMA, LSD than about any other drug that they've ever approved in their entire history. And the reason is because they, the research is usually done with hundreds or thousands of people. 10,000 is about as high as you go. But we've had LSD used by tens of millions of people and marijuana by hundreds of millions of people. And we know the one in a million side effect or the one in five million side effect that we only discover from pharmaceutical drugs once they're approved. So it would not take a long time. We already know that we would work with marijuana with non-shoe control for cancer, chemotherapy, marijuana for pain, particularly for people on opiates. Because we've already shown in phase two studies, funded by the state of California, that when you combine marijuana with opiates that people get better pain control and they don't need as much of the opiates. And because of oxycontinol, all these big concerns. So we know the areas that we would study with marijuana. And we know the safety profile. So we mainly need to just do studies and 250, 500 people to look at the particular patient groups that we want to approve. We have to get high quality standardized medical grade marijuana to do it in. And so maybe we're five years away if the political barriers were removed right today, which they're not. What happens to someone that takes LSD and goes crazy? Because I've had many people tell me stories. I know the Sid Barrett story from Pink Floyd is a famous one. I don't know if it's true, but that was the word was that he had taken too much acid and lost his mind. I think it's possible, but it depends on the support of context. And before you asked about candy flipping about MDMA LSD. So in the future, when people are having this very difficult LSD experience, maybe they go to the emergency room or something, adding MDMA takes it from this terrifying sense of dying ego destruction and grounds it so that people can work through it. So I think that LSD has that potential to destabilize people. But in a supportive environment, that can be helpful and handled and supported. So that's fascinating. So the candy flipping aspect over the adding envy, my mitigate some of the negative effects of the stress that you could get from the acid experience. Oh yeah, completely. Yeah. And then you can, so one possible thing we would like to study one day would be to take people who were dying and start them like we did in Switzerland, start them with LSD. And four hours later administer MDMA. So that way LSD peaks in around three half hours, three, three, and F hours. So they go through the whole challenging LSD of letting go, of opening up. And it's, you know, hopefully they can make it through that. And then at the four hours, you give MDMA and then everything softens and they can take it in more and then they integrate as they're coming down. Oh, so you ride one wave right into the next. Yeah. Or if they're flipping out, if it's too painful or too difficult for them, maybe at the one at the two hours, you could administer MDMA there. And you don't even have to administer a full dose of MDMA, it'd be like a half dose of MDMA. So often it's somewhat. Do they have a synergistic effect? Yeah, they do. They do. They do. The two of them together. What's the difference between? Well, it's more like there's an expansion aspect to it, but there's a grounding aspect as well. So you think that's a really good combination. That's I think it is. Yeah. On the other hand, for, you know, sometimes for spiritual purposes, let's say, where people are looking for this ego distillation, you know, you start with LSD, you start with sillasab and, you know, sometimes the experiences last eight, ten hours or more sometimes. If you don't fully, if you open up to the energy flowing through you, then the psychedelic experience tends to take a shorter amount of time. And if you end into this resistance, because for whatever reasons, it's really difficult, it prolongs the experience. And once you enter into those kind of places, if you were to add MDMA, then people can integrate it more healthfully. Have you done any studies like what the difference is between like hippie flipping and candy flipping using mushrooms instead of, is there any difference to that? Well, again, we haven't done any studies like this because combining drugs, but more or less, it's it's similar. MDMA blends with ketamine, even MDMA grounds people with ketamine grounds. Such a shame that we can't find out about it. It's probably going to turn out to be like a Jack and Coke. People were like, why didn't you guys do this from the beginning? It was my fair thing in college. It was so hard to find, but when you did, you bought a lot and you just saved you sat on those. How did you do it in terms of the timing? Because I'm talking about where, did you take them both at the same time? These were actually designed together, where it was like it was like a candy where it had both of the chemicals in it. That's the only way I've ever done it. Now I've done it since then, but done it separately with mushrooms and then just taking, you know, yeah, I think it was, I took it when I was peeking, I would dose myself with the molly, which would then take whatever an hour or so, four diamonds later, you'd start feeling it. But yeah, it's great. I love those two together. There's a way to sign up online to interview things. Let me know. I was robbed by gunpoint. So I got the post-traumatic stress if you need that. Well, we need people to be, it's not as easy as getting a prescription for marijuana to get an air study. So you have independent raiders. You have to have a treatment resist that means you you have to have had PTSD and diagnose. Well, your PTSD is very minor compared to like soldier PTSD too. And they're dealing with like real debilitating issues. You just got freaked out one night. I got gun in my chest and I thought I was going to die. I'm scared of black people for six months and it still comes back to me once in a while when it's dark out. Right. Right. Well, people can sign up online to donate to maps because we're funded by individuals. The pharmaceutical companies aren't interested because these drugs are off patent. They're only offered a few times so far we've not been able to get a government grant. Although we are working with the National and Civil Health and we are Senator Rockefeller from West Virginia recently sent a letter to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs saying that MD and APT's research should be looked into. But we have yet to obtain any kind of federal funding or pharmaceutical funding or major pharmaceutical or major foundations. So we're more individuals and family foundations trying to bring this research forward. Well, I think what you're doing is awesome because you guys are bringing the jitters to this that would never be done by guys like Brian or myself. Or any of the other people that are out there enjoying the fruits of your labor and the fact that these doors have been broken down now or opened I should say and work is being done and evidence is being put forth. They really can't be refuted anymore. It's slowly but slowly starting to accumulate. Yeah, I would say that this can't be refuted. Right now we're at this stage where we have to replicate our results because that's the key part of science. You may have done it once but can you do it again and again and again and that's where we have still to prove. So we haven't completely proven our case yet but it's moving we hope in that direction. Well, that's awesome man and I think I think there's really exciting things coming up. I really do. I feel like our culture is starting to shift and I think it's stuff like what you're doing is a big part of that. Getting that information, having it on the internet, allowing people to share links, allowing people to go to whether it's maps.org or any of the different websites. Arrowhead.org. Arrowhead is a great website. We were there at Fiscal Sponsored. We went to college together. We tried to help other organizations in that way. I think this idea of getting honest information out for people to make their own decisions. That's what we're about. It's a matter of time, right? Hopefully. Yeah, well my dad is hilarious. My dad is 86 and three quarters and he sent me an email today and it said, here's a link to an article about marijuana reform and he said, oh it's going to be legal in my lifetime. Wow. I was like, he's right. Dad, I said, I hope you're right. Even if you have to live in another 20 years. I would have never thought in 2013 it would still be illegal. When I was a kid, I thought it was a matter of time. Well, I was on the board of normal for a while, quite well. I was with people who started normal in 1970 and 71 and thought it would be legal in a few years. That sort of temper is my sense of time to be with people who over 40 years ago thought it was only going to be a few years away that marijuana would be legal. Unfortunately, they're still working to try to help bring that about. Do you lose enthusiasm sometimes when you see that it's still illegal after all this? No, it's about it's a worthy like an unworthy opponent. It's a worthy goal and so I think we just do what we want to do. There's times when I felt like I was so blocked that I needed to do something where I could actually see change and so I stopped work for a week and painted my house. That was great. That's funny. That really must be, must you feel like spending your wheels sometimes? Well, for years and we just spent four years with health Canada trying to get an import export permit to bring in eight grams of MDMA. This is after health Canada had approved the protocol and our IRB had approved the protocol and the four years it took and they went through all these ridiculous things about the pharmacy, had to have bulletproof glass and had to have all these alarm systems. Those are people going to come and steal your eight grams of acid. All these ridiculous things about the pharmacy had to have bulletproof glass and had to have all these alarms systems. Because people are going to come in and steal your eight grams of acid or MDMA. There was eight grams, yeah, that would be in a safe, and the safe had to be disguised in a wooden cabinet, and the safe had to be bolted to the floor. They were harder than the US. It was ridiculous. But we eventually prevailed. We just took every ridiculous thing and we did it. I mean, my policy is surrender. When there's certain kind of irrational things coming from people who are more powerful, try to give it to them. Well, that's probably why you're in the position that you're in. You're a facilitator of this. I'm willing to dialogue, fetch a fourth. Yeah, continuous, or... Yeah, and there are parts that are exciting, that are connections that are just coming together. Like even for the National Institute of Mental Health, there was a... In the late 1980s, the fellow who's the current head of the National Institute of Mental Health was doing MDMA neurotoxicity research in animals. And I visited him. And he was, you know, this sort of hidden away in the countryside, animal research lab to, you know, not attract all these animal rights protesters. And we had to go through all his guards and barbed wire and stuff. But he seemed like he was sincerely interested in the question and wasn't trying to twist through the results to justify the drug war. And we developed a respect. I certainly respected him. And about two years ago, a year and a half ago, I wrote him an email. I hadn't talked to him. And since that point, he's now become the head of the National Institute of Mental Health. And I just said, is now a good time to apply for a grant for MDMA PTSD research? Or is it so politically hot, it's just not worth it. And he said now is a time. And he appointed someone else inside the NAMH who's an expert at PTSD to help us prepare applications that are more likely to be accepted. But what he did say is that the actual decisions are made by peer reviewers. The way they've set up for government money to be distributed, that they bring in the scientists. And he said, the system of peer review is well known not to be sympathetic with innovation. So even though we have all the support, it still may not work. It's hard to get systems to accept innovation and change. What can people at home that are listening to this podcast or watching it? What can they do to help you to help keep this momentum going? Well, first off, become a member. Sign up for monthly membership. We just had the incredible conference where psychedelic science 2013, largest psychedelic conference that we've ever had in the US, over 1900 people. There's a whole ayahuasca track, the biggest ayahuasca conference ever and clinical research. And I was approached by Amara, this group that helps groups crowdsource transcription and translation of these talks. And videos are not searchable on Google. But when you do a transcript or if you do transcript of these shows, people can then search on the transcripts and that gets them to the video. So people, if they're interested, and it would be a tremendous thing for them to learn, to go to the maps website, and mayps.org to our psychedelic science 2013 conference page. And you could sign up if you wanted to listen to some of these lectures, which are tremendous, and transcribe or translate them if you know other languages. Awesome. Yeah, there's other things people could do. Do you guys have a Twitter page? We have Twitter. We have... We have... What's the Twitter page? Maps news. Maps news. Yeah, we have a tremendous social media team. We already remember. We are going to do an IndieGoGo campaign starting probably in a week or so to raise $10,000 for the Zendo project at Burning Man, our harm reduction program. So people could tell other people about that. And then we're going to go, as we said earlier, to probably $250,000 request for the study with veterans with MDMA. I think people can come out to their families. People can come out to people that they just talk about and not be so reticent. If psychedelics have been helpful, or even if they've not been helpful, to talk about how... Realizing. ...what they learned about what they think are these tools. Maybe they use them poorly. Maybe they use them well. But I think look at the gay rights movement and think about these. Maybe they use the wrong tool for the wrong job too, because they didn't have education about it. Yeah. And we're finding that people that sometimes use psychedelics at festivals for what I would say is the wrong reason, just to have a fun time. And not the right reason. Well, you're out of your mind, Jerry. Well, it's beautiful, but you have to be ready for the difficult stuff. And if you're trying to suppress the difficult stuff, that's when people get into trouble. You should work. Yeah. So I'm not supposed to joke around. Yeah. But I think the celebratory use is really important. And that's why for us, medicalization is not the... For maps, as a 501c3, not changing the laws, we're about medicalization. But I think as a society, we need spiritual use, we need personal growth, creativity, we need a broader drug policy, which would have adults have the right to use psychedelics. I think it would be like the driver's license model, where you would perhaps have a certain education. You have to pass a test and maybe even to start out. So we avoid a backlash. There would be psychedelics clinics where you would go have an experience under supervision. And if you did it well, meaning you didn't totally fl about it, then you would have the right to bite on your own. And I think what we would do with children, I think drugs would be illegal for minors, legal for adults. But 23 states in the United States have a parental override for alcohol. That if you want to give your kid alcohol in 23 states, you can do that. And I think that that's how we handle underage is that we leave it not the government prohibits it all, but that its families decide among themselves how they want to handle it. That's awesome. I'm going to have one more question, and I'm going to let you go. Terrence McKenna's Stoneed Ape Theory. He's a fascinating proposal that human beings evolve from lower hominids because we got in contact with psychedelic mushrooms. And his theory, I don't know if it's correct, but according to him and his brother, his brother, if you just Google search the Dennis McKenna podcast, I don't remember which number it is. He could find it pretty easily in a quick search. But he gave some really interesting scientific reasons for why he believes it's very possible that that's what happened. The doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years, all this attributed to psilocybin. Dennis was one of the speakers at the conference, and so people could actually translate and transcribe his talk if they wanted. Awesome. But I think the deeper question is, can the apes that we are today evolve further with mushrooms? And I think the answer to that is clearly yes. Whether the apes of several million years or 100,000 years ago used mushrooms, it's certainly plausible. And I'd to say one way or the other, I am not in a position to say I believe it or not. I think Terrence said some things that were pretty exaggerated, like this whole idea that the end of the Mayan calendar was going to be the end of the world. Well, he doesn't actually. Well, he talked about a massive concept in the shift, and it would all be different in that space. Yeah, well, he talked about that we were going to reach a point of technological singularity. He thought that we were going to reach a point of infinite novelty. Right. But tracking it with his time wave zero algorithm that he created, he created this really sketchy thing when he was on mushrooms. It does based on the E-chain that supposedly map novelty or human innovation that you could put it through a graph. But I think when you get really fucking high, you can see patterns and almost anything. Yes. And he had this E-chain pattern that he had chased down for like 20 plus years and created a formal mathematical program. He had some mathematical experts actually engaged him in dialogue. He had the Watson disagreement right now. Yeah, so I think if, you know, Dennis McKenna just wrote a book, Brothers at the Screaming Abyss. And there's a good discussion about some of the criticism and time of the value of time wave zero. So I was, actually Terrence was the one that started, helped start MDMA research. Because we were at a conference at Esselin. It was in 1983. And it was already clear because of Dallas and stuff that MDMA was being used in public setting and that the crackdown would calm. And so the underground therapist and the shilligans came us, you know, so we had this meeting to figure out what to do. And Terrence was like, forget about MDMA. It's from the lab. It's got to be a plant. You know, mushrooms, thousands of years, plants are better. You know, we can trust them. They're from nature and, you know, and look at all these risks of MDMA and all this stuff. And I was like, well, I don't see these risks. And so, and I also don't believe that plants are, drugs from plants are inherently better tools that we're part of nature. And so, I'm showing the human mind is out there. So I said, I'll put up a thousand dollars towards an MDMA study. We'll see how risky it really is. And then Dick Price, who founded Esselin like 30 seconds, 10 seconds later, said, I'll put up a thousand dollars. And so it was in response to Terrence going on about plant medicines being best and MDMA being super dangerous. That we did this study and kept it quiet until the DEA moved to criminalize and then we surfaced with the study. That's interesting. That's great. Yeah. That's very funny. I always wanted to hear different people's take on that theory because I thought it was a fascinating theory. The idea that humans became us because of psychedelics and the best culprit is mushrooms because they're like sort of built in. You know, if the cook on, you know, do you think we're you have to, you know, extract anything, just chew away and boom. Here comes the boom. Well, I felt when I had my bar misfo when I was 13 that it did not turn me into a man. Coming a big, that's a really unrealistic expectation to 13 shit. I mean, I was the oldest before that's my parents. So that's what I expected. But when we came up with that back when people were willing to be 30. Yeah. So when I, and I was disappointed, I was the same. I was really, I was like, I remember being in bed for the whole week. And I'm thinking a lot of people must have had their bar mitzvahs that day and God must be slow and he'll come around to me eventually. Oh, that's hilarious. And then, and finally nothing happened. And I just was sad about it. But when I took LSD for the first time, I felt that it touched the parts of my psyche that I had hoped my bar misfo would touch. Wow. LSD better than bar mitzvahs. That's your next meme. You got two memes so far out of this show. Well, thank you very much, Rick. This is a really awesome conversation. I'm glad we could pull it off despite the gay pride parade in the Illuminati trying to hold it back. I made it happen. Go to maps.org, ladies and gentlemen. And what is it, maps news on Twitter? Please follow that as well. Facebook and Facebook. And let's do this again sometime. I think we could have done those three hours for us and so tired. Yeah. Well, I maybe you should have tried modefanels. Yeah. I got to work tomorrow. I want to sleep. Thank you everybody for tuning into the podcast. Thanks to Ting for sponsoring us. Go to Rogan.Ting.com and save yourself some cash. I'm an awesome company. Thanks also to Audible.com. Go to Audible.com forward slash Joe for your free audio book and 30 days free of Audible service. And thanks also to LegalZoom. If you use the code name Rogan in the referral box, you could save some cash. LegalZoom is not a law firm, but they provide self help services at your specific direction. Thanks also to on it.com. That's an IT use the code name Rogan and save yourself some money. We will be back someday this week. I'm working crazy hours. So I hardly know what day it is or what's up. I'm a mess lately. But we'll see you, Freaks and Vegas. Joe Diaz and I are playing in Vegas at the joint in the hard rock this Friday night. There's some tickets still available and it should be an awesome weekend because it's UFC weekend. So that's July 5th Friday night the joint in Hollywood. All right. We love you and we'll see you soon. Bye.