Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Good to see you. It's a pleasure. How you feeling out there? You truth warrior? I keep waiting to be done with this shit. Yeah, you're done with gold. It's nice to be done, right? They will not let it go. Yeah, it's strange. It's strange now because it's also strange. What bothers me? And I try to emphasize this as much as possible. And I even had to do this recently with some close family friends. You've got to take care of your health. You have to take vitamins. You have to eat right. You have to. If you don't do that, your body doesn't function well. That includes your immune system. It includes everything. It includes inflammation. It causes a host of diseases in your body. You got to take care of yourself. And that should be the most important message that everyone's putting out, not just podcasters, but the government. Health officials. Everyone should be saying that. You should really supplement with vitamins. You should really get your nutrient levels checked, if you can. Even if you can't do those things, though, you can eat decently. You can eat decently. You can try to exercise moderately. Look, I know a lot of people have complicated lives. If kids have work, they don't have much time. I get it. But even if you can work out like a half hour a day, three days a week and not eat too much, you're in better shape. Much better shape. Yeah, there's been some studies done recently that something really crazy, 20 minutes of exercise, like twice a week, improves your overall, like all-caused mortality score. Yes. Just a little bit, moderate stuff. Nothing crazy. Do some pushups and situps and some jumping jacks. You're good to go. Just you have to do something that gets your body moving. Or it doesn't think that it has to, but it atrophies. It's just an unfortunate aspect of our biology that we are not like other animals. And other animals get stronger too, as they exercise. But we've all seen animals that are super muscular, they don't do anything. It's just they're different. And they only live 13 years, right? Yes. The whole thing's different. Yes. With us, we're this long-term species with intelligence and ego and justifications and all sorts of weird ways that we will procrastinate and justify bad behavior and unhealthy choices. And it's such a constant battle just being human being. And no one wins that battle. You just win battles. You win daily battle. No one wins the war. Everyone dies in the end. Everyone dies in the end. But I wrote about this on the subs day. We just talked before we started about when I didn't see you. But when you were in Vegas in July and I was in Vegas in July for I was playing poker, that gambling isn't. And I'd like to gamble. I don't have a moral problem with it. But gambling destroys people too. Overeating destroys people. Gambling destroys people. Gambling destroys people. This is true. This is true. As human beings, we've set up all these modern things to take advantage of our dopamine. And we're not really built for it. We're not. And we're certainly not built for phones. So many people are getting destroyed by social media. Like their lives have become wrapped up in arguing with people. And I just think that's super unhealthy. Yes. There's some aspect of it that's very beneficial and positive. I think you get a lot of information that you wouldn't have gotten. I think you get to see people's perspectives that occasionally are very inspiring and very unique and interesting. I love listening or reading things from other people that I think have very good perspectives and interesting perspectives. It's a rare opportunity to talk to people that you wouldn't be able to run into. If we lived in the 1970s, you'd have to cultivate these interesting people like in the physical person, which is probably better for you. Right? But not available for most people. That's right. And we tend to imitate our atmospheres. And you see that in thought bubbles. And I think that's another problem that we have with social media. And there's these thought bubbles. And people just sort of gravitate towards them. You stay in them. And if you're busy, you just sort of get affirmation from that thought bubble. And you never think outside the box. Yes. Look, I don't know what we do about social media. I mean, obviously my career. I wouldn't, well, I guess I was on with you one time before COVID, you know, talking about cameras. But before you got kicked off. Before I got kicked off, Twitter. Yeah. And then got put back. Let's talk about that. Because you came on for your book that I've referenced many times. And it's called Tell Your Children. And I think it's important. I think when we talk about these things that some people like to use recreationally, like even gambling that you talked about, we have to be aware that there's consequences to these things too. It's not an even ride. It's not like every person is going to handle every situation well. And we had a podcast yesterday with Kurt Angle, you know, a limcled medalist and wrestling. And he was the WWE champion, amazing guy. And he had a real pill problem. And he had a pill problem because he broke his neck like five times. And he had like cray wrestled in the Olympics with a broken neck. Broken vertebrae in his neck and one. Wow. I mean, just the freak of freaks. But so he can do that. But he got hooked. He got hooked. I mean, this is like a man whose mind is as strong as any fucking human is ever walked the face of the earth. You can win the gold medal in the Olympics and wrestling. Wrestling is one of the most competitive grueling, insane physical contests that are in the Olympics. Is like boxing and wrestling are two of the craziest. Judo, Judo is pretty crazy. But God, those guys are strong mentally. And for that, God, he get hooked on pills. Like God, like that, imagine. Right. Because it's not about how strong you are. It's just if they click with you in some way, you're going to have a problem. And I also had Peter Berg on the podcast. He was brilliant. And Peter, who did that film before Netflix, the series is done now, pink killer. He said he tried an oxycontin once recreationally. And he was like, oh my God, this is amazing. I could never do this again. I'll never do this again. But he's got a mindset that can see that and go, oh, I see where this is going. Right. Right. So the pro, look, there's always been this stuff. And the legalizers, whether it's drug legalizers or people who want more gambling, they say, oh, they always say the same thing. Well, you can't really stop people from doing it. And so you got to make it safe for them. Here's the problem with that. Here's the flip side of that. When you legalize it or normalize it, you wind up opening it to people who otherwise wouldn't do it. True. And let me go back to gambling, because I think it's a little bit less emotionally charged for people. Once upon a time, if you wanted to gamble legally, you'd go to Las Vegas, basically, or maybe Atlantic City after 1978. But basically, you'd go out to the desert and find that gambling. And yeah, maybe- You deal with the mob. And deal with the mob. That's right. Or if you wanted to, no, no, if you wanted to bet football, like you could probably find a book you could call a friend, you'd call the friend. And you could, but you know, who's is going to be some guy who might break your arm if you didn't pay? OK. So you could do it, but it was discouraged and not that easy. Now we have gambling in like 23 states. We have lotteries on every corner. And in just in the last five years, we have sports betting on your phone in many states. So it couldn't be easier. So what does that mean? It means it's going to wreck people who would never, it would never have been available to before. And that's just a function of freedom. Right? Well, it's OK. Freedom would be go to Vegas and do it. And we're not going to really judge you for it. But you've got to go get it. So make it less successful. That's right. This is more, we're going to promote this because both private interest and the states, state governments, make money from it. Right. Well, you could see it from their perspective, too. They're like, why should we give the revenue to Vegas? We can handle it here. Our residents should be able to gamble here. And there's a percentage. Whatever that percentage is. And I don't know if it's genetic or if it's based on personal experience in gambling. Like maybe it's like OxyContin, like Peter Burke took one. But if he took as many as Kurt Engle did, he would be physically hooked, too. That's right. Maybe there could be just you chasing bad money a couple of times. And next thing you know, you're doing it all the time. I mean, you see it. OK, you see the people who can't stop. Right. Who know who know they don't have this money, who know they're going to the credit card advance machine for the fifth time that weekend? They can't stop. So how do we balance that with the freedom to be able to do it? Like how do we say that it has to be regional? Like how do we say that you can go to Vegas. It's totally legal, but you can't gamble in Michigan. That's a fair question. I don't have a good answer to that. So is the solution that we just have to have more people available for counseling and more rehabilitation centers? Is that the solution? I don't really think that stuff works very well to me. Here's what I do think. I think putting it on people's phones is a mistake. I think putting it in every... You don't think gambling rehabilitation works or any real situation. I don't think rehabilitation works as a rule. I think when people want to stop, they stop. But you don't think that support from other human beings that have also gone through it can be beneficial in making good decisions in the future. I think for people who want to stop, that can be helpful to them. I don't think anybody who goes to rehab unwillingly or even settling willingly is gonna get much out of it. And I know this is a controversial perspective. One of the things that... So before COVID, just before COVID, I was working on a big book about... bigger than the cannabis books, but growing out of the cannabis book about drug legalization and sort of addiction in general. And the most disappointing thing that I found when I was doing this research is that when you try to do randomized trials, or you say to... You take a hundred people and you say 50 of them, you're gonna go to AA, the other 50 or not. And you look at their outcomes a year or five years later, there's no benefit even going to AA, which I really thought worked. The reason AA seems to work is that people go to it and stick with it like you say, get something out of it. But there are gonna be a bunch of people who don't get anything out of it. We're like, I don't need to give my, you know, a volition to God. This is a problem I'm gonna fix. I don't like the AA model. And by the way, why do I have to sit in this room three hours a week? So for every person who gets something out of it, there's somebody who doesn't get anything out of it. The truth is people stop using drugs or stop gambling when they personally realize that it's become a crisis for them. Sometimes though, people are motivated by other people's feedback. So is there a point of no return? Or is it, it's gotta be variable for different people? Like I think for some people, rehab is probably very beneficial, especially cause they get a chance to talk to someone who made it out of it. Let me say, who was telling us about this rehab guy that came in cracked out of his mind? I was Brian Simpson. The guy, he was like a counselor or something like that. And then one night, you just went off the wagon and came back to work at the morning and everyone's like, hey, are we supposed to pretend that you're not cracked out of your mind right now? No, but let me give it, but you laugh. But the most dangerous time for an addict is the first two weeks after they come out of rehab. Because they've stopped using their tolerances down and if they start again, that's when people OD and die the most. Oh Jesus. It's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, but then the argument against legalization, here's the problem. And you know, I've talked about this ad nauseam if you heard this, I'm sorry. When I was a kid, if someone was on heroin, that was fucking super rare. It was super rare. You would know that guy's off the deep end. Like Johnny's out there in the woods doing heroin. Like whoa, like that guy's gone. But now here, oh, my uncle got hooked on pills is super normal. Right. And now because of these documentaries, we know like what was the root cause of that. But now once it's kind of been established that this is a recreational thing for people. So what do you do? Do you outlaw and then what does that do? That, that empowers the cartels because there's the demand already. Well, so, so okay. So the roots of the opioid crisis are exactly, you know, Peter Burke, I mean, you know, that, that, that, that series is completely correct. It came out of Purdue Pharma. It came out of unfortunately some doctors, some of whom I think thought they were doing the right thing, some of whom were motivated by money. They pushed prescriptions of opioids in the US in an absolutely insane way. And we've now tried to push back, but we're still dealing with the fruits of that poison tree. Wasn't that done before in other countries to kind of ruin countries like introduce heroin? Yeah, I mean, the classic example, and you know, when people talk about how the Chinese export fentanyl to the United States, I guarantee you there are people in China who have not forgotten the opium wars. In the 19th century, the US and Britain, and this is something we should be ashamed of forever. We basically forced opium on the Chinese. And we, we destroyed that society. Well, you and I weren't alive. That's true. So I don't think we should be ashamed. But I think human beings in general have done some really fucking heinous things. We just want to pretend that they don't do them anymore. You know, no, they do. But isn't it interesting? Like it's part of the pushback of all this stuff from people that are, that have no stake in the game other than they're a human being? Is that you're saying something that shatters their narrative? They have a narrative they've established about what's good in the world, how the world, what's the right thing to do in the direction we have to go, and these people looking out for us, and these people are Nazis. And, and when you have that, and something comes along and says, hey, there, there might be something a foot here. You should pay attention. Like there's some data you should look at. We have a long history of people lying about all kinds of things. You know, whether there's the opium war, fucking everything throughout human history. But for whatever it is, like now we don't like, hey, that's not, that's, oh, this conspiracy theorist. Oh, this guy, this wacky guy with his fringe ideas, and alt-right hero, and like, oh, okay, I get it. I get it. I wish the world was perfect too. I really do. I wish there was a guy in the White House that was this amazing human being, and a shining example of what's possible from just a person, a loving person wants to take care of a nation, because they really believe in them. But this is like, you got me laughing such a bit. But it's what we want, and we never get it. We never get it. It's like fucking, it's Charlie Brown and Lucy. That football just did his yanked away every time. And we were like, shit, shit. I thought this was gonna be the adults who are in the room, shit, you know? Look, I mean, beware of the person who, you know, tells you what to do, because they know it's best for you. Yeah, that's a normal thing if you've been nature too. It's a weird thing about human nature. We're always led by someone. It's very strange, because it seems to be a part of just our programming that we've kept since we were primates in the jungles. Like, there was always a leader. There's like, if you ever watched that chimp nation show, amazing show on Netflix. These scientists were embedded in this chimpanzee group for 30 years. And so the chimpanzees had become totally comfortable with human beings, as long as they were 20 yards away. So they never moved any closer than 20 yards. The chimp moved close to them. They back away. They never have food. There's a bunch of rules about what to do and what not to do. But if you follow those rules, these chimps behave as if they're just chimps in the jungle. So it's this incredible opportunity to watch their social hierarchies. It's just like people. There's a leader. There's always a leader. There's always a leader. There's always a young people that are challenging the leader and the leader has to beat them down. And it gets to a certain point in time the leader can't do that anymore. And he has to relinquish. And it's all about the relationships they develop while they're leaders. And those are the ones that can go on the longest. That's the same thing with human beings. It's like, god damn it. It's literally our programming. And we've surpassed it in our ability to communicate and our ability to understand the variables and the amount of variables. But we still operate on the chimps. Or operate on the chimps. It's really crazy because if you watch that chimp empire show and you think of us, like, oh my god, this is what our problem is. We always want to have a leader. We always want to run things. We always want to tell other people. We get power out of telling other people what to do. Some people just get their jollies. Like, you know that if you have a bad boss and the boss like yells at all the people in the warehouse, like, oh, because it's one's a humility and being charged. Yes. They want to beat their chest and run through the fucking trees and shake them. It does sometimes feel like anybody who wants power should not be allowed to have it. Yeah. Right? Like, and the only people who should be president or people don't want that job, you know? It's like John Dutton and Yellowstone. He has to become governor. You know, it's like, it's really like fucking, it's kind of similar. Yes. Jesus Christ. But I mean, remember, the old chimps now will not leave the stage. Oh, not just the, I mean, all of them. All of them, these people are hanging in. It's amazing. With like hormone replacement and Adderall whatever else they have to take, these folks can keep going, keep in their 80s. Except that Mitch McConnell guy. No, no, he's, he's having some real ones. He's just going to fall over. He's having some real moments. Like that, if that in any other job, like imagine if you're a trained conductor and you just freeze up Charlie, Charlie, the crossroads, it's coming Charlie, Charlie's just locked up like Windows 98. Like, blue screen of that. That's gross. You got control all delete Charlie before this fucking train crashes. But you can do it if you know, you're a high ranking politician and the greatest country the world's ever known. It's very strange. You know, like Diane Feinstein doesn't want to relinquish her, her throne. But what I understand is it's also all the people that work for her too. And they all have like a whole system. It's probably not even her that's getting things done. It's a giant staff. And if she stays in office and the giant staff keeps doing what they're doing, I don't even know if it's a giant staff. But a competent staff. It's not about, no, their job's dependent on her. It's as much as Hollywood, right? Like your job depends on your relationship with the big, big guy, big woman. Right. Well, you know that lady's not making the big decisions. At this point. Nope. At this stage. That's when she started. Oh, my God. Jesus. She's kind of pretty. She was hot. The thing is, man, when you get that job is like any other job. If that's what you do, if you play football, you're used to colliding with people and scrambling for the ball, that's what you do. What they do is govern. It's like, why am I telling you? Like, why are you gonna tell Mick Jagger he can't tour anymore? That's right. Come on, man. He looks awesome out there. What are you gonna do? They're fucking politicians. What do we expect? It's, it just, that should be like fucking, there should be some sort of a cognitive test or something. At some point in time, it should be like, look, we really need. Can we give you another job? Like a second job? Like a second job? You're gonna have 35 to be present. Why shouldn't there be a top limit? Why shouldn't it be 80 or something? I mean, it's some reasonable number. Why don't we move like the elder statesman into a different bracket and like advisors, have them be advisors to discuss policy? They're year wouldn't that be great? If like the senators could go and meet with the advisors are still around, belt back in the two colleges, those initiatives with 4G. You know, like, this, you know, I mean, there's gotta be a way to do it where you have like more vibrant people representing whatever they're representing. Yes. But it's also, they don't wanna relinquish power and they've got a really good grip on it now. It's really, if you wanna run a country like within the rules and kind of dominate it, they've done an amazing job. Because they've done it all within the rules. It's like, it's pretty clever. Yes. It's like, when you download Chump is talking about not paying taxes, yes. You know, it's like, yeah, you guys set it up like that. So I don't have to pay taxes. I'm gonna take advantage of it. Yes. Yes. It's like, it makes sense. Well, I mean, so this is a good, I mean, it's a good segue into a lot of things, but it's also a good segue into sort of COVID and pharma and those guys because they are masters at going to the edge of the line, going to the gray area. Right. They don't necessarily lie, although sometimes I think when they're forced to, they will lie, but they shade the truth, they run studies in a way that determines, you know, that gets them to the outcome they want, they use friendly doctors to promote. You saw it with pharma, with Purdue pharma, with the with oxygen, with the opioids. You saw this in spades and we're seeing it again right now with the mRNA vaccines. So these companies, they know they're very, they're very legally wise and they play games. And they're allowed to. And they're allowed to. And that's their job, right? That's what's interesting. Well, they're doing a whole new stuff. That's their job. Well, there's one guy's job, and that guy's job is to invent medicine. I mean, not one guy. Yeah, but there's one group of cures. And then the other people, that job is to sell it. The job's get it out there. In the very different kinds of thought processes, I would imagine. And that's part of the problem with like business and medicine when they're together. It's like either we're looking out for each other or we're trying to make insane amounts of wealth from each other. That's right. Because those things are like, that's two ways to look at the health care for a country. Either we say the whole reason the system is in place is to make sure that everybody is healthy. And if you get injured, we can help you. If you could do it that way, that would be wonderful. The other way to do it is saying, we got to fucking get you on as much shit as possible because the more stuff we sell to you, the more money we make. And if there's a reason to recommend it, we're going to recommend it because you want to make our reps happy. Want to make the hospital happy. And unfortunately, that seems to be real too. It's very real. So that's real too. So that's a real possibility in today's modern age. And I'm sure there are people that fall into the former. I'm sure there's, I mean, I'm no doctors that are great human beings and they really enjoy being able to help people. Yes. It's not, it's just like, it's just that's how a system works when a system has the opportunity to make more money by doing certain things. It's like, it's not the scientists that are doing trying to, it's like, there's a whole system. It's, so what the drug companies, and I think this is true of doctors too, it's not that they want people to get better. I do believe that, okay? But once you've invested a billion or two billion dollars in a drug and you've brought it to market and it's got an FDA approval, you're going to do whatever you can to protect it. And that means generally exaggerating its benefits and if there are problems with it, doing everything you can to hide those problems. And that's almost like a fiscal responsibility. If you're a shareholder who trades that's right, that's really crazy. That's what's really crazy. What's really crazy about it is that money and medicine are all combined. And it's not saying that doctors don't deserve money or that people that develop medicines don't deserve money, they certainly do. They work really hard. What I am saying is when you have anything that gets wrapped up in a lot of money, people want to make more. They want to make more. Like how do I make more? I don't like making X amount. I want to make why. How do I get to why? What do I have to do? I have to sell this, I have to do that. I've got to make some unnecessary these or those and do a few things to people that maybe they need. Yes. And it's okay, because maybe a benefit to them, it probably doesn't hurt them that much. You justify it. And then there's real things that people about working in spirit sees. Real things like incentives. And that showed up during the pandemic as well, that they got paid per case for people that had COVID. And they got paid per COVID deaths. And they got, the whole thing was weird. It's like if you financially incentivize the treatment of a pandemic disease, that's seeing, like I understand that hospitals have to make money. But isn't there a fear that you label something COVID death, you get more money, that people would use that on things that weren't necessarily COVID, especially if there's nowhere oversight. Oh, yeah, of course. They're not combing through your fucking books. And if the worst thing that happens if they do comb through your books is you have to pay some of it back. All the incentives. That's right, exactly. We just, we upcoated a little bit here. We cheated a little bit there. We'll give you a check. We're not talking about it on the podcast. And people said he was making it up. Nope. He was not making it up. He was saying if you've got bit by a shark, and you have COVID, they would call it a COVID death. Yes, it's like what? And this is still going on, Joe. This going on till 2025. If you're a family member and you're, and you can get a family member who died to be classified as a COVID death, you get up to $9,000 for their funeral expenses. You submit it to FEMA, they cut your check. And so of course, those families want, you know, they want $9,000, who wouldn't. I mean, yeah, it's $3,000. Your loved ones already gone. Yes. The whole thing is just so slippery because yeah, you would, if in, you know, if everything was perfect, you would say maybe it would be good to help these people the funeral. Maybe you would be good if you... But why is COVID different than anything else? If you could question. Why do you get nine grand for COVID and nothing else? Right. What do you think would it be like if people started promoting that for obese folks? If you're obese and you die, you're getting confused. That's Indian. It was bankrupt the federal government. Grandma was obese. You know, like, you just like, people respond to incentives. When there's money, companies respond to... Not fortunately, right? Everybody is really... Yeah, I mean, I guess, unfortunately, I mean, look, it's why we have this, you know, all these great things in this country too. But yeah, I will give you... So an ophthalmologist called me a few weeks ago, there's a drug and the drug works, okay? It's good for people. If something called wet macular degeneration, okay, it's something older people get and it can blind you. So there's a couple of drugs that actually work for it. They block the flow of... They block blood vessel formation at the back of the eye. They help you. So these are administered... Ophthalmologists administer them in their offices. So a drug like that, the ophthalmologist actually buys and charges Medicare or the private insurer for. Okay, what's happening... And I saw this with a different drug when I worked in the New York Times 15 years ago. So nothing ever changes. These companies all play the same games, is that the companies that make this drug are giving doctors a rebate on the purchase price. And the more you use, the bigger the rebate. And this is a drug that costs thousands of dollars per person per year. Okay, it's dose multiple times a year for a lot of these people. So what all this adds up to is if you're an ophthalmologist who's using a lot of this, the company is cutting you in check for five or sometimes six figures. Sometimes multiple times a year. Okay, don't tell me that's not a bribe. Okay, because that's a bribe. It may be legal. They may have found a way to do this. And he showed me the check that his company, or that his ophthalmology practice had received, and it was huge. Okay, and by the way, these doctors make a lot of money on their own just doing the procedure. They don't need this, but it's a way for the drug company to get them to use this more. There's corruption all over our medical system. How does that get resolved? Is there a way at this point, or is it the system itself? Is it just a function of that's how human beings behave when they have enough regulation where they can get away with some stuff, and they just want to make more and more money, and it just becomes, that's what they're trying to do. I mean, I don't know. I mean, is this human beings? I mean, if you're that ophthalmologist in Florida, do you need another Ferrari? Maybe you don't think that way. You don't think that way. You just think I can get it. And I'm in this system and the system is focked already. That's right. And I'm using this drug, because I know it works, and it's good for patients. The problem is you're then having incentives to ignore the problem if there is one later. And so in this case, It's good for patients. The problem is you're then you're then having incentives to ignore the problem if there is one later. And so in this case, the guy actually said to me, he's like, this is a good drug. It does work. He said, but sometimes if we dose it too many times, we can get there can be sort of a paradoxical effect where it stops working. If you're one of those doctors who's on the tit and getting that check every quarter or every six months or however frequently you're going to it's going to be harder for you to see the problem because all of a sudden you have a financial incentive not to see it. Right. I know we do better any of this. Except talk about it and make sure people know. Talk about it and make sure people know and you know you need senators that call this stuff out. And we need you know, you need people that run these companies to be just to have ethical boundaries. You know because they make great stuff. The thing about pharmaceutical drug companies is like I would never say we don't need them. That's crazy. I mean people they've helped. You know, many drugs, the pharmaceutical companies that we currently demonize because of this thing, this for profit aspect of it. But how many of them have brought drugs to the market that have fixed all sorts of problems that people have been suffering for forever. Yeah. They just can't go ham. They can't go crazy and force people to take your stuff. Like that's a bad relationship. A good relationship is a consumer and a provider and the provider develops these drugs that are very beneficial to people and most of them are a lot of them are. Right. So some of them are. But they do have drugs that they've developed that are really beneficial for people. They really do. They're real. And we can't fucking throw out the bait with the bathwater. I just think that it just happened. The problem is also the process, right? Because to bring a drug to market costs so much fucking money. It costs it crazy. It's so prohibited for most if you were like some pharmacologist or some biologist and you guys were working together and you developed something. You got this idea about a pathway and you figured out something and maybe this could fix it and you really figured it out. Sure. It's good fucking luck. Right. Good luck. Right. Getting that thing approved. Well, what I mean, one of the great disappointments for me in the last 10 years is realizing that if you had to choose between a sewer system and a medical system, you'd choose a sewer system. Like another, in other words, what's more efficient. What actually helps human health more? The great gains for human longevity in the last 200 years have been really simple things. Clean water. Try to get the air clean. Don't bury, you know, don't have like meatpacking plants in the middle of the cities. Don't don't have giant graveyards in the middle of cities. Like that stuff. You seem to have your red dissolving illusions. I have not. It's a fantastic book about just that. And the beginning of it is they talk about the conditions that people lived in because you never really think about it. Like what would it be like to live in a city before there were cars? Well, guess what? Or a shoe, but nothing gets to you. You're not getting fresh vegetables in the winter. You're not getting vitamins. That's right. It is massive malnutrition, starvation, extreme poverty, people living in squaller. Terrible sanitation. I mean, open outhouses for entire blocks of people. Yep. And just crazy diseases. Yep. And they all lives on top of each other. And again, malnutrition, vitamin D, you know, sunlight exposure in the winter, etc. etc. And a lot of those people get horrible diseases because of that just like they did in the olden times. Like we know about when people dump shit in the streets. So that became like the like 18, the first, you know, the first few decades of the industrial revolution were terrible for human health. Like people got, you know, they got crammed together. They got sicker. And then about 1850, they started to figure this stuff out for a hundred years. Like we did great. Okay. But it wasn't really medicine. It was really more basic than that. And so the last 50, 60, 70 years we spent more and more and more money on medicine trying to like continue that growth in life expectancy. And it turns out like there are limits to it. There are just limits. And we seem to be reaching them. And the problem is in the US anyway, we're now spending so much money and having so many unnecessary medical procedures of marginal value. I'm not even talking about the cost. I'm talking about like value to people that we seem to have topped out. And this is like a really depressing thing to realize that that ultimately like once people get to be about 80, there's just not that much you can do for them. Unless you're Vince McMahon. You've seen what he looks like. He's 78 years old. He's a little jacked. He goes to Jim at three o'clock in the morning, sleeps two hours and nine. So there's that canary in the coal mines. That's right. Let's see. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's only four years from now. But the reality is you're right. It's so, you know, it's just, but it's also there's a lot of complicated factors in being healthy. They don't all involve medicine. No. And it's not just said it there is. You're joking. No, no, that's legit. I think he was 76 or the 74 that so is four years ago. I still Jack. That's ridiculous. Wow. Modern science. Right there, baby. Look at that. Look at him. Jack 76, 78 year old man. It's just a stacked. He keeps it rolling. The train kept rolling with him. Yeah, man. There's a lot going on with people's health. And the reality is we rightly should attribute a lot of it to medicine. It's great. They did a lot of great stuff. But also there's a lot of other factors. And the factor with like plagues is like the sanitation systems that we had in this country at the beginning of the 19th century, they were horrible, horrible, horrible, horrible, I mean, every real type of terrible disease. It's all gangs in New York. People forget. You think in New York, do you think it like Fifth Avenue? What amazing place to visit? The fact that it was horrific. Little Johnny came home with a cold and the next day was dead. Yeah. Terrific. Yeah. People would just die and left him, right? You know, one thing that I also found out that was fascinating was about the Spanish flu. You know, the Spanish flu killed so many people, right? It killed a shit ton of people. But they said that what it killed people from is not actually the flu itself, but the side diseases that come with it and that you could have cured those with antibiotics. Back to pneumonia. Yep. That's true. Back to Errol pneumonia. And what was the other one? There was another one. I think that angitis. That may be, that may be. Was it that? But they said they could have cured those with antibiotics. So if that that happened to it, like the fear was always if the Spanish flu happened today. But because medical science has progressed, if that's the same flu came around today, they would actually be able to save the mortality. It would probably be much lower. No, if there's a bad flu or bad, you know, another coronavirus, you I can just about guarantee you that will come out of a lab. Just like this one did. This is a conspiracy theory. And this is getting you kicked off YouTube. It's not a conspiracy theory to say it came out of a lab. Isn't it funny that it used to be? Used to be racist to say it used to be something wrong with you. Did you did an amazing job of gaslighting people? I didn't say it was made in a lab. I said it came out of a lab. Yes. And it did. Okay. So well, it seems like the people in the lab were patients zero. Right. They were fucking around with the coronavirus. They were trying to make it more dangerous or trying to make vaccine a pan coronavirus vaccine. And they didn't, you know, somebody slipped or somebody accidentally injected a ferret when they were supposed to inject a mouse. And it all started there. Most likely. Yes. Most likely. Yeah. It's just that's weird how little outrage there is about that. Yes. By the way, if it came out of a cave, it came out of a cave when some idiot who shouldn't have been in the cave was poking around, swabbing a bath's asshole to try to like find a virus. So either way, it's the fault of our effort. We did this. Okay. Is there any benefit from that kind of research? No, it just won't be stopped. Period. Do they just do it because that's what they do. Yes. Just like we do research. And I want to do research on coronaviruses and how to make a more infectious. Yes. It should always stop. It's useless. Okay. You want the proof that it's useless? Did you hear anybody predict this was going to happen before it happened? It's been 10 years trying to figure out what was going to happen. But is there any benefit in understanding those things so that they can develop drugs to combat them? Probably no. And also there's a problem with that because you literally have a thing where you have a cure for a thing. And if that thing gets out, then you can sell that cure. If you're doctor evil, you're going to fucking open the hatch. That's right. No, they would hope nobody would ever do that. But you would hope. But there's been people in the world that have done some horrible, like we know Hitler was a real guy. We know that was like that. It never happened again. Are you fucking sure? Are you totally sure? There's been genocide since then. It seemed like the only way to, boy, I mean, we have to figure out a way to like catch up to our abilities, like catch up as a species. I don't know how. I mean, so the last we have the ability to like affect so many people in negative ways with whether or if it's drugs and all sorts of things that we do. Did you see Oppenheimer the movie? I haven't seen it yet. It's pretty great. Okay. Her name is. And so I read the book. It's based on which is also pretty amazing. That was a case. Those guys unbelievable. They just like, they looked inside the atom with their minds. It's unbelievable. They figured out how this works. And then they took metal and they fired. They made the sun. Okay. They made an explosion like the sun. They figured it out in a matter of years. It was so scary to people. The threat that nuclear weapons posed that we actually kind of got it under control. We never used them again after 1945, which is really astonishing. It's pretty amazing. So when the threat is obvious enough that like you can eliminate a city in seconds are low lizard brains. We figure something out. The problem is with these viruses, it's a little more marginal. It's not as obvious. And so we have these people just continuing to mess around with them. I hate to take you off track. But when the nuclear bombs were first detonated in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And I think with some of the tests too, right after that is when people started seeing a lot of UFOs. That's like the folklore behind UFOs. They all started coming after 47. Huh. Yeah. I did not know that. Yeah. So I would ask you, what the fuck is going on? What the fuck is going on? When you see all this UAP stuff and all these people that are whistleblowers and they're talking about crashed retrieval programs where they recovered crashed UFOs and back engineer them like, what's going on? So I'm not a believer in this. And let me tell you what. Please, okay. You are an alien. Okay. You have super hyper advanced technology. You can you can go faster than speed of light. You can get to earth. You can figure out that this one little planet has other human beings or has other, you know, life forms on it that you want to go see. Okay. Right. Right. You do that. Then you crash or stupid UFO into the desert. Yeah. I have a problem with that. One one one more point on this. Okay. What happened with the Titan Submersible? Okay. That thing went down and basically they knew. Okay. Within hours that it was blown up. Okay. They still were human beings. We try to rescue other human beings. Okay. The aliens are going to try to rescue other aliens. If there's been a crash, they're not going to try to come get them. So you tell me, you tell me why it's always in the desert in Arizona. They never show up the White House. They never show up in Times Square. Why? There have been places where large groups of people seen it. And there was a place in Brazil, a vargina Brazil. And there's a very interesting documentary about it called Moment of Contact. And there was a crash. There was a the crazy lightning storm. And there was a crash. And they claim that there was actual live beings. And one of these guys took one of these beings to a hospital. They refuse that brought to another hospital. I think they want to bring you to a third hospital. The guy who is carrying this alien supposedly. But this is a fact. This guy died of some incurable bacterial disease that they had no hope of fixing. Like it just overcame his body and he was dead very quickly. He was a young I think he's dead in less than two weeks. And they were tripping that to him carrying this fucking alien. So whatever the, whatever the body, the alien body, I don't know. They say that the United States Air Force flew a jet. And this is in the documentary. They said that flew a jet to vargina Brazil to recover whatever this thing was because they have a, you know, recover retrieval program. Who the fuck knows, man? Every time I even say it, I sound so dumb. I listen to myself like, you believe this? Do you believe this? But I do think we just crashed in F 35. That's true. There's a guy that fucking eject out of his jet. And they're like, hey, if anybody sees one of our $800 million jets call this hotline. This is what I'm saying. Like that's us. And that's the pinnacle of like modern technology. Maybe if you just have their saucers over washing, do you see what year was that June? 52. Yeah. It was a newspaper article where they had, they apparently they photographed. Yeah, someone tried to shoot it one. But what does that mean? What does that mean? And you know, when someone tells a story like that, you know, maybe they did see something. I mean, how much of it do they remember? How much of the embellished? So I were there. But there are fighter jets. Fighter jets that have encountered them. I believe those guys. Sober, sober like American heroes. Yes. Like David Framer. Yes. That story isn't saying. But I tend to think more than ever that it's a drone and that there's some sort of a drone program that they've kept secret. That is completely powerful. That all believe. And if I had a drone program that can do wild shit, like go hypersonic speeds and hover dead still in midair and operated without any visible method of propulsion, I would start talking about aliens too. I don't like dude, they're here. We don't even know what they are. They're off road vehicles like or excuse me, off world vehicles. So we and then people would go, Oh, yeah, aliens are here. But meanwhile, what it is is we have super sophisticated tech that your tax dollars have paid for without you having any idea it exists for your own protection. So you don't believe in aliens. I do and I don't. Why do in, you know, of course, these are the fermi paradox. Like if they're out there, where are they? How can we them see them? But how much can we look? That's like a guy poking his head out of a tent going, I don't see any bear. How fucking much do you look at? How much are you really paying attention? There's a hundred billion stars in this galaxy alone. There's hundreds of billions of galaxies and then no universe. Like what are you talking about? Like, I'm not saying they're not out there. I'm just saying they're not interested in us. Most certainly think they would be interested in us. A monster. We like, we're these fucking idiots. Right. Well, the same way we go to the Congo and film for a chimp empire. It's really not that much different. The same way we go to butterfly habitats and study butterflies. Like human beings are fascinated by some of the most primitive of creatures. Yes. You know, a long thought instinct fox becomes a major news story amongst academics. When people can go and travel to exotic places, and especially biologists, and study these animals, you know, like, you ever read Sapolsky's work with the baboons? Oh, fast and ending stuff. Sapolsky, who's from Stanford, right? Do you stand for it? Just brilliant guy who's done all this crazy work about toxoplasmosis. Are you aware of that? Toxoplasmosis, isn't that? It's one of the reasons why they tell women and not handle kitty litter. Toxoplasmosis is a cat parasite that grows in a cat's gut. And when it gets on rats, it rewires the rat's sexual reward system and makes the rats sexually attracted to cat urine. And it removes their fear of cats so that the devour the rats because the only way that that parasite can reproduce is inside a cat's gut. So the parasite reproduces inside the cat's gut comes out and cat shit and then people get and people get it from cat shit. You might get it from an open wound. You might get it from handling it. But when people get it, it makes them more reckless. He said there's a disproportionate number of motorcycle victims, crash victims that are toxoplasmosis infected. At one point time, France was like 50% of the people had toxoplasmosis. And that wild? And it changes behavior. It affects behavior. Okay. I did not know anything. And it's a fucking parasite that like half a population of a countryhead. It's a good story. I'm gonna have feral cats. So point is, we study all kinds of shit. Weird parasites and fucking monkeys and giraffes and everything. There it is. Toxoplasmosis is considered to be a leading cause of death attributed to foodborne illness in the United States. More than 40 million men, women and children in the US carry the toxoplasm parasite. But very few symptoms because the immune system usually keeps the parasite. This is like if you have HIV late stage or something, you winds up killing interest. It's an interesting, right? It's a very bizarre parasite. But we study fucking penguins, man. Because they all look the same. The march of the penguins is, you know, people study them. They love to watch organisms. Do you don't think they'd want to watch us? Yeah, but ultimately we mess around with those penguins. The aliens would mess around with us. I think they might be. I think they might have made us. They might have made us. We might really be a biology project. It's not a joke. If you think about the, there's weird thing with primates and us. We're so far past them. Yes. We are so in another dimension of reality with communication, with our ability to create technology and alter the world. We're in a weird place. Like how do we get here so quick? Like how did that happen? How the doubling of the human brain size, the biggest mystery and entire front, the entire biological record had that happen over two million years. Human brain size doubles. People start walking upright and talking to each other. What happened? And they find was an asshole for another planet. And I came down here. I'd be like, you know, it's like when people take it, they take a wolf and they breed it with a chowabax. There's their addict. You want to see what it looks like. I wonder if they would do that to us. When they come and they'd say, you know what we could do, I just add a little of this to these things. These crazy shit throwing. Why? Why? Just give them a taste of alien DNA, alter some stuff here and there. You know, just see how it works. Do a couple different versions of it. Do you know what I'm getting from this conversation? Joe Rogan. What? That COVID is definitely over. Yeah. I mean, it's it's here. Take care of yourself and it's a cold. Nobody wants to say that. It's like it's like this for Bowdoin thing. Come on kids. Let's be real about it. Let's be real about it now. Yes. You know, and if you that Kathy Hochel thing, which she was on TV saying, you know, you have to get this is this is a new vaccine. The old one's not going to work for it. Like she's always saying what the CDC just said. It's crazy. Okay. So COVID is over. Okay. But here's what I'm telling you. And like I guess I'm going to be stuck beating this drone for I don't know how long. We do not know what the long term effects of the mRNA vaccines are. And it is it is I would go beyond borderline. I would say it is immoral and unethical to keep using those right now. Okay. There if you're going to insist on giving people COVID vaccines, there are simpler, cheaper ones that don't have this question about what they do long term. The mRNA is at this point in me. They're a failed product and they basically should be withdrawn. It will never happen. There's far, far too much at stake for both the pharmaceutical industry and public health and the Democratic Party and the media to even consider allowing that to happen. But the promise, Joe, the promise two and a half years ago was these vaccines are new. They're going to revolutionize the treatment of respiratory viruses. They're going to eliminate COVID. Don't let them tell you you that's not what they said because it is what they said. Okay. Not there may be some symptom reduction. It may reduce cases of serious illness. No, it was these are so effective. We're going to get the herd immunity with them. And COVID is not going to be a problem ever again. That was total horseshit. And we can't let them forget it. Yeah. And I know I know this is boring. I know there's only like a few people who care. But it's so important. No, I think a lot of people care. I don't think it's a few people. It's just uncomfortable. All these things are so uncomfortable. You know, it's the reality that people would sell things that don't work just to make money and they could put your risk. But it's like if they can, they will. If they have it for sale, it's like going to get this stuff off the shelves. Come on. We've been developing this. We developed this thing for the variants. So this is a number. Didn't they just test it on 10 mice? Yes. Pfizer literally 10 mice. Yes. Not a joke. There were five billion doses so far of the mRNA is made. Okay. About a hundred billion dollars sold by Pfizer. No, a little bit more. A hundred and a hundred and ten hundred and twenty billion dollars sold by Pfizer and Moderna combined. Okay. My best estimate and I haven't been able to lock it down because the numbers are really hard to find. Two billion of those five billion doses were thrown away unused. The companies made somewhere between $40, $50 billion on vaccine that just got tossed. It was a pure gift to the companies. $40 billion. Wow. Now that that even by American pharmaceutical standards, that's a lot of money. It's a lot of money to waste. Yeah. Jeez. Because nobody wanted them. They made Pfizer made 75 billion in 2021 and 2022 Moderna made close to 40. They made some more this year. How is much? But yeah, it's a lot of money. Wow. Yeah. It's hard to turn. That's big it off. That's good. And it's hard to tell the truth when there's that much money. Well, can you though, if you put something out and you like again, we're bringing this back to the obligation to your shareholders and how to run a corporation versus like what's the right thing to do, right? If you have something and you haven't been called out for it, and there seems to be like enough gaslighting going on in the media that sort of obscures the reality of it, you're supposed to keep selling it. I mean, if that's what your company does, right? I'm not saying it's good, but I'm saying like, if you don't know, there's a problem, then you don't know. There's a problem. And if you don't look to find the problem, then you don't know. Right. So you don't look. So you don't look. That's the game. Boy, I wish that wasn't the game. I wish the game was we want to make medicine to make you feel better. And if that medicine doesn't work, we try to come up with a new one. Sorry. That's right. No, that's not the game. It's just isn't it sort of just the amount of money involved in developing one of those things, the incentives to pass it through regardless of whether or not it's effective are so strong. Yes. Because you're so in the fucking red before you could get out of the gate. Yeah. Before you get out of the gate, yeah, you're into this thing, a billion dollars or whatever. That's right. And the flip side of that is it's so profitable on a per unit basis because it takes a few cents to make. And then you could sell it for, you know, $5 or $50 or $500. So the per unit profit, once you get, once you earn your nut back is phenomenal. Phenomenal. So, you know, I'm suing the government, right? I'm suing, I'm suing, I'm suing people say that to you all casual. You know, I'm suing the government. It's something I'm right. Oh, that's cool. But I'm also suing the chief executive of Pfizer and one of the board members of Pfizer on the same suit. So they've, they've responded and they've, you know, it's called the motion to dismiss, they want the lawsuit gone. Okay. One of the things they say in the lawsuit is that I have been fundraising and I have a sub stack and I've been merchant doesn't, which I've been merchant doesn't have this shirt is, is my own printed, Borla is the CEO of Pfizer, Fauci, we all know, Gottlieb is on the Pfizer board and Slav it is somebody else I'm suing. You have a t-shirt on like you're a YouTube streamer. I do. I do. I do. But for clicks. But, but so, so, so Pfizer's lawyers have said or Borla's lawyers, Albert Borla, the CEO of Pfizer. As I like to call on the world's favorite veterinarian because he's not a doctor. He's a, he's a doctor veterinarian medicine, which is fine. We need those. But yeah, absolutely. But, but you know what? He's sort of treated the world like livestock. But, but Borla is trying to get this lawsuit dismissed and he's saying, Barrenson's making all this money. Listen, buddy, your company made 70 billion dollars selling the vaccines and you personally had your salary double from 18 million to 33 million almost double from 2020 to 2022. So don't call me the grifter, my friend, when you're the one who's made more money than anyone can imagine on these vaccines. Well, he's calling you grifter because you're making money from what? Because I have a subset and because I've raised money to write about other things in sub stack. You write about many things. I do. But no, no, I mean, you would say right a lot about, I would, you know, I write a lot about the COVID and the vaccines. Yeah. But, you know, the whole thing is that having that as an argument seems kind of crazy. Like, it should be based on whether or not he's right. That's right. And also like, why did you guys get him kicked off Twitter? Like, who did that and what? Who who talked to who and how did that go down? Well, that's a, you know, so that's what the lawsuits about. But, but I know, I know that this guy Scott Gottlieb who's, get this Joe Scott Gottlieb between 2017 and 2019 was the commissioner of the FDA. He quit the FDA and three months later, exactly three months, the minimum amount of time later, he joined the Pfizer board where he's a senior board member where they pay him about $400,000 a year. That sounds like a sweet gig. It is a nice gig for a couple of meetings. So, good move. So, Scott Gottlieb has earned his paycheck with Pfizer though because he in August of 2021 made a call to a senior lobbyist at Twitter. And within a few hours, I had gotten my fifth strike and I was kicked off Twitter. That you kicked off for specific. I mean, we can find the tweet, but you just tell me. But the exact words were it doesn't stop infection or transmission. Think of it at best as a therapeutic that needs to be diagnosed in advance of infection and has bad side effects. And we want to mandate it insanity. That was the entire tweet. Every word of that is true. Let me tell you what was really happening. Okay, we can, we can talk about the vaccines and the approval process and the hype around them and the hope around them in early 2021. And you can make a good case that, hey, there were people just trying to get out of the pandemic. All right, by the summer of 2021, everything changed. Everybody who knew where to look, which was really Israel could see that the vaccines were not working for very long. That the, while it is real data was important because first of all, they were first. They were first to vaccinate small country. They've actually almost everybody by the end of January. And were they very open about their data. They were. And you can read stories from the spring of 2021 talking about the miracle how COVID went to zero in Israel, basically, because there is this short period of time after those first two doses, when you do actually prevent infection. Okay, I don't think, I don't think anybody who looks at the data can dispute that. I know there's some people to do, but I don't think there's anybody who can really dispute that. Okay, then what happens is your antibodies go away and it comes roaring back. And you also often provoke a new variant, which is what happened in the summer of 2021, the Delta variant sort of came roaring along. So by July of 2020, can you explain to people that don't understand how that could be. a new variant, which is what happened in the summer of 2021, the Delta variant, you know, sort of came roaring along. So by July of 2020, can you explain to people that don't understand how that could be possible? Sure. How does a vaccine promote a variant? So these vaccines, specifically, these MRNA's cause a very focused immune response. And what they do is they make your body make a specific version of the spike protein, which is, you know, the part of the coronavirus that attaches to your cells and gets the virus into your cells. So the idea is your body makes a spike, your body recognizes the spike as an invader. It makes antibodies against the spike. And then if you actually are hit with the coronavirus, if you're infected with it, you've got this great head start where your body's antibodies can can attack the coronavirus and keep it from infecting any of your cells. You don't get infected. You beat it. Okay. That's, that's, I mean, that's the basic theory of the vaccine. Okay. The problem is the virus, quote unquote, knows what's happening. The virus, the virus is going to mutate. There are just going to be errors in its genome over time. These MR, these RNA viruses are notorious for this. They, when they replicate their, they, they make mistakes. And some of those mistakes in the genome, lead the virus to look a little bit differently. The spike to look a little bit different. And then the antibodies can't attach as well. If you're, if you're a virus that's mutated and you have these different antibodies, you have an advantage, the advantage is suddenly you can infect people again. Guess what? That version of the virus is going to take off and accelerate. So that's, that's a very natural process. Here's, here's one thing nobody sort of thinks about, which is we really stop mass vaccinating people in late 2021, early 2022, the rate of variance slowed way down last year and into this year, the Amacon came. But since then, there hasn't been another major variant class. Is there any dispute in this? Because there was a conversation that I got in with a friend of mine at the very beginning of the pandemic. And he was trying to tell me that his doctor was telling him that it was the unvaccinated people that were causing variance. No. And I sent him some YouTube videos. I'm like, this is what I've read. And what is his name? Girk Vanderbauch. Yes. He's a, an expert in, what is he? He's an epidemiologist or forget what he is. He's something to do with vaccines. Yes. But he understands the whole pathway. It's like you never mass vaccinate during a pandemic, yes, especially with something that doesn't offer. That's leaky. Yes. Yeah. Yes. Complete. So, so I mean, that's why you give people the flu vaccine before flu season. Ideally, you do not mass vaccinate during a pandemic. So, but so in the summer of 2021, everything went to shit from the point of view of the Biden administration and to a lesser extent of the vaccine companies. Okay. The vaccine companies were more aware that this was going to happen. But remember, the Bidenates and you can find, I can find your clip of Fauci in May 2021 saying this is over. Like, I think we can eliminate this. He said that on the record. They were caught with their pants down and their response was twofold. One, we're going to try to get everyone boosted. We're going to try to scare people into getting boosted or encourage people who to get boosted, which they knew or should have known was only going to buy them a matter of months, but they didn't care. They just wanted to do something. The other part though was even worse, and that was the mandates. Okay. The mandates were unforgivable, unforgivable constitutionally, unforgivable medically. And here, this is unfortunately what I've concluded about the mandates. You know what else was happening in August 2021? Afghanistan collapsed. Okay. And I don't know if you remember, but I'm sure you can find it that there's a picture of Joe Biden sitting alone in the situation room looking at TVs and he looks like he looks completely lost. Okay. We left Afghanistan in July by August. There were the Taliban was in Kabul and we were, you know, Marines were getting killed and Afghans were trying to get on airplanes. It was terrible. Okay. Here's the thing about the mandates. Let's, let's just pretend the vaccines actually work for a long period of time. Okay. And let's pretend that 90% of older people hadn't been vaccinated, which they had been. Okay. So let's pretend that there was an actual justification for these mandates. What were they, Joe? They were workplace mandates. The government couldn't directly make old people get vaccinated. So they said we're going to have workplace mandates. Who is in the workforce? Healthy adults under 65. So there was no possibility that the mandates could actually affect the population most at risk from COVID and get them vaccinated. They were designed not to work, but to be something that the president could say he was doing at a time when he looked completely incompetent because of what had happened in Afghanistan. That is my true belief about this. That's it. That's it. You need something that is not that picture. Jesus. That was August. I don't know if that's the case, but I do know that I mean, if you have a vaccine that protects the people that take it, what is, what is the why you've mandating it for the people that won't be protected? That's right. If it does work, that's right. You should probably encourage people to take it if it works, but the people that don't take it. Hey, let those people get sick. If that's what they want to do, like is that that's right. And they'll figure it out because who are they going to get sick? Just other people that have them and that's that's if it really works. That's right. That's right. And then people would eventually catch on. Right. And then they would figure it out. Like you don't have to mandate it. Right. So there was this theory that there was this young people who for whom the vaccine hadn't been approved yet, but that was of course a complete lie because young people are not at high risk from COVID. The only the only exception to that is there's a small number of people who are seriously immunocompromised. I'm talking about people who have chemotherapy, people who have, you know, really sick. And those people don't necessarily have a strong immune response to the vaccine. So you say, you say, okay, our theory is we're going to make everybody get vaccinated protect those people. Here's the problem with that. That's not how we practice medicine. You don't practice medicine on a group basis. I was talking with my friends today about it. I was like, imagine if for some reason we were actually talking about fluoride in the water, but it's a similar analogy. Imagine if some people were more susceptible to skin cancer. So we put sunscreen and apples like people would go, no, I want to fucking just a regular apple. No, no, no, you need this. It's for everyone. We have to protect the other people that are vulnerable. So this is how apples come now because people love apples. What kind of craziness is this? You guys put medicine in the apples? I mean, the thing about fluoride in the in the entering water is a very, very, very, I don't know that there's any risk to it at all. But that's what the standard has to be. But you know that there's there's a associated lower IQs. It's that F higher floor. That I did not know. Yeah, we found it out the other day. We're trying to figure it out. Like, we're like, why does why is fluoride in the water? Like, I've heard wacky conspiracy theories. Like, the wackiest ones is like, it's to make people dumber and more docile. But what I'm telling you is you're mandating this not for the people who are at risk, but for adults in the workplace who are not at risk. What is the logic there? Right. It is just to make that man look like he's doing something. Do you really think that's it? I do because I can't imagine there are people who are so in the throes of that thing. I think people when when COVID was in, it's just full phase. And there was a heightened, it's hard for us to remember because I think it was very traumatic. It's a, you know, because when when you have a situation, like, you know, it's like people after 9, 11, their memory is very fog. Yep. Right. COVID is very traumatic in a way that like was a long, slow drip of trauma in a weird way where it gave people horrible anxiety. There's a invisible thing that's going to kill us all. And you got to stay in your house, you got to take the medicine and get boosted. I don't think people got off that ride. No, they didn't. And maybe you're right. And maybe I'm giving the White House too much credit. Maybe they were just afraid and stupid. But you go, it was the mindset of the country to do something. And if you got vaccinated, you were a good person. Yes. And if you didn't, you remember like people saying like you're pointing to loaded gun at someone's head if you're not vaccinated. Joe, I'm not vaccinated. I mean, not against this. I know mRNA, no COVID vaccine. I believe me. I remember fine the statement that Biden made is either September 8th or September 9, 2021 where he said it was the White House. It was when he announced the mandates. He said, we have lost patients with the unvaccinated. And there's there's one from a, I think that was him taking control. I do. But it's also what you're saying. There was real fear. But I mean, imagine that, imagine trying to divide the country like that. The wildest one was the White House statement that said the unvaccinated will experience the winter of severe illness, the winter of severe illness and death. Yeah. Patients is wearing thin. Yeah. I remember that. We've been patient, but our patients is wearing thin. That's so crazy. If it already was proven that it didn't work, you know, people didn't one person get COVID while they were in the test. I mean, more than one, but but there definitely what happened was during the clinical trials, which only lasted a couple of months, that's that period when the vaccines really worked. There is this short period when you have a tremendous number of antibodies and you don't really get sick. And that's what the data showed. But it didn't show anything else. And that's why they have to have long term studies long term studies. Yes. But we didn't have the luxury of long term studies. So they seem to have we do work. Not two. It's just the weird thing was the ignoring of natural immunity. That was very true. That's another weird way. Not just ignoring, but I had intelligent people that I respect trying to convince me that I should get vaccinated right after I recovered from COVID. And I was like, well, I don't think that scientific. I think if you read the data, it shows you that you have a much higher level of immunity from recovering it from it naturally. That's the data. I'm not just encouraging people to go get COVID. But I'm saying that that was what the data said. So like, and then while you get even more protected, if you get vaccinated, I'm like, okay, but is that more risks? Like, what is the risk factor now? Like, is it because that's what I've heard. There's like an elevated risk factor for adverse side effects if you've just recovered from COVID. Is that true? Yes, that is true. There's no reason to be vaccinated. But here's what it really was. They wanted me to join the club. That's right. That's what it was. That's right. I'm in the club. I took the vaccine. Did you take the vaccine? I got the new iPhone. You got the new iPhone. That's right. Team Pfizer, team director car. Yeah. No, don't Apple. Team Apple. No, man. It's sick. It's sick what they did. Yeah, they got us. They got us. They played us against ourselves and people. They literally enjoyed like chastising people that are not following the rules. That's right. And when those rules turned out to not neither be accurate, scientific, or even beneficial, when those rules turned out to be bullshit and actually detrimental, nobody apologized. Nobody cared. That's yes. And the reason it's worth talking about this now is because of what they did last week. Yeah. So they announced more. They're trying to get everybody to get boosted six month olds boosted 12 year olds, 12 year old boys, 20 year old guys who have a risk for myocarditis boosted. It's wrong. And it's not what the rest of the world's doing. And they should be ashamed of themselves. What did you tweet? You tweeted something about the numbers? Yes. So what I tweeted and this one, this is this really landed. It's gotten five million views since last week. It was showing the CDC's own calculations. You'd have to give a million doses to save maybe maybe one 12 to 17 year old. But when you give those million doses, you have 100 to 200,000 not 100 to 200 100 to 200,000 severe side effects that are short following the vaccination plus. And I didn't put this in the slot in it. You have another 50 to 300 cases of myocarditis. So maybe you save one person with those million doses, but your side effects are so much worse. And those are going to include some deaths. Okay, they are because myocarditis can kill young people. So what are we doing? The rest of the world practically Germany, Australia, Britain, most of the world did not follow this path. It's only basically the United States and a couple other countries like Canada that basically follow our recommendations that follow this path. So these are the slides. But if you go back to the main, yes, this is what it says. This is what it says. So the CDC's own data admits that you get 100 to 200,000 severe side effects per 1 million doses. Yeah. So that means that means like, are they getting that from theirs? So they're getting that from the clinical trials that the companies ran. So that doesn't mean that doesn't mean like you're in the hospital for a month. What it means is you might have a week of fever or you might have, you know, nausea that keeps you from going to school for three days. It's it's a, but that's you said severe. Yeah, but those are those are classified as severe because remember COVID isn't going to do that to most 12 to 17 year olds. It's more severe than the illness itself. So, but the myocarditis aspect of it, those cases can kill no question about it, not that they frequently do, but they can. So there is zero, putting aside the fact that this is an expensive thing and it's taken, you know, when we were trying to mandate it, remember a lot of schools, high schools, colleges said you had to have this. If you're going to go putting aside the fact that you're taking away people's autonomy on a strictly cost benefit basis, it makes zero sense to try to get kids and young adults and teenagers to take this. And the rest of the world knows it. Why don't we? Isn't it wild that what you said is controversial? Isn't it wild? It's wild. It's a sign of time to what you said was dangerous. Like, oh my God, what is he saying? That's right. Like, people listening to that that are branch covidians that are all in and still supporting the vaccine. I know it works because I took five and I'm still alive. Like, there's there's people out there like that. I've read comments. I know right now and then I'll dive into someone's covid debate and read what are especially from like hardcore lefties that are still all in on it. Yep. We start in the mask again. You know, like, yeah, they're masking. They're doing in New York City. I'm telling you, but I'll tell you something. So, DeSantis, like, who's the only real politician who's who really understands the math on this and takes it seriously. And Joseph Lidopa, his his his surgeon general, they came out last week and they said, we don't agree with the CDC recommendations. We think people only people over 65 should get this. Now, that's in keeping with the rest of the world. So what happened? The New York Times and the Washington Post and NBC, all the sort of elite media outlets attacked DeSantis and the Dopo over this. And not one of them said, hey, what DeSantis is saying is what the rest of the world is doing. We're the ones who are the outliers. No, what's wrong to say it is doesn't agree with the CDC recommendations. He's trying to get people in Florida killed. No, it's a lie. Is that really did they get that hyperbolic? I have a very bad part. I'm exaggerating. But that was a real headline of like, man, that guy really went for it. No, but the headlines were like experts say he may be putting people in Florida at risk. they were stuff like that. Okay. All right. Maybe. Maybe not. Maybe not at all. Like, at what point in time did we just look at reality and stop being so fucking tribal? Because I think if the people that had gotten vaccinated, the people that got talked into it, maybe some of them that regretted it, if they didn't have a stake in the game, then they could just look at this thing for what it is. They would be like, what? Right? Like as it is now, they'd be like, what are he talking about? But there are he so invested in being team vaccine. Well, is it interesting? 19 vaccines also team Ukraine. It's like, it's weird. So I'm one of the few people who actually who's like not in favor of the mRNA is, but I do support our intervention. I don't know if intervention. Where I do support our supporting Ukraine. I know that I'm like the only person that's a complicated conversation. Yes. It's a very complicated conversation. But just to go back to vaccines, you can't get unvaccinated. So if you take in two or three of these or worse, if you'd had your 15 year old take one or two, you don't want to think about it anymore. Right. And also you don't want to feel responsible. So anything that comes, it's confirmation bias that can give you some sort of a feeling of peace that you didn't fuck up and give the wrong thing to your kids and take the wrong thing yourself. And anything you could do to like comfort yourself, because imagine if you for your children, you gave it to your children, not now, so your children has like some sort of a hard issue. So people do like to hold on to their beliefs as much as they can, especially when those beliefs are integrated into a tribal ideology, which it was in some strange reason for some strange reason rather during the pandemic, being vaccinated and believing the science and trusting the experts became part of the left's ideology. And anyone else was a moron, a Trump supporter and you know, get take your horse paste and die. This is why they don't like you because you're clearly, you know, not on team Trump. You're not a, you're not a maggot guy. So they can't, they can't sort of a tar you that way. So you're too, you're, they don't like anybody. They can't categorize. Well, we should all be uncategorizable. We should all, there's a lot of great ideas that come from both sides. It's like the idea that the does only two sides is crazy because there's so much variability. So much variability in the left and variability in the right. Like when you're looking at like the craziest fucking militia guys on the right. And then you look at the craziest fucking antifa people on the left. Like that's not representative of the right in the left. It's representative of the worse aspects. The furthest out in the edges. But if you are in agreement with anything that the right us to say, whether it's stuff about, you know, regulations, the economy, whatever the fuck it is, you are all the sudden on the side of this goddamn militia. Like how did that happen? Right. I did. You know, you're on team. Michelle Obama's a man. You're on team. You know what I mean? Like you got to, you got to go all the way with all this fucking cookiness. It's on that side. Like, oh no. I just think that, you know, maybe we should have free speech. Yes. Maybe freedom of speech is actually really important. And freedom isn't something that should just be dismissed. It sounds corny and cliche. But freedom is really critical. The older I get, the better I understand the Constitution and why we have it and why we need it. Those guys were wizards. They were so good. The people that wrote the Constitution were so good. Like they understood human nature so well. Yes. It's really crazy how they set it up. Because they're like, there's got to be a way to stop dictators. There's got to be a way. And they were kind of, they were kind of on it for a while. Up until like World War Two. They did a great job. They did a great job to people who amassed power and then they had the media and newspapers, they were getting control of newspapers and all that. And then it was like, oh boy, boys getting slippery. They did a great job of setting it up though that at least we have things that they don't have in other countries like freedom of speech. That first amendment is, it's so fucking polarizing for some strange reason that people that have like smart people that have openly said maybe we should amend the first amendment. Yes. So this is, so I wrote this in a sub stack about a month ago. This is very upsetting to me. There was a poll that Gallup, I think was Gallup did of just a few weeks before that. I think it was June. 70% of Democrats now essentially think the government should be able to ban quote-unquote false speech on social media. So first of all, who is deciding what's true and what's false? Okay. And second of all, you want the government to do that? The Democrats used to believe in free speech. That usually, you know, liberals, the famous instances when the ACLU in the late 70s, there are these Nazis, Nazis marching in Skokie, Illinois. And the ACLU said we're going to defend them. We hate them, but we're going to defend their right to speak because that's the first amendment. That's America. The left has just totally forgotten this. They don't want to hear anything that they don't want to hear. Yeah. It's unfortunate that we just have this thing in our head that this is what my team believes. It's so unfortunate because it really allows these things to take place. Whereas if we're rational and objective and agnostic, we would look at it and go, these are problems. Like this is a problem for all of us. This is a problem for everybody. But if you know, that's your fucking problem. I want to, you know, internal combustion engine, bitch, you know, you can't fucking make me drive a luxury car. Like everyone is so, we're so, we have an identity, you know, we identify with being a progressive, we identify with being, so- whatever it is, whatever it is. And when we do that, we want everyone, we want a signal to everyone else that we're on the team. So frustrating. So crazy. It's just, it's so crazy. I mean, yes. And you see it, you know, I don't know if you paid attention to this woman in Virginia, it's running for the, she's a Democrat running for the House of Delegates, so, you know, like a Virginia state office. And she was caught, I think it was about a week ago, she had like essentially a porn site with her husband. Oh yeah, like filthy, just absolutely filthy, okay. Yeah. Okay. So, so there's healthy, filthy, you can do it. That's a good advertisement for it. I was baron since says filthy, absolutely filthy. So, so meanwhile, you got Lauren Bober, right? Who's like doing what she's doing in that, you know, in that theater in Denver, right? I heard about that. Yeah, right. So, here's my thing. Okay, they're both, they've both disqualified themselves from political office. Not because I have any problem with sex or anything like that, but because your judgment is so bad. Okay, you have two little kids, don't start talking about how you're going to take money so people can watch your husband fuck you up the ass, which is literally what that woman in Virginia. When I say filthy, I mean, and don't, and don't start jerking off your like buddy, your first state buddy in the theater, the Beetlejuice theater with a pregnant woman directly behind you and kids around you. Just don't do it. Okay. Neither of those women should be holding political office. I don't think that should be a controversial position. Okay. But if you're on the left, you know, you know, this is this is the right of a married woman to have sex on camera with their husband and God forbid we should, we, you know, we say anything about it. And if you're on the right, you know, Lauren Boba was just having a tough day or something. No, why can't we just judge these things sort of a politically as the crummy behavior that they are and why can't we say to these two, like, apologize and leave us alone. Yeah. Well, it's certainly an inappropriate place to be grabbing dicks and cities, but I like the enthusiasm. I like the fact that they're getting after it. Um, and they probably didn't think anybody could see because it was a dark. There was a woman directly behind them. I'm a pregnant woman. She stopped. Oh, really? Yeah. Because they were doing it all the time. Wow. She's a lot of fun. Um, yeah, probably, uh, reckless human note to self. This did not go the direction. I'll come on out. We have to have some fun with this. Yeah. No, I knew what you're saying. I mean, and I, yeah, isn't that I have a problem. I mean, listen, you know, adults are going to do it. I don't know. Well, the, the hundred, the hundred Biden things, the greatest example. Yes. There's almost no pushback on the left. No outrage, no chaos. Here, oh, you know, here's the most disgusting part of that that he and the, and the, and the president wouldn't recognize his daughter. Okay. That is disgusting, especially if you believe that, you know, like there's all this evidence, you know, getting raised by a single mother is, is not a, you know, it's not a good thing for your outcomes in life. Yes, plenty of people overcome it. Yes, we don't want to stigmatize, but in general, it's better to have two parents involved. Okay. You have the son of the president of the United States refusing to acknowledge his daughter. Okay. That is disgusting. And he shouldn't and the, and he's that because he didn't think it was his. It was a real thing. He's paying your child support. So even after the DNA, he still refuses. And the Biden said we have six grandchildren. They have seven grandchildren. Okay. That is a national shame. And the, and I don't care if you're on the left or the right. It is not right. The thing about him is just that he's such a hot wire. It's like you can't touch it. It's just just too much there. You don't want to bring any attention. If you were on the left, you wouldn't want to bring any attention to him. And that laptop and those business dealings and all that stuff. Cause like if that was the Trump family, oh my God, it'd be like, we told you, we told you. But, but you think the Trump so much better, like they're, look how much money, look how much money Jared Kushner made when he was in the White House. Look, I mean, it's crazy how much money the Trump's are making and did make. It's, uh, yeah, no one's saying that that's good either. Right. That's the thing about someone who has a shame. Yeah. People love people on the left love to do that though. As soon as you point out anything on the left, what about Trump? What about Trump is like, they should make a t-shirt just says, what about Trump? Cause that's like one of those things that they say. And yeah, you're right though. You're right. That kind of corruption is, that's inexcusable too. And, you know, some of it is just business air quotes. It's right with the Saudis. I'd love to hear about that business. It's fascinating. The question is, you know, Kushner's 35, he's got his whole life to suck at the trough. Like, did he have to do it when his father-in-law was on the White House? I don't know what the details behind that. What happened? I mean, so he made, he and Iran made an enormous amount of money, like, during the four years of the Trump administration. And, you know, you can look it up. I don't want to quote a figure because I don't want to be wrong. But it is, it is an absolutely stunning amount of money. And so, and you know, and now Kushner, you know, he's got, he's got Saudi money that he's managing. It's, I just, I don't know. I don't know where we are as a country. It seems like the people in charge think that anything goes. What do you think of RFK Jr? I like him personally. I've been interviewed by him. I think, I think he's, I think he's right to raise questions about the MR&As. I don't agree with a lot of the details of what he says. He's a fascinating guy. You've interviewed him, right? I really enjoyed talking to him. But really important is his work as an environmental attorney. What he did with the Hudson River, the cleaned up the Hudson River. It's a lot of it based on him winning cases. Yep. And he really cares about people. But genuinely does. I think he's a a good person. I really do. Would you vote for him? Yeah, I vote for him. Yeah, I would. I don't think I'm going to get the opportunity. That doesn't look that way. Me, Lynn, they have a feel and they've got some rascally tricks up their sleeves to keep him from ever challenging. And there's not going to be any debates. That's for sure. Yes. You know, which is, uh, it's just, I just really want to know. I mean, this is like a show that I can't stop watching. If I, if I wasn't personally involved, it wasn't, you know, something going on in the country that I turned that I live in, I would be like, wow, a show. That's crazy. Is that guy going to make it? Like, what's going to happen? Is she going to be the president? Like, is rushing in a new coast? I would be like, what a show. This shows crazy. You know, you get opium is legal. You can sell pills, but marijuana's not. Okay. Mushrooms aren't, but, you know, fentanyl is like, okay, this shows crazy. Look, they got alcohol. They drive fast. They're putting speed cameras up all around LA now. They got to, they're, they're putting speed cameras up or they give you a certain ticket for X amount of miles you go over the speed limit. Is that true? Yeah. See if you can find that. I just saw this. So like, okay. It's a big brother is watching you drive, watching you drive down the street now. So you're still leaning towards not interviewing Trump. Is that right? I don't want to interview anybody. Oh, how about that? Speed camera bill in California heads to Newsom for approval. Please, Gavin, don't do this. Oh, you know, he's going to do it. Please don't do it. A 11 miles over? Yeah, issue automatic tickets for driving. California heads to Newsom for approval. Please Gavin don't do this. Oh, you know, he's gonna do it. Please don't 11 miles over Yeah issue automatic tickets for driving drivers going at least 11 miles over the speed limit Cameras would be prioritizing areas surrounding schools high injury intersections and known street racing corridors to reduce speeding and traffic fate Tows. Oh well hold on a second you put it that way. I'm like, okay. Yeah, are there certain areas? But the problem is once you're out in that area like oh, we're gonna prioritize means no. Yeah Prioritizes a weird word. Yes But if that's the case because like those fucking street takeovers like that's bananas Like these fuck and how many times do you have to see on Instagram some dudes standing around the circle and the guys spin around His car and hits one with the ass and some flying through the air Jesus Christ kids get the fuck out of that circle. I know it's a thrill, but Get out of there. I'm here Darwin. That's get out of there man You know, it's like those like you see it even in the tour de France. Those people on the side Yeah, I take out one of those bike all the time and happened all the time And then there's like 83 of them go down right. I mean trusting just regular people to stand there Like one's gonna be a moron one's gonna be on their phone one's gonna have a text that can't not answer Bring a French flag. Yeah, they're gonna do something. They're gonna talk so pugs plasmos Well also the fucking when you have like car races when they're like to do on those rally races like those people are out of their mind Those things come sideways around corners just people right there But at least those are experts those street racing kids just nuts Like how's that that's tree takeover thing when did that first to your jealous of this? I can tree take over Yeah, you wish you were in one of those cars. What how dare you? I'm not interested in that at all I don't want to spin around a circle I have zero desire to spin around in a circle But I mean I wonder if that was like was fast in the fury is about that or was it before that? So the street takeovers were before yeah, wait for 80 so fine. I chose 80s in Oakland Wow In formal social gatherings of Bay Area youth Side shows that's what they would call them so they would just take over in intersection and start spin around I want to generally last I can't out in minutes guys have like held up an intersection for half hour just spinning around circles I would have been to the Bay Area recently little kind of anything girls little wild thing to do though to make everybody stop So you driving a circle in your car and everybody does they know what's going on so they'll just deal with it What are you gonna do that's nuts? Here's a there's some Raps on the here's the rules now listen this is code to the show for the people out there Who just don't know if your car is real clean then bring it if it's high performance Then swing it if it's a motorcycle you better serve it and if you get a ticket you better deserve it Okay, it's part of the culture no part of the culture noted you get it ticket you deserve it. Yeah, don't do some bit chest thing Shut the whole intersection down do donuts Right, right. Yeah, that's a different thing, but it's a lot of those cars are like those souped up fast and furious type cars Right, I'd say like a lot of like souped up cars or cars clean bring it I guess it's just what a crazy thing to do to people make them wait So you could do donuts Wasn't there something something this happened in Austin pretty recently? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. They did one I was here they do them everywhere. It's all over the country Yeah, it's like kids want to be kids like they hate to see it on Instagram But I guess they don't see the ones where the ass and hits the people and they go flying. Oh, no, that's they're definitely seeing There's so many of those people don't know how to control high performance cars and they just get on the gas I think spins around a circle and swans into a telephone pole There's so many of those oh to be young though to be dumb Not know how to drive a car Something happens here. I've heard about definitely not been a participant is Kids taking over people's houses. Oh Don't find a big house that's empty and be like it's time to throw a party Oh, definitely doesn't only happen here, but I've heard of it seen Instagram ads imagine coming home from vacation There's a party going on you ask you got to kick everybody out. I think that's a will-feral movie is it? It should be yeah What got fuck yeah should be but they can't make those movies anymore. That's yeah, that's right Yeah, they can't make those funny you try to make step brothers today you did can sold in that crazy What's that long ago? No, they killed the genre. They literally killed Wokeness killed the bro. Really over the top ridiculous comedy genre You know like super bad. You could never do that movie today. That's true. It's a fucking brilliant movie. It's so funny That movie no way Oh Virgene I probably all of those are all those step brothers. Oh Tropic thunder you better get thoughts out of here There's so many live wires and Tropic thunder so many landmines. Oh my god Yeah, but me mom brilliant movie you can still watch it You know, it's like back in the day when we were free Temptical Diculous yeah, so quick it happened so quick social media people gathered together in echo chambers and decided what was acceptable and what wasn't And enforced it on everybody don't you feel maybe we hit the peak of that about two years ago when they went after you I think There's a enough Understanding now that the vast majority of people don't like that the vast majority and also the vast majority of people Think that context is important and that humor is important and that fun is important and that I don't like when other people are telling me how I have to Think and talk like you should be willing to let people you want to call yourself a zur or that's great But you get mad at me that I won't use that made up word like this is bonkers This is just bonkers, you know if you have makeup on long hair and your girl and you tell me you're non-binary and you I have to call you a Reserve I don't want to participate. You know, this is not my my dance like you can go Go fucking cosplay do whatever you want. I don't know, you know dress up like an angel I don't care but I don't like it when people start reinforcing Their ideology on other people and that's part of what goes on whenever people have the ability to do it When people have the ability to tell other people what to say how to think they just do it Whether they're right ways right or not they don't want to debate it They just want you to comply and they'll say things to you like you should just be quiet and listen You know they'll say things like you know, which is a moment that's an amazing thing to say just be quiet and listen When woke people are educating you. Oh Just be quiet and listen. Okay. Well, that would make it easier because as soon as I start talking your arguments gonna fall apart Well, you know that there's now been some research done into like some of the DEI stuff You know that shows that it actually causes a backlash. Yes, right? Like that you know when you tell people they're not allowed to talk and They come out angrier than they went when they Yes, exactly and it's also the Wasn't the person who created DEI just came out and said it didn't really work that well is that true? That would not surprise isn't that something that just happened Jamie? I Could I say I'm pretty sure I saved it because it was so bonkers I was like this can't be really have to look into this Let me look at it real quick because it was so cookie that I was like I need to read this and because a lot of times and Guilty as charged if you ever thought I did this if you see me come on this podcast and just start talking about shit that I probably just wear the headline All right, what am I looking up again? DEI right right right right right I got it in here. I know I do Okay, here it is Jordan Peterson tweeted it and it was tweeting it. He was quote tweeting Michael Sherman. I'll text to Jim So all that stuff became explain that to people what DEIS and how it came to be and what it does and what it's impact is I mean, I'm not I'm not an expert in it, but you know DEI is diversity equity and inclusion right is basically this idea that you know White people need to shut up right and and well, it's not just died to it. They want people representation in You know here it is even Harvard psychology professor who I say his name Ma's Ma's are in Banaji has come around she literally pioneered the research upon which all the DEI nonsense was hypothetically predicted Predicated rather not alone no sick in Greenberg to for her to write this in the Wall Street Journal It's astounding is Freud abjurid psycho an analysis But here's the forte and sure more thing that's interesting, right? So sure Michael Sherman says astonishing admission from the pioneer of research on implicit bias bigotry racism same person Ma's Zarian Masarian Banaji my apologies that DEI training programs don't work and even hurt racist attitude still exists But much improves in 1960s and most don't act on them anyway and DEI now and that's what Sherman wrote it Yeah, so yeah because when you know look everybody has straight thoughts that you know may not be the best in the world But if people aren't gonna act on them and you you make them sit at a conference room and tell them how terrible they are for three hours they're gonna wind up feeling probably More aggravated than they were when they came in. Yeah Nobody likes to be told they're awful all the time right and it's also so productive That's not it's Usually build burnt Bill Mar rather talked about this that you know We should strut we were supposed to be striving for a colorblind society But somewhere along the line we were told that that's that's not possible He shouldn't do that because it's colors important raises important all these things are important should Why DEI training doesn't work and how to fix it? It's hard to go right by her and the law there's no question that bias exists There's no question that the way organizations deal with it is more likely to hurt than help Okay, but maybe that she's saying how to fix it. Maybe she thinks it just needs to be tweaked We would have to read the article. It just too much trouble. Yeah. I mean The real problem is everybody wants a meritocracy right but in This long race of self-improvement Not everybody starts at the same starting line. Well, that is true And the reality is we put very little effort into Making a better starting line for a lot of people in this country. That's that's a that's an unfortunate reality of this country That is undeniable and that needs to be addressed That's the root of the whole thing. You can't just like decide Just do something about the fruit you got to do something about like what where's the What is the fertilizer for the civilization? What is what is the root structure of the civilization? Yes, but that needs to be improved but to go back to where we started today There's nothing that's worse for parenting Then There's nothing that's worse for parenting than parents of young children being using drugs with drugs alcohol Cannabis or you know or math or heroin. It is terrible for parenting I mean it leads to abuse and neglect It leads to poverty. It leads to terrible outcomes And I don't know how you stop that but one of the things when you consider whether you're gonna Set up a world where drug use is sort of allowed slash encouraged slash commercialized is the effect on young kids It's a really good question and I you know as a person who believes That freedom is one of the most important things. I also come from a perspective where I you know I'm a different place in life than I was when I was 20 and what would I be like when I was 20 if Heroin was legal. What would I be like if cocaine was legal? What would I what would I have done and that there's a there's a reality that if you open the gates now And you say now all of these drugs are legal We're gonna regulate them and the way to stop fentanyl coming in in these tainted cocaine It's to sell pure cocaine and it actually be better for everybody I don't believe that I truly don't believe it I don't think the problem is the tainted drugs. I think the problem is that drugs just eat people I think there's both of those things But what I was about to say is if you did do that you would undeniably have a certain amount of people that are going to get addicted that never would Certain amount of people that were gonna lose their lives that never would a certain amount of violent actions car accidents people on meth and heroin and drugs and Coke and they're gonna do wild shit, you know and you know people are super unpredictable when they're fucked up on drugs and you're gonna have real problems and that That's also true but You know would more people do it if it was legal. I think you're right. I think more people would try it but eventually not So we just had to sacrifice whole generation to even learn you have to go to Europe and and see like the like kids are a lot of drink wine in Italy Sure, so they don't there's like their instances of alcoholism and it's not a big deal to them for us It's a big deal like I remember the first time I got drunk with my friends. We were listening to the Led Zeppelin My friend Jimmy and it was like it was like really 15 years old 14 15 years old and I got sick in a cab like the whole Yeah, like but it was getting alcohol was crazy. Yeah, if you live in Europe, it's normal like they they they Cussed they get their kids acclimated to it like you don't let them drink but there are a lot of have a sip of alcohol Have a little it's not that big a deal. Right. Don't think of it as like some forbidden fruit. You can't wait to get to it It's fucked up But even with you know adults We know that even with adults that have You know reasonable ways of approaching every other aspect of their life Some of them can't have a drink. That's right. They can't they can't do it They get fucking durable eyes and they're gone. You know, you know those guys Of course those are real people too and what do we do about that and it's a good question But it's a question that unfortunately There's so many pros and cons of both sides and the con of both side is crazy because you're empowering a gigantic criminal enterprise That is yes, that's crazy and that was the prohibition that was the thing that was going on in America They didn't stop people from drinking whiskey, but they stopped them for drinking good whiskey They were making moonshine and you know that was what NASCAR was Yes, yeah, you were trying to run away Because yeah, yeah, yeah, they developed hot rod cars to run away from cops And then they said you know we should race these motherfuckers They just kind of fucking waste tracks at circle. Yes I mean that's literally how NASCAR started it's kind of amazing But it's just There's no real there's no one perfect answer. There's no one thing we say you know what if we do this We'll have zero deaths and everyone's gonna be peaceful and the world's gonna be utopia There's no answer like that. No, but here and I'm not suggesting this, okay But you if you have a regime that is really strict on drug use you don't have much drug use I mean I'm talking about what I meant like you know like Saudi Arabia Yeah, you know if your kind of people's hands off arrest and and that would never fly here And I don't think it's a good idea. It's definitely not But this idea that like you can't culturally and decidedly lower the levels of drug use is not true You can't you it's just the customer of the price you pay right But that is not the thing about like peace as well like as long as you're willing to have like like who is the was it? Was the who's the was it the president of the Philippines? Oh? Yes, yes, yes, yes, I mean yes, I bet that on an impact. Yes I mean I wouldn't recommend it but I bet it worked to a certain extent. That's right. No, it's but so there's just This idea the drug legalization lobby has very successfully argued that basically you can't manage the amount of drug use in a society You just have to manage the consequences and that is demonstrably untrue Here here's another like drinking and driving used to be pretty society acceptable now It's not acceptable I mean people start so still sometimes do it But levels are way down have you ever seen that video from when they first started telling people you can't have an open beer in your car No See if you can find the video Jamie. I think it's from the 1970s and then this lady's like basically we're overcome a calm you know Is this guy's like you work all day it'd be nice or you could have a beer on your way home It's crazy people are advocating for openly drinking in their cars. That's right. You can change it behavior. Yeah Well, that's a wild one. That's a wild one that people want to be able to just fucking booze it up by the driving Listen to me Here is viewed by some is downright undemocratic Common this one fella king and I put in the hard days work in 11, 12 hours a day and they're getting your truck in the lace right and one or two beers We can't drink when you want baby. Yeah, you have to wear a seat belt when you're driving Pretty soon we're gonna be calm this That's when Trump but it's first light bulb I think it'd be president That guy I didn't even like his accent. I didn't even I under did it. Yes He was over the top, but the baby next to the baby right there. That's how you say carry babies around Put them in there no airbags. Oh, stay in the front. Those cars. They fall apart. They get maxed When I was a kid we just sat in the back seat you know where fucking people everybody's bouncing around back there You know what? It's not the end of the world It's most of the time people survive and there's a there's an amazing There's something I've been meaning to write for the stack. It's been like I started to write and I haven't had time But this is a non-COVID thing. This is a kind of stuff. I need to write more of so There've been there's been a lot of research done recently on like the unhappiness of adolescents and you know teenage girls especially and What's one of the things that's really interesting is if you look by by political party Liberal kids are much much more unhappy than conservative kids right now and it not and if you look The outcomes that's not necessarily the case, you know like when did this become? Was this always the case? Is it it's more recently much worse in the last few years and it's because of the years the last few years I got to go back and again I don't want them as quoted but you know they're because of lockdowns and COVID as well Lockdowns and COVID and their parents scaring them to death with climate change and they're just like a bunch of neurotic Like kids who you know who don't have any like they don't have any fun the climate change one is wild Because the thing about the climate change one it's it's both sides. It's kind of undeniable like it is undeniable We're having an effect. Yeah. It's undeniable. I agree, but I watch this guy discuss. I forget what Legislative it's what you know politicians he was talking to but he was asking them because they were trying to figure out what to do about carbon emissions And he said what do you think the level of CO2 like what percentage of the air is CO2? And everybody had a guess like five percent 100% whatever was and he said it's actually 0.3 or 0.4 0.3 and at 0.2 plants die right Is that true? Final that's true when I got was saying that I was like they don't know because they're just guessing right so they know it is 0.3 It's because it's 300 per million 0.3 right. Yeah, and there's an effect that we're having and that effect Is causing the earth to be the greenest and silver vent right? Yeah, no look We know this is real. Yeah, I heard 0.3, but yeah, but but you can't scare the crap out of your kids all the time Don't scare them. Here's the other thing and This is again not denying that human beings have an effect in the climate we clearly do It's never been stable. No, the climate's never been stable It's never like a flat line like look if we go back to the dinosaurs before people start fucking around Was a nice flat line you always knew what day temperature is gonna be on September 19 2020 September siffin, you know, come on. No, you didn't it's like it was all cookie The whole thing is like this if you watch that like I had Steve Cooney non who's a physicist who explain all this Is this it I'm out of I think so. Yeah, here it is Santa Maria atmosphere CO2 carbonans well, yes, it's okay. I buy five percent. I just follow you see there five and Suggest that we know that transportation causes 49 percent Why we're working on energy transition all right. What number you think it is? Five I didn't hear you straight seven seven. Yeah, but I'm just boy So we got a five seven prices right Hey I'm gonna hit the high end. All right. Well, I appreciate that. I don't mean to I put you on ice I asked a lot of people that because over here is climate change climate change Go to I heard a couple on the panel saying you're looking to change your vehicles to electric even though We don't have the electric grid and me as a farmer. I wouldn't be real happy about running out They see $300,000 $500,000 million pieces of equipment because I want someone was a electric The answer is point zero four percent Not one percent not half of a percent Point zero four percent. It's gone up from point zero three This is what we're being all contorted into new uses tiny change in CO2 If we go if we get below point zero two plant life starts now so Let me ask Mr. Boy what A lot of your vehicles here for already or the vehicles that you know about in the industry Yes, all right. That's the cleanest burning diesel equipment. Yeah, right. Yes, all right about mr. Dre. What do you think? Yes, okay, so why would any baby anxious you go out and change out all those vehicles that you've been upgrading My home state of California. Our arm has eliminated lots of equipment trucks. You know We're gonna be we're down at least 70,000 truckers And all because they don't make a mandate for a 2011 and newer vehicle So it's gonna be harder to get things from the ports all this all in so Anyway, I just wanted to underline that as you know You know getting about trying to make your main electric Especially in my home state when they're shutting down the power grid and taking out hydroelectric dams And they barely kept in place the new to their power plant for additional five years Nine percent of our grid. I don't know how we're gonna do this. I don't know how you guys can do Instruction out remote areas where there isn't power lines yet nearby or what have you or charges stuff maybe you'll bring generators Anyway, yeah, it's a mess so interesting, right? You see these people that that's why we're working so hard to remove carbon from the end she doesn't even know it Shouldn't know what he just said No, yes, but she's she'll tell you the 49% of that 0.4 Or 0.04 comes from trucks Yes, come some transportation Look, I think there's an even more basic problem, okay The promise the Chinese and the Indians we can we can we can go to a post industrial society and all live You know growing beats in the United States and Europe. They're not gonna stop building Car you know coal-fired plants. They haven't stopped building them. Maybe they will promise to stop building them The Europe basically if you look at a graph Europe is like A tiny fraction of the world's CO2 right now, okay? US we still emit a lot, but the Chinese emit a lot more and I think the Indians are on track to pass this if they haven't passed this already So we can destroy our own economies and it won't make that much difference unfortunately So that's a real problem We are really concentrating on climate and we're really concentrating on our impact But we also have to be concentrating on what other countries are doing and our ability to economically compete with them and be Sustainable that's that's one of the real important things that we should have probably learned from the pandemic Well, we couldn't get stopped like yeah, you couldn't get anything from overseas because they couldn't just go We do not want to be in the pockets of the Chinese They're not necessarily our friends. I mean Well, yeah, we are we are well, listen, we can have a decent relationship with them What they've done is so clever, but that's yeah, we depend on them for everything. It's amazing It's not it's not a good position to be in but that's what makes people really cynical about these relationships these countries have They're kind of enemies but kind of not you know they're competing, but they're also You know selling each other stuff and their economies rely on each other Economic sanctions the most devastating. Yeah, I think we'd be mistaken to depend too much on the Chinese right now So but but but just go all the way back like don't scare your kids No, don't scare the fuck out of people but all of us But how do you not scare the fuck out of them while making them aware at the same time the two kind of different things But but don't tell your kids the world's gonna end in 50 years No, that's all that. Yes. Well, that was that wasn't that what Greta Thorneburg was saying in 2015 Yeah, the idea that you can predict how this is gonna go down seems nutty but really we need to concentrate on some stuff that we absolutely can control and one of them is Plastics in the ocean like These people that are doing a great job of trying to figure out methods to sift that stuff out Just the sheer knowledge of how much is out there Yes, doing a lot of our stuff apparently We think that when you recycled that everything gets recycled But apparently they don't do such a good job recycling plastic They just use it put in landfills and sometimes they ship it to other places You guys take it. We know nothing about but I believe you. Yeah, there's horrific horrific imagery and videos of Other countries where they're just dumping their waste into a river and you see these river systems that just completely clogged by plastic bottles and garbage and Whoo humans are so fucking weird We're so weird. We need to aliens to save us drill. No, we need to get it together But I do think if I was an alien I would be watching I think if I had a guess if I had to put my you know my chips on Whether or not it's real or not real. I would think yes, it's real. I think there I think there are most likely We've been observed most likely. We've been visited Multiple times why wouldn't they if they have the capability we'd be fascinating Also, I think some of the stuff we're seeing is ours I think both of those things could be true at the same time and I think one of the ways that again I would obscure whether or not we have stuff like that is to start talking about aliens Well, that just seems like common chess moves. I'm like oh, I see where you're going You know if you just all of a sudden you got whistleblowers and all of a sudden you're telling me that all this stuff is real Okay, now I'm suspicious. I was less suspicious when you were lying about it You know when you were lying about it. I was like oh, they're hiding the aliens They're hiding it, but now they're talking about like oh you guys probably are still hiding the aliens But you probably back engineered some shit or develop some stuff on some completely independent government-funded black ops branch of physics where they New something about magnetic propulsion or something and they've developed some unmanned drone that can go hypersonic speeds What do you think they look like aliens? Well if you want to go back to the old CIA documents because there are documents that George Knapp and Jeremy Corbel have uncovered from the Freedom of Information Act where they said there was four different races that were visiting us Yeah, and some of them are the classic grays and some of them are what they call the tall whites They look like Nordic people like really pale skin and long hair and they have their ears really flat to their head And they have larger eyes than we do But they look almost like humanoid. Huh? Yeah, but I mean who fucking knows You know, it's just all just nonsense talk. It's like like what kind of elves do you believe in? All I don't believe in leprechauns, but the regular wood elves are real You know, I don't know man. I don't know. I haven't seen one. I can't I would die to see one I mean I would be fascinating. I'd be willing to not tell people Take me show me I want to know but everybody thinks that way right everybody wants to know But until you see something and if you do see something you're gonna go what did I fucking see? Is that real? Like how reliable is my goddamn memory You know like did I just have like some internal burst of psychedelic chemicals and it tricked me and I can see. Is that real? Like how reliable is my goddamn memory? You know? Like did I just have like some internal burst of psychedelic chemicals and it tricked me into thinking that I've been abducted? That's a good all good question. Well, that's a real question too because a lot of these alien abduction stories they happen at night and when people are sleeping and dreaming, they're occasionally people get sleep paralysis, that's a real factor. And then dreams themselves, people have lucid dreams. They have dreams that appear that they're real. They have like different levels of dreams. Like some medications you take give you wild vivid dreams. Yes. We know that, right? So what is happening there? Well, there's obviously some sort of neurochemicals that get released during sleep that appear to be, if not hallucinogenic, maybe they're definitely psychedelic. What are they doing? Are they connecting your consciousness with some other realm? Like what is going on? And I could imagine if you were, you know, you had one of these indulged dumps of these naturally produced psychoactive substances and you're lying in bed, you would see fucking aliens over you. But does that mean that the aliens aren't real? I don't know that either because it might, that might be how they get to you. Look at the bottom paragraph. The ICIG office did nothing to look into the information they receive from David Grush on UAP crash retrieval programs. They have no information they can give to Congress cover up. This is representative Tim Burchat. He calls cover up. It's posted the two page letter that the ICIG Thomas. Monheim is it? It was working with David Grush. Interesting. Interesting. And they're claim is that they haven't done anything. They're not looking into the claims at all. Interesting. Well, maybe they're not allowed to. If there there was a crash retrieval program, I would imagine I would say shut the fuck up. No, you can't look at it. If there's some UFO that we have and if we find out, look, how do you know? How do those people working for you? Whether or not someone's been taking money from Russia or taking money from China or taking money from Iran? How do you know? How do you know? I mean, some guy that works for you that's a spy. You can't let everybody come in and see the UFO. It's on a need to know basis. So you deny him. No. I think everyone needs to know if it's a UFO. I don't know when they cover it up now. I'm sorry to think they're real. What would it matter if they have a spy saw this, but I guess they have something. Maybe they could take pictures and send it to them and they could start reverse engineering. They could explain it. If someone explained how, maybe they don't know how to get it to work and then one person figured out how to get it to work. Okay. That's the whole Bob Lazar lore. The whole Bob Lazar lore was that they hired him to be a propulsion expert to go and back engineer this thing because they didn't know how it worked. Initially he was like, oh, that makes sense. The reason why people can see those, they're ours. Okay. And then very quickly as you examine the thing, he's like, what, what the fuck is this? This thing designed to carry three foot tall people that operates on some sort of gravity generator from an element that we haven't stabilized yet. And it's only theoretical at that point. So that's what he says. Oh, but I had to take you down this road because I know you're like one of those guys that calls bullshit on things. And I know you're paying attention to it because it's everywhere. I'm very COVID focused. Really? Yeah. I mean, I'm a vaguely aware, but just vaguely. I would say just vaguely. I mean, I'm silly. I'm busy suing the government. I understand. I understand. Are you worried when you do stuff like that? No, I mean, we're all in the NSA database. I haven't done anything bad interest. You definitely in the NSA database. No, but we all are. Yeah. You know, what does that mean? What does it mean? Exactly. I mean, so not that worried. I mean, I'm honestly, it'd be more likely that Pfizer would be interested in me, but, but they're not going to do anything anywhere either way. I mean, you know, it's like, these are court cases. You, yeah, you make your best case. They hire really expensive lawyers. They make their best case. And it doesn't seem like they ever really face criminal charges. That's right. Nobody, nobody, they face fines. That's right. Nobody really goes to you. If you're a senior corporate executive, you don't go to jail. So it's, so why do anything that could actually get you in trouble? Like what's, yeah, what's really fascinating is that, you know, they, they, the criminal charges they get hit with are often less than the profits they made. That's right. That's right. That's true of both five, you know, Eli Lilly, I, which is a company that I covered when I was at the New York Times. I mean, this is a funny thing. Like these people on the left, they want to, they want to pretend that I'm some kind of conspiracy. There's, I'm the same reporter I was when I worked at the New York Times and covered the drug industry and wrote these stories. This is why I'm so aware of the games the companies played, because I've been writing about it for so long. When you worked at New York Times, what year was this? This was a 99 through 2010 I worked there. Could you ever imagine that journalism would be where it's at now? No, but now as a person who was there on the inside of the great lady, like what was, did you notice a shift while you were there? There was a, there was a slight shift. Not a, look, I was a business reporter. Okay, I was an investigative business reporter. They never told me don't write about this or do write about this. I mean, there's sometimes this only do write about this, but they never told me, you know, don't do this. it might offend, you know, the democratic party or whatever. You know, that's not, that's not how it worked. And I remember going to Iraq for the paper and coming back and some guys in me, I was in Las Vegas actually in 2003. And some guy, I think I was getting my shoes shining. The guy next to me getting his shoes shining said, oh, it must be hard to work for the New York Times when they tell you to make things up. And I said, I was in Iraq and like, I put my life on the line for that place and for to get to the truth. Like you don't know what you're talking about. And so, so that was really like a responsibility and a trust that I felt to try to get to the truth. What happened? People were always cynical even back then. Oh, yeah, they were cynical, but they were, but they were more wrong than what happened was a Trump got elected. Okay, Trump got elected and it broke the American media because they couldn't believe that the United States elected this guy instead of Hillary Clinton. They all wanted Hillary Clinton, certainly, and, you know, and especially younger female reporters at the paper, why was also projected to win? That's right. So it was like, there's, I think I don't know if I said this to you some previous time I was here, but there's this famous onion headline I'll never forget from 2015. Hillary Clinton tells nation not to fuck it up for her. And that's how it felt, right? Like, like, I'm going to be elected whether you want me to be or not. Right? Do you think we would have been better off as a culture if she got elected? Oh, that's an interesting question. Like, do you think that the separation, the polarization of the right and the left wouldn't have been so bad if she won this. This stuff was happening anywhere. Right. But I wonder if that was because Trump is such a polarizer figure that I think that was the tipping point. Yeah, maybe maybe we would. I don't know, but she didn't win. He won, right? And he and the media. If you listen to some interviews. That's right. Tell us the news illegitimate. That's right. That's right. But when yes, Russia hacked our elections. That's right. Remember that? I do remember that. That used to be okay to say, but he, but he, the media hated him. Yeah. And, and he used their hate and their hate got worse and worse. And they became openly partisan in a way they hadn't been, you know, I don't know, in 100 years. Yeah. So it was weird. It's weird. It's weird. And it just, it doesn't seem like it's ever gonna bounce back. And if he wins again, Jesus, Louisa, what is gonna happen? I don't know what's gonna happen next year. I mean, he could be in prison. There's a real chance he could be in prison and win. I don't know what that looks like bananas. If he goes to jail for the crimes that they're accusing him of, uh, how long we talking about for this? Well, the Georgia stuff he could do 20 years. Oh my goodness. I mean, he's governor of the country for myself. What would they allow him to have like access to phones? Oh, I think, I mean, I think he'd have to be the president. I mean, I think, I think there'd be enormous pressure to, to let him out under those circumstances. And then put him back in once he gets out. I, that's a great question. I mean, it's, it's unthinkable. Now, the federal stuff he could pardon himself for. It seems pretty clear he can pardon himself. There's a debate about this, but he could also direct the Justice Department to drop the, uh, prosecutions. But the state stuff he can't, state stuff he doesn't control. So it's crazy. And, and I've increasingly concluded that it was a huge mistake to indict him. They should have presented the information and said, because he's, he, this is a political issue, not a legal issue. The political issue is, does the country want him as president? If it wants him as president, it'd be different. Okay, if you said he murdered somebody or he committed espionage, that this is all, I mean, nobody really is accusing him of crimes like that. So, so the idea that he might be in jail and the country might have to vote in an election where one of the candidates is in prison is crazy. It was, I was listening to a conversation at Dennis Prager had and, uh, forget who he was talking to, of David Pakman. And they, they're having a conversation about the election. And one of the things that Prager said that I thought was really interesting, like if you knew that Hitler was an incredibly evil person and do you knew that you could stop this person from getting into power by manipulating the election, it would be your moral imperative to do so. And that a lot of people viewed Trump like that. That's right. That's, that's a real thing. And that's, and I think they do right now, like, if the will of the people is that he becomes president, the rest of the people that don't agree with that will go into a fucking fury of fury. Yes. If he becomes president again, like, God, what is going to happen? No, it'll be terrible. But if he is, if he is in jail and can't campaign, his supporters are going to think it's terrible. Yeah. They're going to think it's unfair that way. The whole thing from top to bottom is just fucking bonkers and bonkers and all the scenarios are bonkers. I can't, I can't stand him and people, you know, I lose sub stack report of views, whenever I say it, but I don't like Donald Trump. But I do think that he, like, the way the left is behaving towards him is not wise. Yeah. It's, it's like telling somebody shut the fuck up. You ever tell somebody shut the fuck up? They don't want to shut the fuck up. The only reason why they shut the fuck up, but you don't shut the fuck up is like a threat of violence or if they realize they really fucked up. And they just like take a moment of reflection. But most of the time, you tell people to shut the fuck up and like, you know, you shut the fuck up. That's right. They get mad. They don't, it's not, it doesn't work. You know, it's like when you think you can just hit somebody because you saw it in a movie, nothing can hit you back. That's right. They might be the fuck out of you. They might wait for you after school one day and kick your ass. They're not going to just take it. Like people don't just, and when you do something like that, where you just try to silence your opponent and try to jail your opponent on what some people think are trumped up charges. No pun intended. That's, that makes people furious and emboldens and empowers the other side. Unfortunately, that's just how it goes. You know, it's like what we're talking about, the DEI stuff, like forced stuff down people's throats and they get angry at it. Like this is the fuck out of here with this. Yeah. And when you make people take vaccines, they get angry, they go, and it emboldens them and it enforces their idea that other people are out to get them. And that's real dangerous. It's real dangerous when we think like that. It's real dangerous. And we got to be very careful. We got to be very careful because we don't want to fucking civil war. I just think we're almost like at this point where there's parts of one side that hate parts of the other side so much. Both sides. Yeah. Yeah. That's why I didn't pick a left or right. It's like it's both sides. It's like there's evil on the right. There's evil on the left. It's just humans. It's humans and groups. You get enough of us together in a group. Certain percentage are just going to be fucking assholes. So what are you guys going to happen? You know, a year from now, one year from now will be right up to the election. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. I'm not happy. I'm also it's like fascinating watching RFK Jr. not get secret service protection. That's where it's where it's gross. Like how is that even a thing that he can get? Hunter Biden gets it and he does it. How could they deny him that? Yeah. I mean, and then there was some guy showed up heavily armed or pretended he was on a security detail or just another. Yeah. Yeah. Not good. None of it's good. It's not good. It's like, but you see these power struggles and you see these power dynamics and it just doesn't take into account. It's like concentrating on short-term victory, right? Short-term victories when the election at all costs. But it's not looking at the big picture of the future of the nation if you choose to ban the rules. Because it's like the rules are the reason why we're great. It's a big part of why this is such an amazing place. It is the freedom speech. And if you're going to social media companies and you're the government and you're having them release or delete things that are accurate, that's not good for the nation. It's not good for all of us. It's not good for human beings as a whole. It's not good for the country that you live in as a person doing that, making that decision. It's not good for all of us. Well, you're not going to convince me it is, right? Obviously. So, but I mean, look, my case, you know, it's at an earlier, there's two, there's two big cases. There's my case and there's Missouri V. Biden, which is so Missouri, the state of Missouri, and the state of Louisiana sued, you know, over social media censorship. And they did that in the Western District of Louisiana and they got a favorable ruling in July. And then the fifth circuit, which is just one level below the Supreme Court, you know, it's several states in the South, basically upheld that ruling of it's about 10 days ago. And now the Biden administration has has appealed to the Supreme Court. And what the fifth circuit has said is we don't want senior officials in the Biden administration, including including the same people who I've sued, talking to social media companies and trying to pressure them. And when they've gone too far, and here's what's really interesting about this job because. So what the Biden administration says is we're not forcing anything. We're not making explicit threats against anybody. We're just saying this is what we think should be on your platforms. And this is dangerous to let people talk about the problems with the vaccines because it discourages people from getting vaccinated. That's dangerous to them. We don't like that. And you know, famously Biden said in July 2021, you're killing people. Those are his words. The platforms are killing people by allowing people like me to talk about problems or potential problems with the vaccines. Okay. Now for my point of view, I've basically been proven right in terms of most of the concerns that I raised. Now we could argue about that. But the truth is it doesn't matter whether I was right or wrong. I'm an American. I would have the right to express myself. And Twitter was my platform to do that. It was my biggest journalistic outlet. So try and get Twitter to ban me. It's one thing. Maybe if you, if you, you know, if you just talk generally about what you want to see, but what's clear is that Biden administration went way past that. This is what the, what really comes out when you read, and of course I've read the rulings in the Missouri V Biden case. And of course my own stuff is that is that they pushed for months and months and really years until really 2021, 2022, they, they put a lot of pressure on these companies. And they're, and the White House is powerful. And the companies have a lot of interest beyond, you know, me or other users. And what we're allowed to say, they have interests in Europe. They have interests with section 230, which is this provision that enables them not to get sued for the content that they carry. And so at some point, even if you're not making an explicit threat of you better take this guy off or you're going to pay, the companies hear that. They hear what you're saying without you saying it. And that's what the fifth circuit ruling basically says. And that's my argument. I mean, my argument goes past that actually because I have, you know, I have evidence that the White House explicitly quote unquote asked why was allowed to be on Twitter. I mean, that's in black and white. But the point is, it's, and this is the analogy because I think everybody gets this. When you get pulled over, and the, and the cop says, can you get out of your car for me? I really need you to get out. Can you get out for me, please? That's not really a question at some point. That's a demand. And so, and so it is not right for the government to try to stifle me or anyone else that way. And that, you know, that's at the core of Barrenson V. Biden and it's broadly, you know, at the core of Missouri V. Biden. And then a perfect world, what they would do is ask you how you came to this conclusion and what's the data show us. Well, we're in a perfect, I mean, the way you did, you did face it on data. Yeah, absolutely. No, you know, look, the White House, they were the most powerful organization in the world. They can say whatever they want. They have a true, you know, a billion dollar advertising budget. They can, the, the president or anybody on the COVID team can call the New York Times at any time and express their point of view. They don't need to shut me up. Whether, what I'm saying is right or wrong, true or false, they don't need to shut me up. And it's against my constitutional rights for them to do so. And that is wrong. And by the way, I was right, they were wrong. And the vaccines have basically failed. And that's why nobody wants to take them anymore. But that actually is almost irrelevant. Yeah, it's just, it's a strange time when it comes to this because it really, there was never social media before like the Obama administration. That's right. Right. It's this is really a new thing. But and it became what it really became during the Trump administration became this like an angeliling pot. Yes. And during COVID because pre COVID, I would have just been an ex New York Times reporter and I wouldn't have had any audience at all. Right. That's what they don't like. They don't like you because you have an audience. They can't control. They don't like me because I have a half million people on Twitter and more, you know, back then who would retweet me and really wanted to hear what I had to say because and they couldn't control it and it was free to me. Right. I didn't have to pay Twitter. It was just an audience and a voice and they don't like that. And that's a real problem if you're telling the truth. That's what's crazy. It's like we're not talking about someone who's advocating for violence. We're not talking about someone who's trying to take down the government. No, we're just talking about someone who's advocating for truth. You're just talking about truth. And if you've got a government that's trying to stop truth, like that's they shouldn't be doing that. They shouldn't be doing that. Everyone should know they shouldn't be doing that. They and you know, these are documents that have come out. They knew that that people like me were the biggest problem because they didn't, you know, if you're out there saying like, oh, the vaccine is going to make your football off or whatever stuff that's obviously untrue, people know, you know, they're going to disregard that. But if you have me saying, look at the CDC's own statistics and make a judgment for yourself whether this makes sense to make those conclusions or are you just doing math? I'm just doing math based on their data. So it's not their conclusions, but it's their data. That is what they know is the biggest problem for them because because they can't say I'm lying. They can't say it's false. All they can say is it's misinformation. Misinformation just means information that we don't like well, that isn't that mal information like information that's bad. So so there's this and Mal yeah, what is Mal exactly so my joke about this was Mal is. Mal is just the third thing because they need three things. But the difference between miss and Mal can be kind of hard to distinguish. Miss technically I think can be false whereas Mal is not ever false, but it is taken out of context. It's stupid. It's all stupid or dangerous or dangerous. Somehow another dangerous country as a whole or something like that. That's Mal. Let's hear what it says. Mal's purpose for I think is a difference. Mal information is truth used to inflict harm on a person organization or country. See, but that's like, what does that mean? If you if like you could say, okay, but there's some examples of Mal information include fishing, cat fishing and doxing. Okay, okay, well, if that's it, but if you but but if you broadly define it as it could do harm to an organization, like information that could do harm to an organization. So how do they define misinformation? If Mal information is truth misinformation. So misinformation incorrect or misleading. So that can be true too. It certainly misleading can be true. It could be misleading, but you could take something out of context or it could be someone could be saying you could be using a part of something like you'd say this does this, but the reason why it cancels itself out is because there's also this that that happening. So you might say the one thing only. Okay, that's called making a case. Right. Well, this information refers to false information. Tended to manipulate cause damage or guide people organizations and countries in the wrong direction. I love that wrong direction. That's pretty Orwellian. Yeah, Mal information reversed to information that stems from the truth, but it's often exaggerated in a way that misleads and causes potential harm. Oh, you mean like climate change? Like is that kind of mal information then like a lot of the discourse on climate change? Like if you go back to an inconvenient truth, would that be considered mal information? So they're okay. So this is actually going to not know. Mal information is defined as intent as meant to cause harm. Okay. Harm to who? Like the information I shared was intent to cause harm to Pfizer's profits. Right. Okay. You could just decide that that's mal information. Right. That's you're trying to cause harm, which is just bonkers. Right. So this is why, so we so next. So I filed a Barrenson to be Biden in April. The Pfizer and the Justice Department and Andy Slavitt, his lawyer, that there are three separate motions to dismiss that came back about three weeks ago. We now have to file our responses, which we do in October. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court is going to hear the Missouri V Biden appeal, which is of course of great importance to my case too, because if the Supreme Court says that some of the people in my case violated the First Amendment, obviously we're going to say to the judge in my case, look, look what the Supreme Court just ruled. You know, this is, you know, very powerful ruling from our point of view. So we'll see what happens. Interesting. It's a very important case, you know, as is the case, was it Missouri, the case? Yes. Yeah. Where they said that the federal government is no longer allowed to explain that. So okay. So this is, yes, there's another case that came out of Texas. So Texas said Texas passed a law saying that Twitter and the really big social media companies can't censor content. They have to allow all content. And the company sued and said that violates our First Amendment rights. We have to be allowed to choose what we're going to carry or not. Now, now their defense, though, isn't part of that because of advertiser revenue. Yeah. Like that's the big thing that's the, wasn't that the discussion that was going on recently about the Facebook ad fallout. Yes. That's just companies come to them. And they say, unless you police your website, you can no longer have our advertising. So I honestly, this is a very complicated question legally. Okay. Because the companies do want to be able to curate content. They want, you know, if you're face business, it's a business. That's right. And they want engagement. So they want to show you stuff that you want to see, especially Facebook. That's their model. So that if you're going to regulate these guys like telephone companies, basically what you're going to say is everything that everybody posts has to be allowed. And, and I can see the arguments on both sides of that. My case and the Missouri Biden case are to me, they're very different. And the reason is we're not saying, Hey, Facebook or Twitter, you have to carry everything. We're saying the government can't tell you what to carry and not to carry. The Texas case, the separate case, this third case, that says you guys have to carry everything. That's where it gets weird. That's where it gets weird. Yes. Because then you have to decide, okay, are these social media platforms, are they a town hall that everyone should be able to participate in? Or are they a private company that can dictate what's on their platform, especially if not doing so hurts their financial bottom line? That's right. And I think that's a hard question. Again, are they, you know, the AT&T, if you, if you make a phone call, they don't get to, you know, you can say racist and I say, whatever you want to say, like they carry your phone call. Yeah, that's what's interesting is like would if there was no stepping in, would the market figure it out? Like would sites like rumble or these other like social media platforms that choose not to moderate that heavily? Right. Would they rise now? You know, a lot of people thought that was going to happen with threads, right? Like people were tired of all the hate speech that was on Twitter and now X and they said, you know what, we're going to go over to threads. Yeah. But it didn't work. People seem to want a more open platform. They want Twitter. They don't want, they don't want to be had established followers and all this stuff over there. And it's just, it was convenient to bitch over there. So many people like, I'm out of here. And they do work at all. I go to their account. Bitch you pose every day. That's right. That's right. No, a Twitter for whatever reason, we don't seem to be able to quit Twitter. It's, it's very powerful. It's also people that don't like the fact that Elon Musk bought it because it seems so outrageous. This guy just spent $44 billion to own Twitter like what a nut. But you gotta get him back on. Oh yeah. I'd love to a paying for it. Might be a not a fun idea. No, I don't know. That's gonna work. It seems odd. I think for everybody I mean, yeah, everybody has to pay. That's what he's saying now. I wonder how much that would cost. I mean, I presume he'd charge a dollar or two a month. Who knows if it's going to, if he's going to do it? If you could just watch ads the pay for your monthly thing, that's a way to pay for it Yeah. Wild. What a time. I'm happy to pay my eight bucks and what. It's fine. Yeah. Yeah, I pay. I just feel like I'm using it. Yeah. It's a resource. I learned so much on it. There's so many articles that I find that I never would have found. So many really fascinating things about everything about space, ancient history, like so many things that I find down Twitter or X now. Can we, can we, yeah, can we not call it X? It's Twitter. It's, I'm never going to forget. It's always going to be Twitter. But I guess eventually I'll. But just to go all right without Twitter, like I wouldn't have had the voice that I had, right? And so and and I think that's a good, I mean, I think it's good that that it exists. Well, the crazy thing is you got back on Twitter before you weren't even bought it. Yeah, I did. I sued my one icon. Which is bananas. You won court against Twitter. I get Twitter. Well, now now, but now I'm going up against Pfizer in the government. I just decided to took it up another letter here at maniac. Just blood and for punishment, stress. Jeez. Well, I got a good lawyer. I believe you. That's why I don't want to interview anymore presidential candidates. Like I don't even want to be a part of this cookiness. I wanted to talk to Robert Kenny Jr. because I read his book and I was fascinated. Did you interview, if you interviewed DeSantis or VVAC or another? No, no, no, I interviewed Bernie back in the day and Tulsi and Andrew Yang. I'd like to all them. I like people with ideas that are you know, non corporate ideas. Yeah. I just don't know if it would ever work. This is the thing that was ever going to talk to Trump. The one question I really want to know is like, what is it like when you get in there? Like, what is that like? What is that day like? What does it feel like when you're just running the show? Like, what the fuck happens? Who talks to you? I guess you couldn't even tell me, right? Because if you want to be president again. But like, what do they say? Like, how do you fucking, how do you pay attention to everything? The idea that one person is in charge of the whole thing is just so nuts. I don't know how you can do that. He didn't. That's funny because I don't see him as having a problem with that part of it. But I would, you know, like we have this illusion of what it's like, you know, you know, the old Bill Hicks joke. They bring you you a room full of guys smoking cigars. And they show... You know, like we have this illusion of what it's like, you know, you know, the old Bill Hicks joke They bring you a room full of guys smoking cigars and they show you a video with an angle of presidential Kennedy assassination They've never seen before and then they go any questions and you're like, yeah, what's my agenda? That's what he's like What happens when you get in there right like this is how much power do you really have like what is what is that? What what is reality like versus perception? I'd be interested in hearing that But you'd have to listen to a lot of other stuff. I listen to a lot of other stuff. I'm willing to listen to stuff I'm curious But yeah, I'll tell you who you'll never have on it's by they wouldn't let them near you That'd be fascinating. I would feel bad I Would feel bad just because if you know, he's a human being Is a human being regardless of his past he's in a declining state. It's yes, obviously Yes, and that's just you know He's too old to be the president of the United States So who do they run do you think if he doesn't make it? Do they run Gavin Newsom because he said no Kamala Harris would take the spot? I mean Newsom certainly fits the role news some or Gretchen Whitmer You know, like I don't like either of them, but they certainly are Viable candidates, but you'd have to get someone who's popular enough to defeat Trump and who's strong enough of a politician And that's where I think Newsom steps in me. He looks like a president. He's tall handsome A strong personality. Yeah, he's very articulate like the way he lays things out He knows that a steam role you with facts and statistics that Even if they're true. Yeah, it doesn't matter. No, no, he's a politician. Yeah. Yeah, it's a really good one Yeah, so that's that's probably who I would imagine they would run even though California is a mess But California I think would have been a mess with anybody running it during COVID I think it was a fucking disaster As soon as you started to lockdowns You let people camp in the streets and you fucking the crime shit and the being lenient on bail Yes, whole boy. Yes, the defund the police. Oh boy. Yeah, it's a mess like cleaning that up boy I do not envy anybody there. They're they're viable Democratic candidates. I guess I knew some Whitmer I mean not Cuomo anymore I mean I guess to start from right now Yeah, they don't have to already be out there in the campaign trail Because you people have to really get to know them and to like we're wherever in September of 2023 We only got a year left. Yeah, no, it's true. And it is funny with with with DeSantis You know, I really like the way he handled Florida during COVID I think he's smart, but he is not connected with the voters at all people Just don't seem to like him. Also soon as he's running against Trump The the Trump or or bust people are not on board. Yeah, because then he becomes the enemy Now that's just a sizable chunk of the opposition. Yeah, the people that are in opposition to the current party There's a sizable Trump Trump chunk rather are Trump loyalists. Yeah And if you go against that like that's just not a good strategy It's just like I understand you want to be president, but like do you see the landscape? If Mike Tyson is the champ and you know, you're just coming out of the Olympics What a few years, bro? Get some fights under your belt. You know, like that guy is just kind of unstoppable Trump has There's some magnetism he has for all these people. Yeah, it's it's I don't I don't understand it, but it's real You know, you're not supposed to say it Because you're supposed to be an opposition of hate them and all this up, but it's clearly obvious These got like this cult of personality that they don't have it's like he's a giant figure When you see when he showed up at the UFC in Miami, it was bananas. Oh, so you've got you've seen him up close Yeah, so first of all, I've shook his hand on multiple two occasions now. He has regular sized hands So all that is crazy All that's crazy because I have pretty big hands He has regular sized hands and I was like this is crazy They're all these years. They mocked him for having little hands. He doesn't have a little hands at all That's why so strange that's great. And by the way, how gross didn't mock someone for something they were born with That's so Anti liberal and anti progressive like why are you doing that? Why are you doing that? That's funny. That's such a crazy thing to do like the one thing that he can't control What about his personality? What about all the things he says if you want to get mad at him get mad at him for the things that you're really Changeable, but so okay. He's got the normal size but so so does he does he have this magnetism? well, he's very very very famous and Part of people's dissatisfaction with the current regime right Especially people's dissatisfaction if you see You know Biden's state of decline regardless of how you feel about the policies and most people aren't even engaged They don't understand what's going on whether or not it's beneficial to people and whether or not there are more jobs and whether or not Economies because his arguments that it is given in a good direction right? There's arguments that some of the policies work But they look at him as a figurehead and they say this is bad and then they really believe because he said it so many times The election was rigged. They really believe it. I said a lot of them really believe it So like I was in I wasn't aspen in this lady. She's like I'm a big fan of yours like this Grandma lady. I said thank you and you know that Trump's our president. I go well actually he's not Because president is Biden if you could Google it you could find out and just like oh they got to you No, they didn't get to me. I just like he's actually in the White House He won. Yeah, I don't know if you won. You don't know. No, no, no. I'm not saying that I'm just saying he's definitely in the White House Now whether or not there's any election manipulation I am not the one to fucking come to for any of that, but I would guarantee you that it's not zero I would guarantee you that in the course of human history there's probably never been an election where there's zero election fraud There's always some monkey business going on, but I have seen no evidence I mean, maybe they'll show it if this trial comes about that that shows that He should maybe I should go seek it out No, he might line about this and I'm gonna stick with this is that he lost unfair and square In other words, the media was against him when people People responding to is this idea that you know corporate America was against him. Yeah, that everybody in power Including a lot of Republicans. I think wanted him out. I don't stand. That's right. No, really. It couldn't stand him anymore sure So but that is different Then the election was manipulated and votes were taken right and then the dominion stuff, right? It's all the issues It's horseshit. Yeah, it seems like It seems like it's really hard to sort out too because there's so many different cases and so many different Hard to sort it I mean that what I'm saying is like It's when you are tallying mail in votes digital votes all these different things and they have projections for these places one of things that Kyle Kingsbury showed me or excuse me Kyle Kolynsky jeez hi Kyle Kolynsbury Long time buddy Kyle Kolynsky showed me is that when we we had him on during the election and he accurately Predicted he said yes Trump is winning because these are the people that show up first But you're gonna see the democratic surge for the mail-ins when they count those nope and that's exactly what happens What happens he's very politically aware he understands how it works. Yeah, I don't I don't dispute any of that what I'm saying is It would be wonderful if we had a system where it was bulletproof It would be wonderful if we had a system where it was impossible to have anything other than zero percent election fraud I don't know if that's even realistic But if we did but we can bank on our phones That's right on the internet You know there's there's like federal IDs that are connected to you and this idea that IDs for voting is somehow racist is so bananas I agree with that. This is that's what I mean. I mean like there was a documentary that HBO had on in a fucking Like the early 90s called hacking democracy. Do you remember that? It was during the Bush administration and they were making this argument that Bush didn't really win And they were making this argument that you could manipulate the voting machine So they actually this was a di-bolt machine I believe and they actually showed that it was somehow or another There was it was available for a third party input. Oh, and they did it on the show I'm changed a vote on the show But it was about the Republicans right so it was okay to Yeah, and all right, so now I'm gonna play the other side here Some of these sentences that have been handed out in the January 6 cases are insane It's wild. It's 20 years. Why? 17 years the 22 years the guy wasn't even in He wasn't at the Capitol at the time. He's getting he's getting a terrorism enhancement Come on. Yeah, it's pretty wild It's pretty wild. I'm not saying that like I'm not defending what happened. I know it wasn't but but you know a year two years three years Maybe five years like that's a pretty long prison sentence. Yeah, for non violence They know what to make sure that people never do it again. Yes Which is probably a good thing, but also How did it happen? Like why wasn't there more security there? What was up with cops opening up the gates? Did you ever see some of that? Yeah, I mean my my my understanding and I've not paid super close attention My reason is they basically just got overrun and decided to back off Which is which is a legitimate like military sort of police response? Sure, and I don't think those people were in opposition to the police And they're probably worried about the police's safety since they were vastly outnumbered I think there were some of that right, but also it's super legal to get into the Capitol That too. Don't do that Like when you got Alex Jones out there with a bullhorn saying don't go in And you know that Alex Jones is the voice of reason. That's not a good time But he was right. We seen it's a trap and it is ultimately it is You know and ultimately also they did break the windows. They did climb. I mean they did go No, I can't they should be in there, but 20 no years the long time But the weird one is that guy with the buffalo hat Were they like leading him around a tour? Just like how come he didn't show that part? Yeah, yeah that part's crazy You guys were leading him around on a tour. Yes It's all what a mess what a mess. Yeah, also don't do that. Also. Don't do that. Don't do that. Don't ever do that Don't ever do that, but there's you guys there were going in there with zip ties looking for Nancy Pelosi Yeah, that was bad too Jesus Christ the guy that has foot on the desk He took a photo of himself. Hey bro. How do you think that's gonna do that? He's fucking But that's the thing they're not thinking these people aren't thinking and they really do but that's also the problem If you if you've been told and this is the this is the argument against what Trump did Right was that if you've been told the election is rigged and you're not showing like clear evidence of it You're just putting that narrative out there now people they operate as if their country's been taken over and they think they're patriots That's right And they think they think there's almost like a god-given Like not a right but an imperative Yeah, to do something. Yeah. No, they had Trump Trump would Trump behaved in a disgusting way Look when your own vice president says it and you know Mike Pence Basically did everything Trump asked of him for four years Okay, and he's come out and said Trump behaved in the wrong way I think you got to acknowledge that but but to go back to your point That there's a large group of people in the Republican Party for whom Trump is basically a god and they will not acknowledge it Yeah, they won't just they're scared of him You know, he's the big booming figure that's at the head of the fucking pack You know, and it's just man. It's so polarizing for the country It's just I wish there was two people that we respected You know, or even one Just two people that you know like hey I don't agree with his policies about this and that but I think he's a good person And I think he's really got the best interest of the country in mind and Who knows maybe their policies are correct? Who knows maybe his policies are correct. Let's find out but instead of it's like Hell in a hand basket no matter which way it goes and then my god What if Biden wins again right and beats Trump? And then is 86 and four years and what if people just like don't believe it's real again And it gets worse than January 6 right what if that happens What if people would have Trump wins and people decide the government has been overcome by fascists and we have to wage war on the Infrastructure and blow up fucking generators Kill the grid and I mean people now you're depressing me. You're playing the role of the liberal parent with the climate change Well, I'm just I'm just looking at this precarious position which we stand while we're also Involved in a proxy war with Russia. It's bananas. It scares the shit out of me You know and and we were so scared of it that we'd rather Concentrate on things like climate change like it's almost like we'd rather concentrate on things that are like Not as Terrifying right immediately like in the distance. It's gonna be a real problem. We could focus on it now. It's like Gotta choices Just don't get your kids vaccinated with the MR and ace though other vaccines fine. Don't get your kids vaccinated with the covid vaccines It's not good for them. Yeah, and take some vitamins. Be thanks everybody. Please exercise a little bit. I'm not gonna kill you That's it. It's a good place to end. Yeah, I think so. Thank you. Thank you and thank you for having the courage to talk about this stuff I mean, it's it's amazing that a lot of the things that you got in trouble with early in the pandemic are now absolutely regarded as fact and discussed openly in mainstream circles like Dr. Lena when was on CNN which is the most mainstream thing out there And she was saying that the estimates of covid deaths was probably actually 30% of what was Reported which is what crazy thing when she said it you can see the look on the people's face like what the fuck is she saying? Because there's a lot of discussion now about the lab leak. It's like it's commonplace Yep, to discuss it. It's commonplace to discuss the pros and cons of gain of function research You know the the people most people are currently aware that cloth masks don't work at all. Yep Most people are currently aware. What when was the last time you heard the phrase test and trace right? I don't remember the social distancing. That one drove me nuts. Yeah, that one drove me nuts. Everybody agrees School closures. I mean that one. We all agree disaster should never happen again shouldn't happen. I mean I was talking about that If there's one thing I'm proud of I was talking about that in April of 2020. Yeah, the schools need to be reopened So yeah, and they were in some places. Yeah, we're down here. That's what's crazy You know what's crazy is we have examples of Florida and Texas and a lot of other places where they just opened up and they didn't have worse I mean even though like look we're in a bad state in terms of like the health of this country Like the people are not that healthy and wasn't that one of the arguments in one of your substacks recently? Yes, oh so so The argument is just today these this epidemiologists wrote well that we have a different rules about the new COVID boosters in other Countries because we're sicker than other countries so we have to give people more mRNA and it's like so wait your argument is you Our public health establishment and medical care is so bad That we have to give people we are giving people advice that other countries aren't giving them That have better outcomes and you want us to take our advice Maybe maybe we should listen to the other countries where things are going better for a change Maybe maybe instead of trying to medicate our way out of every problem. We should just tell people Go for a walk. I mean this was one of the things about lockdowns way back in 2020 right? This is a disease that it hurts people who are obese or morbidly obese The most so maybe the solution is not to have them sit on their asses for another six months There's also been some real data about vitamin D. Yep and real data about how many people who could have helped yep So it's it's been a long three years But what's so depressing? Just sort of this last thing. I'm like they don't seem to learn anything That's what the last week taught me. That's why that's why I feel like I can't stop talking about it They're doubling down even as the rest of the world is realizing You know what covid is not a big deal. We need to you know Reserve these vaccines for people who are at really high risk The US will not let it go at least the US public health establishment will not let it go And the truth is 98% of the country isn't going to listen to them But it's still important to point out that they're full of it. We have to keep doing that Well, thank you for doing that. Thanks. You appreciate you You're out there Tomatruth and you know in the beginning you took a lot of shit for it You really did and a lot of people who are in apology Well, they're not giving it to me. Well, they don't have to. You got it. I mean you you know you deserve it You know you do. Thanks, Joe. Thank you. All right. All right. Bye everybody