Joe Roman, fine. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. So Dave, you were telling me right before the show that you were now retiring because you got an impromptu phone call and bet hundreds of millions of dollars on oil prices going down. Congratulations. It was a good bet. It just wasn't timed. Right. I thought you got it in on time. I thought you got it in like, yeah. I thought you got it in like five minutes early. I did not. Those are not a massive investigation to that right away. Didn't someone make like $1.8 billion in like five minutes? Yeah. There's a lot of those like trades like that that should be investigated. They kind of never are. Bro. How about what's his name, Lutnik? Yeah. How about that one? He's a tariffs one. Working for the administration and also standing to gain huge if people can sue over the tariffs. Well, explain the whole thing. Well, do you know how to do the actual details of it? No, I don't really know that he was telling everybody that don't sweat it. The tariffs are golden. We're getting them through. There's going to be no problems. Is that what it was? But in meanwhile, who's shorting the tariffs? Yes. Yes. So he was personally shorting that's fault with that. Absolutely is. Yeah. So you don't get serious. Yeah. He's quite litigious gentleman. Yeah. It might be. See, we can find it. He's a while the people were on the files, visited the island, and then they still work. It was unbelievable. Some people had a resign from some jobs, well, especially just him because he so, the way, there's something about a really confident liar. Like where they just said, because I mean, that interview clip where he's like, let me tell you something. I met Jeffrey Epstein that one time. He had a massage table. He said they were sex massage tables. I went right back to my wife and I said, honey, we are never hanging out with Jeffrey Epstein again. And that is that, you know, is that really just cool? Oh, dude. I mean, I was seeing that. I don't know if it's verbatim, but that is the exact spare issue. Right now. We'll be pretty verbatim. Let's listen to it. Listen to it. I find very, very close to exactly what he said. Okay. Make it. That's one again. What was this one? Let Nick interview about Epstein. And he just sounds, I mean, so like morally outraged about the idea. So many people that they exist in that world we just pretend that you're a different person. You pretend you're one way. Yeah. You pretend you think things differently. It's, I've been up close with people like that. I said, that was my takeaway from debating Chris Cuomo was like, I just, it's a weird thing to see someone just lie like that. Here it is. You did good. Now this is the greatest black male or ever. What am I trying to find? Yeah, try to explain to him. It was a, let me see the key words that would downplay his relationship with him. That might be it. Is there something that would be the other thing, but I don't know what that would be. Does he do? He's a, what's he's a commerce secretary. He was always like a money finance guy. I think he used to work for C, C NBC if I'm correct. In this administration, this like the wolves have taken over the hen house. Yeah. Yeah, they sure have. This is, this is what draining the swamp looks like. Under fire for Epstein ties, Commerce Secretary Howard let Nick defense visiting his private island. Yeah, but this is, this isn't the clip. The clip was from, he said the top it says, it says, let Nick said in an interview last year, he was never in the room with Epstein, other than a 2005 visit to his apartment. Okay, so that's probably it. He said, you know, he met him once, like this guy. So he specifically says that he met him, that he saw he had a massage table in his living room. And he goes, hey, Jeffrey, what are you? You really like massages. And he claims that Jeffrey went, yeah, and the right kind of massages. And that's when he decided he would never talk to him again. Nobody likes the right kind of massages. Those are terrible. Imagine if those were legal, just hand job massages, there'd be no relationships. How many people who heard terrible relationships because they need sex? There's a lot of guys, they'd be like, I'm just gonna hang out with the boys, just get jerked off what's on Wednesday. And I'm good. Howard letting it down, plays relationship with Epstein during Senate testimony. Is this it? Now this is from recently, this from this year. I did find an article that kind of, I don't even know what this website is, I don't know if this is. His old firm did not in fact profit from this cream court tear ruling. It says that there was an article claiming it, and then that's how I was trying to dig through this. Oh, we've been ahead of that out then. I mean, it was reported though that they did, but I don't know what this says. So this firm is run by his two sons, Elder Luttnik announced the sale, the stake in the firm, and other investors of the cream court are Friday invalidated many of Trump's tariffs. The president said, okay, I did, the caster did not consider the product, which has existed for years, was humming trade on Wall Street's first term tariff push, but decided against it after weighing the political sensitivities according to a senior banker familiar with this matter. Cantor spokesman said the salesman erroneously believed the firm was likely to greenlight the business, okay, I'm missing this. I'm not exactly sure what they're saying here. There's just the legality of tariffs or discussing that. I'm an email that's that they're representing 10 million and that's where I go. I was trying to figure out the tariff refund rights. I could see if all this is what not. So what was the accusation? The accusation was that he had shorted tariffs while claiming that tariffs are going to work. Yeah, the accusation was that he stood to make a lot of money from tariffs being struck down. Punch put that into perplexity, Jamie. Find out if that's accurate and let it scour the internet instead of us doing it. Gotta love AI. Yeah, it is. It is. I can't wait till it takes over government. It's gonna be awesome. It's after a while you're like, I don't know if it could be much worse than what humans are doing with government. It's gonna be better. It's not gonna be greedy. Well, as long as it determines that human life is valuable, I feel like it's really the, the deal. But humans. So let's be honest. Yeah, some homeless guys taking a shit on your drag war. Is that guy really valuable? Yeah, but you know, but to AI, we all might be homeless guys taking a shit. There was these San Francisco tech guys and they got trapped in their Waymo because a homeless guy started attacking the Waymo and yelling at them. Why are you paying robots? No. Yeah, you're a trader. You're paying robots. You're paying the robots. The homeless guy was a set of guys. The homeless guy was attacking the Waymo. The tech guys were in the Waymo. We were terrified for our life. We feared our safety. Because they're, they're being attacked by a crazy person saying you shouldn't be giving money to robots. That's an uncomfortable position to be done. I get all my information from the Tim Dylan show, by the way. But they did it. It's not the worst source. It's the best source. It's the best source. Him and that dude. What's his name? James Lee. He's our other number one source of information. Conspiracy theorist. There you go. There you go. You're one, a Waymo, a gal got in. And there's a fucking homeless guy in the trunk. Because apparently the last person, when they left their Waymo, they opened the trunk to get their luggage out. And they never closed it. So the homeless guy hopped into their fucking Waymo and closed it. And was it the trunk? So she gets you orders of Waymo. She climbs in. There's a homeless guy in the truck. And Waymo's like, that's unacceptable. Oh, oh, you're taking it. OK. OK. The main claim is that Cantor Fitzgerald, Howard Lettingxformer, firm now chaired by his son, stood to profit by buying tariff refund rights that only became valuable of Trump's tariffs were overturned. But the firm insisted ultimately did not execute those trades. What critics say happened. Investigators and reporters reporting notably by wire described Cantor Fitzgerald exploring a business where it would buy the rights to future tariff refunds from importers for about $20, $30 on the dollar. Internal materials cited in those reports suggested Cantor had capacity to trade several hundred million dollars of these refund rights, and had already facilitated at least one trade of around $10 million in rights under the IEPA tariffs. The idea was that, of course, later struck down the tariffs the government would have to refund duties. And Cantor or its clients would collect the full refund while the original importers only kept a small upfront payment. So why is this seen as a conflict? Is it true? So just said that they executed on one, right? Didn't say that. Let's go back up. It's based off that email. Yeah. Article 1. It says internal material cited in those reports suggested Cantor had capacity to trade and had already facilitated at least one trade of around $10 million in rights. It's only $10 million. Let it go, Dave. That is small potatoes. So that's what we're talking about. Yeah, these kind of guys. What Cantor and Letnik side said, Cantor Fitzgerald has publicly stated that while some salespeople explored, like that in quotes, broke rate tariff refund rates in 2025, the firm never executed any transactions or taken any position on tariff refund claims. Calling contrary reports false. Follow-up recording has echo that Cantor considered products tied to the Supreme Court tariff ruling, but ultimately backed off in part because of the political optics. Duh, that's a big duh. Around Letnik's government job. Letis coverage is no public evidence that Cantor actually booked profits from this strategy though the investigations in Congress are ongoing and focused on whether there was any attempted or potential profit here. Are you more interested in the ethics conflicts of interest or the nuts and bolts about the secondary tariff refund market works financially? No, so it seems like we don't really have evidence. Well, it'll be interesting. I mean, if which is probably gonna happen, but the Democrats take the House and the Senate in the midterm elections this year, I mean, that'll just be the next two years of politics. It'll be investigations and- Some Democrats can lead. Just over, she just took over the seat in Trump's neighborhood where Mar-a-Lago is. So Democrat Lady just won. Yep. Yeah. Well, there's- Yeah. I mean, look, in his first term, they impeached him twice for absolute bullshit. So they'll go after him for anything, but I have a feeling now there's probably a lot more for them to investigate and work on stuff like this and the meme, coins, stuff and whatever business deal. You know, I don't have the details at the top of my mind, but I do know that they said at one point that Jared Kushner would not be involved in this administration at all, because he does so much business over there. And it's just like- So they were like, oh, no, no, no, he won't, but now he totally is. It's him and Whitcoff are like the lead, and the negotiators in this too. So- Oh. So there's a lot of meat on the bone for Democrats to make big political theater out of for the next two years. Is there any where that's not corrupt? I mean, when we look at the insider trading in Congress, when you look at all these slimy deals that get made with NGOs, you look at everything. It's like everything's dirty. There's not one part of government like right there, they nailed it. Yeah, well, that is true. Like maybe the post office. That's, I mean, post office is pretty fucking good, dude. Yeah, compared to all the rest of it. Sure. You get us a letter moved across the whole country for like what is it like, 30 cents? How much is a stamped these days? That's true. I mean, I don't know if you include the cost on the back end, like the taxes that pay for the whole thing, maybe it's a little more expensive, but relatively speaking, yeah. The pellet is, you can get something about that organization. Sure. In terms of government organizations, you never hear except going postal. That used to be a thing. Remember those days? Yes, I did. It was a while. Like where so many post officers went so crazy and started shooting people that they started calling it going postal, but it never just went away. Yeah, young people, if you're listening to this and you don't know what we're talking about, in our day, we didn't have school shootings. Okay, we had to do it the old fashioned way. You had to drive a postman crazy until he went around shooting people. And it happened several times to the point that that became a thing. Like these crazy people. Do you see those papers? There was a video game called postal. Well, you run around shooting people. It was in the, I was there in the 90s? Yeah, that would be about the time, Paris. The first one came out in 97. Yeah, yeah, and it was like highly criticized. They were like, weren't they like cartoon-looking characters? Can you see if you pull up a video of posts? It was like South Park lived in characters, just blasted people. So it felt like less, if I remember correctly, or maybe that's the box. And I ever played it. Maybe I played it. Oh, this is not. This is not. Oh, this is not. This looks way better than 99. This was in the 90s, for sure. Is this the new postal? There's what it looked like. There might have been a newer version right there. Oh, Jesus. You just run around jacking people. Yeah. So it was like the first Grand Theft Auto, really. I mean, Grand Theft Auto came out around then, too, actually. It didn't look like this, didn't know. But real weird, though, right? That post-office workers were just killing a bunch of people. That's what it looked like. Like that. OK. This is what it looked like. It didn't look like that other thing. It was like, it wasn't a first-person thing. It was like, you're seeing it from above, and you just run around killing everybody. I played a postal, though. That was a first-person like that. Maybe they had more versions of it. I also, I don't want to show, because they don't know what it's going to be some bad stuff on there. Yeah, Bravo voice. Dude, video games really are like crack. They're like, problem. I loved your, you had a rant about that years ago about how like the problem is that they're so much fun. They're not accomplishing anything. The last video game I got into was UFC 3. And I loved that game. I just loved it. And then, like, I think it was, I got married. My wife got pregnant. And I was like, I got to get rid of this. I just can't. I'm like, so I was at the dojo of comedy. It was a club in New Jersey. Great club. They have an L-A-1 too. Oh, do they? OK, I'm triply. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So I was at the one in Jersey, and they have in the green room, they have UFC 3. And I was like, oh, that's the game that I got really into. So I was there for a weekend. And I mean, I just, the whole time I was there, just in the green room playing this video game. And I was like, it was like a feeling almost like, like a drug addict who's around their drug of choice where I was like, I need to be away from that. Like I will play this until I kill myself. It's so much fun. It's a problem. Robbie Lawler fighting, you know, whoever and just. And they keep getting better. Yeah, I know. Well, I didn't. I stopped at that. So I never even like learned how to play the new ones. But like, I can't. But with number, UFC game of the yet now, the graphics keep getting better. The movement keeps getting more natural. Yeah. And first person shooters, man. Oh, my God. Who was the good? No. Was it Joe Lowe's on? I want to say. Was that one 55? Yeah. Really good grappler. It wasn't his thing. Like he was obsessed with video games. And then he went, I got to just do something else instead of this. So I just did Jiu Jitsu. And then he's got like amazing at Jiu Jitsu. I swear I think that was a story. I could be misremembering this, but I swear I heard him talk about this in an interview once. And that they were just like, I just played video games all day all night. And then eventually I was like, I got to do something productive with this. And so he just started doing Jiu Jitsu instead. I wonder what he's up to these days. He was a fun fighter to watch. Fun dude like in person too. Him and his brothers to beat the fuck out of each other on the yard. Like in the front yard. They would have like full on MMA fights. Like full power. They just beat the piss out of each other in the front yard. I was like, boys. Save it. Like save that way along each other. That's crazy. That's a young man's game. They had to wake up a bunch of guys hanging around. They looked like it was a picnic or something like that. They decided let's spice this picnic up. You and me fight motherfucker. And they would fight. Fight fight. But all across this country, there are boys fighting in their yard. And that was of the highest level of yard fighting. I mean, that was top 1%. Wow, that was a bit too. Too like legit MMA professionals. Yeah, too legit MMA professionals are mad at each other. Because they're in the house with each other all the time. Shut the fuck up. You didn't fucking do that. You were supposed to put that shit away. Yeah. Yeah. You ate my food. Yeah. They both ended up being real fun fighters to watch. Oh, yeah. Joe was awesome. He was a great fighter. Yeah, he had a lot of fights in UFC too. Yeah. And I think it got to, you know, how many years is he in? God, God. I want to say it was at least in the UFC for like around a decade. He was, yeah, he had a pretty long career. Yeah. Because he was fighting. I mean, he fought. I don't know. I mean, he fought like the whole, like I think when he started it was like BJ Penn era of lightweight. And then he fought into like Anthony Paddis was the champion. Yeah, pull up Lowzons Wikipedia. Find out. So he retired. Well, this first fight was September 23rd, 2006. And I think it's his last time it was 2018. Mm. Wow. Yeah, that's crazy. 2019. Whew. Some of these guys just don't, they just don't want to stop. This is too fun. It's a very hard job to keep going for a while. Maybe the hardest. Yeah. You know, like on your body. Oh, yeah. Other than football. There's a lot of those guys in the NFL. They only lost a couple years. Yeah, for sure. This episode is brought to you by Intuit TurboTax. April 15th is coming fast. There's been so many tax law changes this year, which means you're going to need an expert who has your back, your in luck. TurboTax now has in person locations nationwide walking to their tech enables doors and meet face to face with a TurboTax full service expert who will get your best outcome. Your expert works to get you every doll you deserve while updating you as you go about your day. Head to TurboTax dot com to find a store near you. No, I mean, that's a real tough one, but there's nothing. Well, I guess I guess like professional football, there's a similar aspect to where like you're not just, I mean, look, you can go to the hospital from basketball. You know, you can get hurt and get a bad injury. But the NFL or the UFC, you kind of like you know, every time you go into it, like there's a very reasonable chance. Yeah, you're leaving here on a stretcher to go to the hospital. But particularly with MMA, it's the most unforgiving sport where like you, you're one mistake, one mistake away from like, you know, like if LeBron James misses a wide open layup, he runs back on defense and tries to, you know, get a block or something on the next play. But in MMA, you could be dominating fighting a perfect fight, make one mistake and it's like, okay, you're unconscious now, maybe you're on the court. Come on. Yeah. For example, yep. Come on, I was way ahead in the fight. It's in the fifth round. I think there's like 20 seconds to go or something crazy. Leon just plants one, a perfect headkick. Yeah. And John Anick makes the perfect call. You know, like something he had been said about him maybe deciding, you know, to quit. And then John Anick says, but that is not the cloth from which he was cut. Yeah. Boom. Man, is this real? One of the most amazing MMA championship knockouts ever. Oh, ever, ever. And then just his post fight speech. Look at me now. Look at me now. And then comes back and wins the rubber match. Yeah. It's an interesting thing. How much, you know, like, first off, like getting knocked out cold like that and you know, better than me, but like that does a number to your body. Like that's not, you're not logically psychologically. And also, I think physically. And then also just like the confidence that that gave Leon Edwards going into the next fight. Right. Like just changes everything now. Yeah. Kamaro had to be very careful because he knew it anyway. I mean, he dodged most of the big ones until the big one landed. Yep. So in his head, in that fight, he had a narrative and that narrative completely changed with one head kick. Okay. So going into the next fight, the narrative is now, if you fuck up, you will be unconscious. You can't get knocked unconscious again. And he fought much more cautiously in the second fight. I remember seeing that with, um, I felt like you could watch that when, uh, doesn't pour a fuck Connor McGregor the second time. Like, you know, McGregor had knocked him out years earlier and you could kind of see, you know, like you could see Dustin, I'm not saying like he was nervous or anything. He's like one of the greatest fighters ever. But you could kind of just see like he gets in there and he starts and he takes a couple shots from Connor and he's still there. You know, and then he lands a couple shots and you could see like in that first round, like his confidence growing. Like you almost got to get that out of your head that it's like, yeah, yeah, that guy beat you that back then. But you're a different guy now. Well, with Connor to talk about weathering the initial storm, yeah, initial storm is crazy. He's so explosive, so fast, so accurate. And then another part about that second fight was Dustin setting up those calf kicks, specifically because both of those guys fight Southpaw. And when you both fight Southpaw, if you're a Southpaw like Dustin, a lot of times the calf kicks not really available. Like you have to, you have to throw it with a switch or it doesn't have the same sort of potential. It's slightly different potential when you're exchanging it in combinations. But with Connor, it was wide open because Connor is two things going on. One is the Southpaw also he had just gotten up to play Mayweather fight. He's very boxing heavy, not just but a while back. But he had really concentrated on striking with his hands. His hands were elite. So because of that, your stance is a little wider and you're putting a little bit more weight on your legs. Yeah. It always had a wide stance anyway. He had that karate stance. The craziest thing about that is the calf kick really didn't become a big deal even until Connor was a superstar. Like it was after that. That's how recent it is. Yeah, it's very strange that that was almost like a thing that didn't get figured out until so recently. And then just totally changed everything. Like at this point, you ran nothing. You never see it. But you pretty rarely see guys kick guys in the thigh anymore. Well, no, but I mean like compared to what it used to be where it used to be like that was that was what a leg kick was for many years in MMA. And now it's the I'd say like the majority of leg kicks are targeting the calf. Yeah. Like you'll see almost like a thigh kick almost just to switch it up a little bit. Yeah. These guys got really good at taking those. Yeah, you got really good at being conditioned. And you know, we also saw a few leg breaks. Right. We saw the Anderson Silva one. We saw the Chris Wiedman one. It's been a few leg breaks from guys just full power leg kicking the thigh. And then someone just lifts up their knee a little bit and takes it on the right where the shin bone meets the kneecap is where they like to catch it. And boy, I've seen way too many of those. I've seen a bunch in person, but because of the internet, I've seen dozens and dozens of small promotions where a guy throws that kick wrong really hard and the guy checks it and his fucking foot just wraps around the leg. Yeah. See it dangling there. Oh, no. I've seen you recognize the thing like that injury is so recognizable. Like I've seen it so many times now. I see it. I just go, oh, it's going to wrap around the calf. I'm going to flop. He's going to fall down. I've seen it several times on internet videos and in UFC fights. I've only once seen a guy continue to talk shit about the other guy after from the ground, which is the craziest shit ever. Everyone else I've seen is like crying in pain and Connor's talking about your wife's whatever. Like he's like, yeah, he asked me to come and sit down with him and do a podcast. He's an animal. I mean, dude, one of a kind. That's for sure. He apparently made a post on his Instagram saying he's back. And if it's true, that would be awesome. That would be awesome. The idea is his suspension for whatever he took before is up. So everybody. What was it? Something, I think it was Douglas Murray when he wrote that article about me. He says, Mr. Confidence returns to save fighting again. Call your grandma, nanny, we did it. Watch and pay me. Fuck you, pay me. You fat Irish prick. You don't have my money. I put your brain to sleep. Who's that? Who's he talking about? See is in the casinos after the Mac loves you as all. I got love for you. It's an all. It's an honor. It's light work. It's easy for life and eternity. It's McGregor. How drunk was he when you wrote this? I do this fight game, easy peasy. The sound of my shots off the head, go Bing and green dot laser form. OK. Well, I really hope he is actually back. I hope it's true. It'd be fun to see. It'd be a lot of times. It'd be a lot of fun to see. Great personality. The sports ever known. That's right. There's no one even close. I mean, he's the most dynamic personality the sports ever known. And he was for a time there just such an unbelievable fight. I mean, he was like just it was incredible what he was doing. The any obvious fight. Oh, yeah. I was there. I was there. Well, thanks to you. It's really good. Really good seats. Thanks to you. But that was that was one of the bet. That might be the best fight I've ever been to live. Because that whole card was just stacked. And that is the main event was just unbelievable. He was in the matrix. He was in the matrix. He was just in the zone. You know, Dana said it best. He's like, that kid eats pressure. He goes, he eats it. Yeah. He thrives on pressure. Pressure that makes other people wilt. Yeah. He like shines under that pressure. And he had an amazing ability, even very early in his career, which was like kind of it was really unique. Like, because even like on his first fight ever, if you watch his first fight in the UFC against like, bromage, I think the guy's name is. And he was a relatively unknown at the time. But dude, the place is going nuts. He already had made so much kind of like street cred for himself. And then the Irish thing, like the Irish were really, really into it. But he from in the very first fight, he would always create these moments. Where it's like, dude, this is going to be the biggest spectacle that you, my opponent, has ever been in their career. Like, I'm going to get you mad with shit talking. I'm going to get the fan so excited because he's completely comfortable there. Like, I'm not sure if you're really comfortable here. But and so it would, and even with Aldo, who had been the entire division, he literally when they started the division, they started him as champion. He didn't even win it. He came in because they have solved the WNC. So he was the entire featherweight division had just dominated everyone. And he even created such a moment that like, Aldo was like, he was the boogeyman. Yeah, dude, he was incredible. He's one of the greatest featherweights of all time. But he got him to the point where he was like so furious. He was like, I'm going to take this fucking guy's head off and then Connor's just like relaxed. He didn't care about any of the shit talking. He was like, yeah, we're having fun. Let's play. He lost his composure. Yeah, and he looked very overwhelmed by the moment. And oh, and by the way, everyone from Ireland came to Vegas for that fight. It was the nutties thing I've ever seen in my fucking life. The entire Mandalay Bay was overcome with Irish people. I mean, overcome like you couldn't move. There was nothing but Irish people everywhere. And they were singing. They were all singing together in the halls of this gigantic casino packed, but like the waiting in line for something. And they were just their party in for Connor. I remember, I think it was when I want to say it was when I was like, look at all these people. Yeah, it was nuts. Well, this is nuts, man. They were all Irish people. Like you got to realize nobody had a following like him. Like this is actually Irish people for the Floyd Mayweather fight. They were still right or die with them even for that fight. I think it was when he fought Dennis Seever, I want to say. I think I'm in Boston. So I went with Louis J. Gomez, my good friend, hilarious comedian. And he, me and him went to some Irish bar. So what, like we just happened to be in Midtown, Manhattan. And we were like, all the fights are coming on to other playing it at this bar. You know, it was just like an Irish pub. And dude, I mean, it wasn't even that big of a bar. They must it. I mean, it was shoulder to shoulder Irish people losing their fucking minds. Like it was the, it was the most fun environment to watch a fight in because they're just, I mean, they're just like, but all that singing and chanting. It seemed like everyone had an Irish flag with them. Like it was this in a little bar. It was this. That's nuts, man. Look at that. That's Mandalay Bay. Wow. Look at this. Oh, that's MGM. Well, they were everywhere. They're probably in every fucking casino. There was. This is crazy. Imagine. Well they were everywhere. They were probably in every fucking casino there was. This is crazy. Imagine... Imagine if you're from Northern Ireland? They still remember the troubles. You made it out of town. Just came to Vegas for a little gambling. You don't follow MMA. You don't fucking idea. What's this one about? I have picked the wrong fucking weed for me vacation. Oh, by the way, I was going to say that Douglas Murray's big knock on me when he wrote his op-ed in the New York Post was he goes he goes, you know, Dave goes on Joe Rogan and he talks about foreign policy like he's an expert but I bet he wouldn't go in there and talk MMA with him because then Joe would recognize he's not an expert. And I was like, we do that all the time. Do that every time. We do that all the time. That's us dude. Almost every time we hang out. We end up talking MMA. And like it probably is fair that yeah, there'll be moments where you'll correct me if I get something wrong. So what? But if I get it right yet, you don't go that's so dumb. Imagine we don't talk about MMA because you're not an expert. I don't know. Well, I watch a lot of it. I have some thoughts. Why is he so silly? I love Douglas. I really do. I've enjoyed talking to him and think he's a brilliant man. But I was very disappointed with... You've never been? A very disappointed with that sort of strategy that you shouldn't be talking about these things that are factual. But even more disappointed with that notion. The notion that like you would never talk about MMA with me. Do you think we would... First of all, I don't think I argue about MMA with anybody. I don't think anybody. If someone has a point about MMA, I never argue. I might say... You've corrected me when I've got things wrong. Yeah, or I might say I disagree. If somebody... Some people think that certain things can happen. I'm like, oh, I don't see that. I disagree. That happens. Sure. Yeah. But... Well, also like... Whatever point you're making is either a good point or it's not a good point. If it's like an objective claim. Right. You know what I mean? Right. So like if I say like when Volkonovsky thought Lopez, his jab was crucial. Mm-hmm. Okay. That's either correct or it's incorrect. Like whether I'm an expert or not, I'm not an expert on fighting. The GG's you can watch the fight and that would be correct. Yes, right. So well, he doesn't see it. Right. I saw he hit a home run. You're right. That's very, very correct. That's crazy. Well, you know, it was a weird thing during that show was... Because it's a weird... I don't know. There's like weird incentives. Yeah. It's built into like all of this. Well, incentives are the right word. Because there's a lot of people that are saying things and you go, why are you saying that? Yeah. Also, from my perspective, I was a little disappointed with it because I was like, oh, this could be like a really cool thing. Uh-huh. And it had been literally... Which I don't think I'm saying anything that is like betraying confidence here. But the only thing that was ever said to me, I don't know, you called me and you were like, what do you think about doing this? And I think I said yes before you could finish answering. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I figured it out. So that's absolutely. Let's do that. And then you told me that he had said, hey, he really doesn't want this to develop into like a food fight. He wants to make this like a good faith thing. And I was like, oh, awesome. And now I feel like he like Trump Whitcoff negotiated me. Like he says, he says, he says, he says, he says, he was, because then he came in and the whole thing was about me. He didn't want to talk about the issues at all. He just wanted, and so in a weird way, I was like, well, this sucks. Because I thought we could have had a really cool thing. But then there was this other part of me that was like, I mean, he's really just handing this to me. You know what I mean? Like he kind of just like gave me the win in a thing that was a big show with like a, you know, a lot of people I knew were going to watch it. I mean, obviously every time I do your show a lot of people are going to watch it. But that was a particularly big one. And so I was kind of almost like for the first 45 minutes of it, I was kind of sitting there like, oh, I can't believe he just, he went this route. Well, if you look at it objectively, there weren't a lot of options. Right. Yeah. It's very difficult to argue the side that what they're doing, like we were talking about Gaza in particular. Yeah. Like the arguing that that's not horrific. And if you're a human being and you recognize that there are human beings that are subjected to that government, just like you're subjected to ice, you're subjected to homeland security, you're subjected to the cops. If you're a civilian, you have to listen to these orders. So if you're living in Gaza and you're a child or you're a woman, and you live, you're not Hamas. Okay. So I think that's the idea that you're responsible for October 7th. Even if you're one of the people that cheered in the street, boy, don't you think you kind of have to cheer in the street? If everybody else is cheering the street, if you're fucking in terror for your life, and you have to like keep your safety intact. You got to kind of go along with whatever everybody else is doing. I'm not saying it's that's good, but when you look at how that place is, it's not that bad. I mean, the most recent videos that I've seen were still like a few months old. So I don't know if it's stopped, do they stop bombing? I don't know what's going on. No, they've slowed down a bit, but they haven't stopped. Okay. There was nothing left, man. And that represents people's homes. That represents schools, that represents hospitals. There's no way you can argue that that's not horrific. Yeah. So you stuck. That's right. That's right. It's kind of indefensible. You pivot to arguing against this guy rather than against the issue. Well, I think that, you know, it's in, I can't remember if this was in the letter to America or this was in his Declaration of War against America, but Osama bin Laden literally said that civilians are fair targets because you guys have elections and you vote for these politicians and they're the ones who conduct these wars that slaughter innocent Muslims. Like just saying, it's the logic of Osama bin Laden to say that civilians are responsible for what? And in Gaza, like they don't even really have a government. Hamas is not a government. They don't have a regular election. They had one election back in 2005 or 2006 or whatever it was, which Hamas did not even win a majority's of. They won on pluralities, you know what I mean? And so the idea that you're holding these people responsible for Hamas just doesn't make any sense and just on a very basic human level, you just kind of go, and I'm not like in a egalitarian, I'm not saying all people are equal or all cultures are equal or anything like that, but on a very basic human level, those are real people too. And when a mother is like pulling her sexual dead body out of the rubble, that's the same exact experience as if your wife was pulling your sexual dead like that same thing is happening to her. And once you even just admit that, it does just change the calculation. It changes the calculation to be like, okay, look, the onus is on you to demonstrate that this is absolutely necessary. There is no other option than to do it this way. And that makes defending most wars very difficult. Not all of them, but most wars are very difficult to defend if you just run it through that filter. Of like, is there any other option other than this? Have you exhausted everything else? Of course in the case with Israel and Palestine, you go, oh, you never even tried to just give them their independence? You've never tried to just let them out from this occupation and see if maybe that will improve things. And it is crazy that the world didn't at one point in time stand up and say, there's a simple solution here. Like these people should have state. Like why do you get to control them, but they're not Israeli? Like they're kind of a country, but not really because they're attached to you? Yeah, it's a people. Why don't you guys go buy another country and give it to them and let them have a country or they don't like being attached on the same small patch of dirt to people that have a totally different ideology, I guess. Well, that's right. And that, look, I mean, it's just, but we are. Yeah. We have Canadians right there. Yes, Canadians do get citizenship in their own country. They think it's a disappear too. Boy, that's the last thing ISIS is looking for is fucking Canadians. Like, oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, your visas expired and don't worry about it, buddy. Get on the plane. They probably have a much easier time. Like Canadians are going, all right. Guess I got to go. Well, yeah. Also, they can just ditch the accent and pretend they're Americans and everybody will buy it. Yeah, it's much easier. I don't say about wrong. Yeah. You know, they could just say, ah, sorry, I don't have my license on me. Yeah, that's true. Yeah. Like, okay, buddy, where are you from? I live in Iowa. Okay, sounds right. That does check it out. Okay, buddy. All right. Shit, that does check. You see the shit that's going on in the airports? So they're using ice now at the airports because, first of all, how many ice agents are there? Aren't they busy? How do you have time to put them in all the airports? How many fucking airports? It's in low tens of thousands. There's not that many of them. Right. So like, how many airports are there? There's a lot of airports. Okay, so you're putting ice in the airports. We get all these ice guys. Are you hiring new ice guys to take the airport jobs? Like, did you just like take seven weeks to train them? So did they have like a surplus of like a ice factory? Were they turning them out and putting them out there? I hurt. So I didn't see any of them. I flew out here the other day. And I didn't see any of them. But then I did see people saying that they were at the airport I flew out from later that day. Up to 150. That's not a lot. Immigration and customs and enforcement officers were deployed at airports across the United States on Monday. So I of course, you know, you get on social media. Somebody sends you something. Somebody sent me something. I'm not sure it was true. But it was like look at the difference between the lines at the airport before ice was there. And after ice was there. And tell me that only 10 million illegal aliens got in. They're like, what is the real? We were talking about this last night. Like what's the real number? What is the real number of the legal in the United States? We don't know. You were saying something about Ann Coulter? Yeah, well she had, and this was from a while ago. So she had in her book, Audios America. She had, I believe it was from Bear Stearns. I could be wrong. Double check now. That was one of the big finance companies. That they had put a thing where like they put it between like 30 and 50 million total in the country. And 50's why? Yeah. And this is before Joe Biden and them. Now I don't know maybe they got those numbers wrong. This is before Biden. So what year was this book? I want to say 2014, 2015. Oh my god. That's 10 years. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of them, a lot of them have come in since then. Well, if that's 10 million, they believe came in through the Biden administration. Yeah. So over four years. Well, I remember the numbers being like during the Biden administration where they'd be like, it was something like last month there were 700,000 border apprehensions. And you're like, well, geez, then how many were just floating? And you'd see those big caravans coming in and stuff. I mean, look, it's a huge, that still is a huge scandal. And as much as I have really been really criticizing Trump and the Trump administration since last summer, you know, he's done a good job in securing the border. That is the one thing that like you kind of got to give him. And he got that secured like right away. Even if you think that it should be open. And those people should be able to travel freely. They should. There's no one's illegal on stolen land. That kind of shit. You know, much sex trafficking happened during that time of children. Let me children were trafficked that way. You know, my children were dragged across the border and sold to psychopaths. Oh, yeah. Oh, it's horrible. I mean, I saw, um, Oh, there's anything with at least 15, at least 50 million illegals in the country today. See my book, audio, America for the analysis from Pulitzer Prize winning reporters and numbers crunchers from Bear. I was right. It was Bear. So this is 2022 this post. Wow. The book is even older though. The book is like the book is from before. I want to say 2015, but it's around that is crazy. Uh, that's crazy. Supposedly this is the book that got Donald Trump on the immigration issue. Uh, at least I've heard, I first hand call to say that before. Maybe that's right. Maybe that's not right. But, um, but yeah, I mean, look, it's like, it's also a particularly, it's a, it's a profound like act of, of treachery for a government to do that to its own country. Like to, to allow that and really facilitate that to happen against the will of the domestic population. Like if you were to, I've tried to look this up before. I was trying to figure this out because I did a big immigration debate last year. Um, or maybe the year before. And I was trying, you can't even get numbers on what the polling on open borders is because no one even asked the question in polling because it's like, they ask like, do you think immigration policy should be less restrictive or more restrictive? Right. Because the number of people who support open boys like maybe 1% of the country supports that. Right. It's as unified an issue as anyone could have that. No, you can't just have the border wide open. Right. So, you know, that to the American people against the, like, you, you drastically changed the country in a way that is not really, it's not easy to just undo. I mean, as we've seen, right, Donald Trump backed off a nasty portation is almost immediately because big business doesn't want it. And then because look like the level of violence that you'd need to just physically deport 50 million people is going to be something that the American people just aren't going to put up with. And you even see in Minnesota. And rightfully so. I completely understand that that you see like, you know, I saw one thing. I saw that Trump had asked the ice agents who were going to the airports to not wear their masks. And I was like, is that even a, that's even an option? Or would they be masked in the airport? Because their ice agents. Yeah. Because they get dogs. Well, that's their concern. I understand. I understand that. I understand that. But at the same time, you know, there is a balancing act there. And, you know, a lot of people, like a lot of right wingers will say, hey, look, if you're, you know, if you came here legally, then that's a crime. You're here illegally. That's the law. And hey, I get that argument. But also the Supreme Law of the land is the Constitution of the United States of America. And I've seen a ton of videos where there were masked ice agents not even identifying themselves going up to people, telling them that you have to answer my questions. You don't have an option to walk away, which is like not what you do. What that was my take on it is that you can't accept people that are masked, that don't have any paperwork, that don't have a warrant on the streets in militarized situations. Because if they're using it for this, which you agree to, that opens up the door for them to use it because you won't take your vaccine. Or because you did this or did that or whatever the fuck it is. If a different person gets in power, maybe they're going to use it for something you don't support. Yeah. It's just not something you're supposed to accept. That's right. You don't want to know something that someone told me that is this is a very credible source that I can't reveal with the sources. But they told me that there are people in this country and not just a few, but many, many that are affiliated with terrorist organizations, directly affiliated, but they've applied for asylum. And because they've applied for asylum, you can't deport them until they go through the entire process. That is wild. That is wild. Yeah. So there's people that are known at least terrorist sympathizers. They're in community, direct communication with terrorist networks. They've done things with terrorist networks and they've applied for asylum. They've got to go through this long ass process through the legal system. And it's up to a judge whether or not this person who may or may not be a part of a fucking sleeper cell gets to stay in America. Yeah. Suicidele empathy. That's what Gadsad calls it. I think he's right. I think he's got a fair point there with suicidal empathy in terms of the idea of like that we that we cannot say on some level that it's like, no, look, we have a desire to preserve our society and we want to do what's bad. And we don't have to out of some feeling of guilt turn our country into something worse than what it otherwise would be. So I think he's got a point there. I think, and like I'm not a big fan of Gad, he literally just him and like Sam Harris and a few others. They literally just trash me all the time and refuse to engage on a single thing I've said. So like it'll just be he calls me Wikipedia Dave. Yeah. On Twitter. And it's a, well, look, I got to like the guy. Well, I have a different relationship with them than you do. Well, that's true. And I'm a big critic of Israel and he's a massage agent. So that is that that is partly thing is he's admitted that he worked from Assad in the past. Yes. Yeah. I guess he would say he's not part of like I used to know for new poor creamery. I represent them anymore. I think it's a little bit different with the massage things. But I also think that the big component that I think all of those guys are missing is that we also create more enemies with our foreign policy. And that's not to say that like, you know, they always kind of caricature my position on this. Like I'm not saying Islam is all peaceful and there are no problems in the Islamic world or anything like that. In fact, I don't think any religion has truly always been peaceful. But, you know, for guys like say like Sam Harris who these kind of like pretend intellectuals who have spent, he spent his entire career talking about how violent and irrational the Muslims are and how you can even draw a cartoon of Muhammad or Muslims want to do violent stuff. And like, hey fair enough, that's bullshit. And we should all say like if you want to be over here in the West, our values are free speech and you cannot kill people for cartoons. But then like none of them ever also go, hey, you know, murdering an Ayatollah might be dangerous during Ramadan. Yeah. Like that is, you know, that is not just a political figure to Shiite Muslims. That is a, so at the same time it's like, okay, I'm fine with saying, okay, you don't want to have suicidal empathy. My buddy Keith Knight, who's brilliant, works over at the Libertarian Institute. He had, I forget what he said, but he said something like, okay, I don't want to have suicidal empathy. Let's also not have homicidal empathy, you know? And so like maybe it also is like as we were tying into that whole conversation with Nahmokah things. With the whole thing about the kids and women in Gaza, it's like, it's also the fact that if you just view slaughtering, and slaughtering Muslim children in the Middle East and in Northern Africa as like just an acceptable political price, you know? That's just collateral damage. And unfortunately that happens when we pursue this policy. You're going to deal with more and more of that. And the combination of both Joe, like the combination of having open borders, having all these people get in and continuing the war on terrorism and slaughtering people in these numbers, and maybe the most insane combination. The idea that you'd be like, we're going to, you know, we're going to just make an entire generation of Muslims hate us, because so many of them have seen what we've done to their countries. And also we'll welcome all of them in with no checks and we can't get rid of them when they come here. That is quite a combination. Yeah, it's all nuts. It's the same harsh thing. I should clarify this because he's apparently talked about me again recently on Bill Maher. He didn't not talk because it was his idea. It was me. I said he wanted to do a podcast with me. He wanted to do a COVID, you know, wrap up, like to, you know, go over everything that happened, all the mistakes that were made and his position, my position. Because that's where we kind of like separate. He was very pro-vaccine. I said I won't do that until you talk to Brett Weinstein that you need to talk to Brett. Like Brett, you disparaged him publicly. I think you said things that weren't correct. You call them a conspiracy theorist. And you said you wouldn't platform him because it's dangerous. I don't believe that's true. I believe the problem is that Sam was incorrect about both the effectiveness and the safety of the COVID vaccines. Brett was correct. And Brett didn't insult Sam. Sam had insulted Brett. Brett said things about Sam since, but it was Sam. And I said, look, you got to talk to him first. You can't just talk to me, you know, especially because he's an actual evolutionary biologist. Like he understands these things. He knows what he's talking about. He said multiple conversations with high-level of ex-anologist and all these different people that worked on the MRM, RNA vaccines. Like he was correct. We all know that now. We know that all the things that he was talking about, whether it's masking doesn't work, social distancing, the fans locked in or all the above. All the above. He didn't want to talk to Brett. And I said, that doesn't make sense to me. Like you talked to everybody. You have debates with Muslims on stage. Yeah, that doesn't make any sense. Like why wouldn't you talk to Brett? I don't think he wanted to talk to Brett. Because I don't, I think he didn't want to talk to Brett because Brett's right. Yeah. I think it's indefensible. No, I completely agree. I mean, you know, I had to... By the way, don't hate Sam. You know, you could say all the crazy shit he wants. He also said, like, I don't think he should interview Gaddafi. Guess what? I would. If Gaddafi was alive, 100% owe it interview Gaddafi. Gaddafi, did we hear Russell Crowe talk about Gaddafi? I don't think so. He did a clip that went viral that was on this show. We talked about why they wanted to get rid of Gaddafi. Right. And like, what they talked about how evil Gaddafi was and how he subjugated his people. You can't say we can find that. Russell Crowe on Gaddafi. He wanted to create a United States of Africa. Yeah. He wanted to get him on the gold standard. He wanted to get him off the US dollar. He had some very dangerous ideas. Now he also supported Palestinian resistance. Yeah, that was it. There's no sound thing in there. Oh, there it is. Here it is. We have taught, for example, to regard Gaddafi in a certain way. Okay. But if you look into what happened in his country while he was the leader, you look into the fact that every person is given a house at a certain age. You look at the fact that everybody's education and health care is free. You look at if somebody showed a particular talent for something that required further education overseas. All of the costs that were paid for by the government. Now, these are all things put in place by the same country's leader that we're told is evil and corrupt. Yeah. It doesn't quite balance. Well, there's also US government interference. That's a, that is one that we definitely monkeyed with. He ran afoul of the United States government. We have taught for example. Yeah. There was the famous clip with Hillary. Oh, I showed a friend of mine the other day that he hadn't seen it and he couldn't believe it was real. Yeah. When she was on the show and she gets unconfirmed information first that they got Gaddafi and then she gets confirmed that he's dead. And she goes, we came, we saw he died. Ha ha ha ha. She was so excited about it. But laughing. And then that led to it, Libya at least for a while becoming a failed state. Oh, it still is. It still is. This whole time, man. It's been a disaster. This episode is brought to you by visible. Folks, there's one thing nobody wants this season and that's getting catfished. And it's not just dating profiles that are putting you at risk. It's also big wireless carriers. You know the type looks great at first, promises a low price. But once you're locked in, surprise fees and an expensive bill that isn't what you were expecting. Your night and shining armor, visible wireless. It's one line wireless with unlimited data and hotspot for just $25 a month. Taxes and fees included. Now that's a green flag. The best part, visible is all digital. So you can switch as fast as you can swipe. Don't fall for the trap of getting catfish by wireless. Visit visible.com to learn more and start loving your wireless carrier. Terms apply. See visible.com for plan features and network management details. And you know the thing is that they called that Hillary's war. She was the secretary of state at the time under Barack Obama. But she's really the one who championed that. And I believe Obama wrote in his book that he was 50-50 and that Hillary really pushed him to that. And he said his big regret was that he didn't think about what came next after good-off. I wonder why we haven't learned that lesson yet. Like after Iraq, you've never thought of that. Listen, but thank God Trump's figured it out. Oh yeah. Trump's figured it out. We'll go in this drastic new direction of getting the seventh war that they wanted. Don't be a pussy, Dave. Jesus Christ. Did you see how one, I don't know what military expert was on television. He said something about we need a fan of boots on the ground like Rome. Like, hey, fucker. Rome didn't have nuclear weapons and drones. Rome didn't have drones that hunt you. Yeah. We talk about boots on the ground. Should we fight with swords? Should we get everybody to fight with swords? Is that what you're saying? The fucker you're saying? Well, also like what even is the plan with boots on the ground? Like what are you talking about here? You're going to take an island. It goes, okay, well then you're going to be a target. You're going to be target practice as long as the Iranian regime is still standing. And if you're talking about militarily occupying the country like we did with Iraq or Afghanistan or something like that, there's a huge country with 92 million people. How many soldiers do you think you need? To argue about that country. And at least half a million. And probably you can't do it with that. So what are you talking about? And so you're saying, are we going to start a draft for the least popular war going in in American history? Because I don't think that's happening. Yeah, this is maybe slightly more popular than Vietnam. Going in, it's less. I'm sure Vietnam by the end was very, very unpopular. But Vietnam going in didn't make any sense. Did it? There's, I guess the Gulf of Tonkin incident. Most people in America were like, why are we doing this? What's going on? You're drafting people to go to Vietnam. We're fighting communism in Vietnam. Yeah. What? Well, they called it Vietnam syndrome that the American people had, which is that we didn't want to fight a war again after that. Is that from their perspective? That's a syndrome. And it's really something. They think, by the way, Ben Shapiro used the same line called, he said Trump finally broke a rack war syndrome. Because they think, see from Ben Shapiro's perspective, the illness is after you lie the American people into a war and slaughter a million people. The illness isn't that. You might look at that as the bad part. But the bad part is that these annoying Americans have this tendency to not want to do that again after that. But he claims Trump has broken a rack war syndrome. Of course, there's really no evidence with support of the American people that has changed at all. And the George H.W. Bush was said to have defeated Vietnam war syndrome in Panama and in Iraq. Because they were relatively easy. You know, bloodless on the American side or very, very limited injuries and deaths. And they weren't like quagmas that went on forever or whatever. But of course, after the Persian Gulf War in 92, we went on to be bombing Iraq for ever since essentially. You know, I mean, for 30 straight years after that. Well, we were still at war with that country. I think for a million people being done. Yeah, what is public support? Let's put that into our sponsor perplexity. What is current public support for the Iran war in America? At first of all, how would it know? No one's asked me. You know what I'm saying? That's the fair point. That's what I would say about polls. Well, it's the last time he answered a poll. Well, it's the last time anybody called you up and said, Dave, first of all, it's the last time he ever picked up the phone. If you didn't know who was calling. And then when you do answer, what was the last time he said yes to a poll? I don't even remember ever getting called. It has to be the dumbest of dumb people that answer those polls. So then you got to realize out of those stupid fucking idiots, even how many of them think the war is a good idea. It's even unpopular amongst them. I mean, what does it say here? Most recent national polls show Americans overall oppose the current war with Iran and think US military action has gone too far. A Quinnipack poll finds 54% what is Quinnipack? Poll finds 54% of US voters oppose US military action against Iran, and 39% support it. And what is the Quinnipag? Quinnipiac? Poll finds 54% of US voters oppose US military action against Iran, and 39% support it. I wonder how many of those 39% are juv. And not too much. We don't have the numbers. Poll reports about six in right. What is the number of Jewish people in America? Two percent, something like that. Six and 10 adults say US military action against Iran has gone too far. Only about a quarter say it's been about right. 25%. First of all, whenever you're talking about these kind of things, it's like who again, who are we talking about? Who was asked? Finds Republicans largely support the military action. Around 86% support. Whoa. Yeah, really? Because I talk to a lot of Republicans that thinks the terrible idea. While large majorities of Democrats, around 92%, and independence, about 64% oppose it, 92% who are the 8% of Democrats that are like, let's fucking go. You think maybe they're juv? They work for CNN. They're like, whatever. CNN thinks it's a good idea? No. Dude, CNN is running cover for Donald Trump during this time. For real? Oh yeah. No way. Yeah, they put up a poll the other day. They had a graphic that said 100% of MAGA supports the war in Iran. It's like after all. After all these years, I'll say he liked it or something like that. Oh, but hold on a second. He likes me. Is that running cover or is that making them look bad? Because most Americans don't support the war. And most Democrats, 92% don't support the war. So if that's the case, wouldn't that just make look at these MAGA people or a fucking problem? I guess. Oh my god, MAGA GOP view of Trump. Can I hear what he says it? Or would it be a problem? Rating among the members. I'm talking at someone else. Okay. That seems bonkers. That seems about a prove 100%. How many people do you ask to? Well, there's two guys with MAGA hats on it. If you notice the way they say this, right? So they don't just say GOP voters. They say MAGA GOP voters. And so what they're doing here is that they're filtering who they consider to be MAGA. And who they consider to be MAGA are the people who still say they support Donald Trump. But like 100% of the people who don't support this war stop supporting Donald Trump over it. Well, look at this little thing on the bottom. They don't show you. 66%, 31% split among non- MAGA. Right. And what is that non- MAGA Republicans? Is that what you're saying? No, I think that's non- MAGA Americans. I believe. Like the whole MAGA thing. It's like how did we're so fractioned as it is? Like this whole idea of right versus left as it is. And now you've got a MAGA section of the rights. It's all just ridiculous, dude. But it's a way to describe it as anything other than what it is, which is the most unpopular war in American history going into it. And for good reason, look dude, he didn't even bother to like sell us on a propaganda campaign about it. He was like the laziest, like just lie, just lie us into it. Let's just... On a fucking firm, tin foil hat right now. Let's get a double layer Reynolds wrap, fucking crease the edges, fold it down. Why would he want to do this? Why would he want to... Look, I am not denying that the regime of Iran is a giant problem. I am certainly not denying that if I was Israel, I would not want them there. They hate you. They're trying to get a nuclear weapon. They're right there. I get the Israel position. I totally understand how they're so just vehemently in defense of their homeland. Like they're surrounded by people that hate them. They're the one Jewish country. Everyone else is a Muslim. They don't want to caliphate. They don't want to kill them. It's been going on forever. They think it's in God's word that they have. It's a lot of craziness. I get it. Why now? Like why now? Like what does that make any sense? Well, Trump himself has said, which literally this would be considered an anti-Semitic conspiracy theory if anyone else had said it. But Donald Trump has openly talked about many times how the Adelson's give them all this money and they come by every day. And all they have is another demand on behalf of Israel. Donald Trump also, very early in his political career, gotten trouble with the Israel lobby, and then immediately pivoted to winning their favor back over by saying he would tear up the JCPOA, the around deal that Obama got us into. And it looks to me, there's speculation aside who knows exactly what control they have over the guy. But it looks to me that after Venezuela and when there were these big street protests and riots against the regime and around there, that they convinced Trump, and this is what Joe Kent, his director of counter-terrorism, as said too, that they essentially convinced him that this would be the time. You could do it swiftly, surgically remove the regime, and the people would rise up and overthrow it. And this is what Donald Trump said when he launched this war. He said, this is a regime change, and I'm calling on the great people of Iran to rise up. And they did. They rose up by at least the hundreds of thousands they were out in Tehran in defense of the regime chanting death to America. Because it turns out when you kill 165 little girls that doesn't make a country go, we love you. Thank you for that. But before the bombing, there were people in the streets that were protesting. And people were killed because that, a lot. That's the other thing, is that that regime is, like they clamped down and they do it with public figures. They killed a very prominent wrestler from Iran. It's really two of them. They killed one a few years back. The UFC tried to step in and somehow they're stopped up, but he was also one that was accused of protesting. Well, good, good, good. Listen, I don't know about this most recent one. I'm not saying this is true at all. I don't trust any governments, but they claimed he killed a few cops. That's what the Iranian regime said he was being hung for. Now I don't know. The wrestler? Yeah, the wrestler. He was convicted of that, whatever that means in a Mueller run court. So I'm not saying that's right at all. But I will say this, right? The Donald Trump, when he launched this war, and there's been a whole lot of just false claims that have been made. But he said specifically that they killed 32,000 protesters. There has not been a shred of evidence presented to back up this claim. Now I'm not saying it's not true. I'm not putting it past this government that they would do that. And they've acknowledged that a lot of people have died. I think the last I had seen was that I know they were saying the government of Iran is before the Ayatollah was killed. They were saying it was something like 3,000 people had died. And then the CIA, when you say died, doesn't mean they killed the president. Well, that's unclear. That's not what they are claiming. But then the CIA, at least there was a piece in the Washington, excuse me, in the Wall Street Journal, where they had said, and this was like a week and a half into it, that they estimated like six and a half thousand or something like that. But this is a huge question, right? And it's not clear at all. Like were they lining people up and just executing them for the crime of protesting? They hung the wrestler. But I'm saying the people who have been killed here. Iran protests death toll could top 30,000, according to local health officials. And this is from Time Magazine. As many as 30,000 people could have been killed in the streets of Iran on January 8th and 9th alone, two senior officials of the country's Ministry of Health told time, indicating a dramatic surge in the death toll. So many people were slaughtered by Iranian security services that Thursday and Friday had overwhelmed the state's capacity to dispose of the dead. Stocks of body bags were exhausted. The official said in 18-wheel semi-trailers replaced ambulances. Now, Liz and all I'm saying here, man, is that you've got to be, I just seen this movie play out a lot of times. You have to be really careful about these accusations that are made in the run up to a war. They're basically saying, we have a source who told us this. What year was this? I mean, excuse me, what date was this? January 25th. So the protest started in late December and then in January. This is what time was unable to independently verify these figures. Right. Listen, the claim being made here, right? Is that in two days, in two days, 30,000 people were killed. If that is true, that is up there with one of the biggest massacres in human history. The biggest massacres during World War II were like around that. And as of Saturday, US-based human rights activist news agency had confirmed 5,459 deaths and is investigating 17,000 more. Yes. So that's at least close. So we're in the neighborhood. We're in the 20s just if what their investigating turns out to be accurate. If that's the case, but we're talking also here, Joe, about like any defunded US-based NGOs who are really around hawks. And so, and I'm just saying, look, the claim here is that a rant, you know, I saw a bunch of the Zionists online when this was first coming out, the back in January, they were like, oh my god, they've already killed half as many people as died in Gaza in just a couple days. And you're like, right, that's a hell of a claim. I mean, like if you just from following wars all these years, if you started carpet bombing Tehran, Vietnam style, carpet bombing Tehran, after two days, that's the type of death toll you'd be looking at. Well, so the thing was we don't, they don't have internet access to the show. Well, they shut down the internet during that period. But there were pictures that came out. All I'm saying is that if you had numbers like that, you would expect there to be some evidence that you could point to. And there's like one picture where they've pointed to like a couple dozen body bags. And I'm like, see, look at this. But look, I'm that maybe it's true. Maybe it's not a very skeptical of these claims when they're made right before we launch a war. But I think the other point is that, at least according, then there has been some evidence of this, right? There were police stations that were burned. There were mosques that were attacked. These were not just peaceful protests. I'm not saying they don't have a right to violently rise up and overthrow their government, whatever. But all the hawks in the West were saying, these people are trying to overthrow their government. And only that in the past, our agencies, our intelligence agencies, have engaged in the fairest practices where we have conscripted certain people to go and like things on fire and blow things up and create these events. Front pages of celery. Front page of the Jerusalem Post, they were bragging that there was Mossad within the protests. So now look, I don't know. But also the thing is this, right? If you are trying to overthrow a government, a government will kill you for doing that. And that's true about every government, including our own. If armed protesters went to try to overthrow Barack Obama's government, he would kill those people. They were actually a threat to the issue. Ashley Babbitt was murdered in January 6th. And every single left winger in the country went, well, that's okay. It was an insurrection. And by the way, every single right winger in this country when this pretty guy got killed, were like, well, he was interfering. Oh, I saw it. By the way, the pretty thing was the most textbook example of a bad shooting. There's just no defending it. They had disarmed the guy. He's down. There's six of them. They panic. They put six bullets in them. Do you know what happened though? Do you know the whole story of the gun? The gun being removed? Yeah. Do you know the whole story about the gun? No, oh wait. The gun is a sick P-20. A-ha. A sick P-320 is notorious for accidental discharges. There is a video of the copper moving the gun walking off. Yes, I saw it. And the gun goes off. Is that his gun for sure? Yes. Because I saw that hadn't been determined, whether or not. I heard people speculating about that. Watch the video multiple times and have watched other people's analysis of it. Obviously, I'm no expert, but I do know something about guns. And that gun in particular has been demonstrated online that it will go off. There's a cop inside of a precinct. He bends over. Not touching his gun. Gun in the holster. And it goes off. There's a video of a guy on a range. And a gun just goes off. And he goes, who's fucking gun was that? And the range master goes, is that a sick? And he goes, yeah, he goes, get that fucking gun off of my range. Wow. Because it's a P-3-3-2. No, so sick by, I should be real clear. Sick makes a bunch of guns that are awesome. Like the P-365 is like one of the best carry guns in the world. There's a lot of guns they make that don't have this issue. But that particular gun that Freddie had with one in the chamber is fucking knuckleheads walking across one in the chamber. Absolutely. It's an all for, I'm just saying. The only point I'm making is that it's clearly, it was a fuck up. I'm not saying like they wanted to execute the guy. I'm just saying like they had the gun taken from them. They didn't communicate that to each other. They freaked out. They, but literally all it took was seeing one video, 11 days earlier where he kicked the back of a cop car. Right. And for every right winger to go, yeah, whatever dude, got what you deserve. So my, all my point is about this, looking at this in the Iranian regime, it's just not clear. Like what are you actually accusing them of? Are you saying that somebody was trying to overthrow the government and the government mowed them down? Are you saying that they lined up protesters and shot them all in the back of the head simply for voicing their opinion? Like none of this is made clear, but when the war drums are beating, no one even cares to like ask these questions. It's just like, yeah, they killed their own people. And then if you notice with this war, much like with Venezuela and almost like with all of them, they just keep giving you like, they throw like 15 justifications at it. You know, and you're like, which one is the reason we're fighting this? Because I saw that all of them like to play the humanitarian card and go, we're doing this to, you know, for these oppressed people, we want them to rise up. They've been living under this brutal regime. And you're like, okay, two things. Like number one, that is simply just not how US foreign policy works. We don't fight boards on humanitarian grounds. You know what I mean? We're partners with some of the most brutal authoritarian in the world. And we've, and in the case of like Israel, we've been funding their destruction of Gaza for the last two and a half years. Like it's, and, and so that like that's not really what's motivating this here. And then number two, Donald Trump, even just the other day, said he'll be partners with the new Ayatollah and run the Strait of Harmus together. He's back to say that. Yeah, he's backed off of regime change. Or the idea that. You've been talking to him, is someone talking to him. Like who's he talking to? Do they know who they're talking to? Because it's not like they're meeting. Donald Trump said he. And guys on the phone, I am free to negotiate. He is, he said Donald Trump himself said the other day that, um, that he goes, negotiate, we're negotiating, negotiations are going great. And they go, who are you negotiating with? And he goes, a person we believe to be in charge. And then they said, so is this the new Supreme Leader? And he said, no, no, no one's heard from that guy. We don't know where he is. Some hacker in his basement in Belarus. And it's not, it's not. He's talking with an irredient accent. And he's got them convinced. Well, it's just I have the authority to negotiate. Let's be partners. Let's be for wire one million Bitcoin. Well, everything I'm seeing publicly reported today is that Iran is like, no, we're not in these negotiations. We've made our terms clear. And their terms what they're asking for is something that Donald Trump is not going to be able to give them. What's that? They're, they're, their demands were that we, we stop attacking immediately. Like that part, they might get that we pay them restitution for all the damage. So far that essentially that we leave the region. I mean, they had a few other things there that were just like, and they want them to open up a Terry Blacks and Tehran. This one, this one was really important. Does it take one? One Terry Blacks barbecue. We don't have a good barbecue here. It's, it doesn't seem like if he's not really negotiating with this guy, if it's like, if that, if that's not true. And he's just like putting this out there in the public as like a negotiation ploy. What a cluster of. Because you're dealing with people that don't mind dying. They, they believe, I mean, these are very religious people. They're fanatical. They believe they're going to go to heaven. They believe they're martyrs and they're fighting for a law. This is, this is the just and holy war. Well, they've also been attacked. Well, that's right. And they've been preparing for this for a long time. You know, and they like, there's, you know, people make a lot out of the chance that the Iranians, you know, they chant death to America. What do you got there, Jimmy? Probably the world wants to be able to control the flow. Be jointly controlled. I know. Maybe me. Maybe me. Me and the Ayatollah, whoever the Ayatollah is, whoever the next Ayatollah, look, and there'll also be a form of a very serious form of a regime. So now in all fairness, everybody's been killed from the regime. There's automatically a regime change. But we're dealing with some people that I find to be very reasonable, very solid. The people within know who they are, they're very respected. And maybe one of them will be exactly what we're looking for. Look at Venezuela. How well that's working at. I mean, dude, this is such a fucking mess. This is such a mess, dude. I mean, this is just too ridiculous, dude. And the, you know, the thing is that a lot of people, you know, I've spent a long time at this point, being against this war, because this war has been telegraphed since, you know, the Bush administration wanted to do this shit. And yet least for like 15 years, I've been publicly opposing this war. And one of the reasons why so many of us oppose this and it's a shitty way to be vindicated, but is that look, Iran is just not like any of the other opponents in the global war on terrorism. It's a different beast entirely. And you've seen this already. Only three weeks in. We never dealt with any of this with any of the other countries. You know what I mean? We had what the Pentagon calls escalation dominance in all of those other wars, which is all essentially like it's just like, meaning like if you do this, we do this, if you do that, like we're prepared for everything. It's kind of like escalation dominance, a lot like, you know, like in Jiu Jitsu, where you see really high level guys who basically put you in a position where you can make one of two choices in either way. Yeah. Yeah. You know, like, okay, you can, you can give me your back and I'll choke you or you can push off me and I'll arm bar you. And you know, like whatever option you have, I'm going to get you. We don't have that with the realm. When Pentagon's been open about this since at least 2007, um, and the fact is that as we're already seeing, they can target ships in the straight of formus. They can target our assets, our bases, our embassies in the region. They can target our allies. And this is a big problem. And so like, it seems like Donald Trump got into this, thinking it would be like Venezuela. It would be quick and bloodless and easy and he could claim victory. Now that it's not gone that way. It seems like he's kind of scrambling for what the, what the off ramp is here. Yeah. Now at least I give Donald Trump as angry as I am with him. Um, like at least it is true that he's looking for an off ramp. It seems like and he did this with the 12 day war, right? Like he started the war. He saw an off ramp and he took a, a, he took it. The problem here really is that this war changed the calculation from the Iranian perspective and that much is clear so far. You know, the after 911, all the countries in the Middle East and North Africa, all the ones where essentially they all wave the white flag, all of them. Saddam Hussein welcomed you and inspectors in. Here's trying to do anything he could to not meet the fate that he ultimately met. Gaddafi denuclearized, got rid of chemical weapons. Bashar al-Assad got rid of all his chemical weapons. Like they were all just like, we don't want it with you. You know, and Iran was very much the same way. And they, they got into the JCPOA. They allowed an inspections regime in to come look at their, their nuclear facilities, all of that. And even up to the 12 day war, when we, we drop the bunker buster, as an Israel bomb to hold a bunch of regime targets, they still in their response called ahead, made sure there'd be no US troops there. They, they hit the side of a little base there. And then they kind of went like they gave Trump an off ramp because they didn't want it. You know, they didn't want it. They don't want to die like Mo Mark Gaddafi. They don't want to, you know, have their country destroyed. So for self preservation reasons, they showed restraint. The calculation this time clearly already from the Iranians was that we can't do that again. We, we have to give you a bloody nose and a black eye. We have to make this cost as much as possible for you. Otherwise you guys will just be back here in another five months doing it again. And they're, they're probably right about that. They're probably right. And so now we're in this situation where we're already in a, in a quagmire. It's already like over a dozen Americans have died. I think a couple hundred wounded at this point. Israel isn't given real numbers on what's going on there, but there's some pretty substantial damage. And definitely some Israelis have died. And I'm sure thousands of Iranians have, have died at this point. It's cost. I mean, Pete Higgs has just asked for $200 billion. I don't know if it'll get up to cost in that much. But this thing is certainly already in the tens of billions. If you consider munition, military movements and, and then just the damage to embassies and bases and stuff like that. I mean, this thing is already a disaster. And so now it's not like Venezuela where Donald Trump could just stop and declare victory and even say like, look how great it's working at. Now, is Venezuela really working out that great? I don't know. That's cut. You know, we took one guy away. The regime still in place. The people haven't been liberated, but whatever he can claim that. This now, the problem here is that, okay, number one, Donald Trump's not really in a situation where if he just quit right now, how is he really going to say, look how wonderful this is? It's like, I don't know, dude, this cost a lot already. And it doesn't seem like there's any clear like what did we get out of this? Well, the only way it would work is if there was some sort of a deal with whoever the fuck is going to be the new guy in charge. And they did come to some sort of an agreement. And they did give them some compensation for all the shit we blew up. Yes. Well, that right. So they just print some more money for that. Sure. And inflation. And go up. But look, here's the thing is that it's not just Donald Trump. There's two other participants in this war, two other entities in this war. There's Iran and there's Israel. Okay. Now is Iran going to accept that maybe, but look, just like the 12 day war, look at the position you're in now. We're relying on the moas. You know what I mean? Like it's that that is not an ideal situation of being. And then the other factor is that there's Israel who also gets to say in this for some reason because we allow them to and Netanyahu just the other day was very clear about this. This is a regime change. And he even said it will require ground forces. And he said he's not sure who those ground forces will be. And so now this happened. If you do remember the moment during the 12 day war when it was the closest Trump ever came to like flipping out on Israel and he said they don't know what the fuck they're doing. It was, but he said Israel and Iran don't know what the fuck they're doing. Because Donald Trump, so after he drops the bunker busters, he goes, that's it. We're, you know what I mean? I've worked taking the off ramp. And then he said, I want to work out a ceasefire now. And then after he said that, Israel just started lighting up regime targets, just bombing the crap out of them. And they weren't bombing nuclear facilities. They were just bombing like government buildings. And they've been doing a bunch of that in this war as well. Bombing local police departments, things like that. Just creating chaos. Because what they want is what they've been getting in the rest of the war on terrorism. They're, they, they are quite happy with a Libya model or a Syria model. There's no one anyone that's organized as a threat to Israel. They don't, it's, it's all about Iran's support for Hezbollah. Yeah. Is that they want Southern Lebanon, which they just cats, their defense minister just announced that they're going to occupy that. That's crazy, right? That's what it's about to be occupying another country. That's what it's about, man. And, and look, I mean, it's not again, this isn't like a conspiracy theory. The guys all tell you this in their own words, Benjamin Netanyahu was asked, point blank a few months back what he thought of the greater Israel project. And he said, it's very near and dear to my heart. Like this is the point of denying the Palestinians a state for all these years. You can't let the Palestinians have a state because then how are you going to take that all over someday? That's also supposed to be part of Israel. And the US ambassador, the US ambassador, not the Israeli ambassador, the US ambassador to Israel is on record saying that God promised Iraq to Benjamin Netanyahu that God promised Lebanon and Saudi Arabia and the West Bank and parts of Syria. And all of this is greater Israel. That is it. By the way, Sam Harris, where are you out on that? Where where are the new atheists when you could finally use them for something? Hey, that's pretty crazy. Is that how we do politics? We work on this ridiculous religious superstition that somehow, when God said Israel in Genesis, he was referring to the state that was created that they named after that passage. This would literally be on the level, Joe, is if I named my son, Jesus Christ. And then I told you, you have to worship my son. Look, it's right there in your Bible that you worship. No, you named it after that, dude. That doesn't count. That's crazy. And they took the spot where it was. Yeah. I mean, like they took over and they did it in a horrific way. Like the NAPCA. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You listen to some of those soldiers, the translation of some of those soldiers talking about what they did and even laughing about what they had. Some of them even smiling in 1948. Yes, because it's not. It wasn't in 1848. Right. You know what I mean? Right. Like these guys were alive. Maybe not so many of them now. But like 20, 30 years ago, you could put a video camera in front of one of these guys and ask them to tell their story. Right. It was 78 years ago. Wasn't that long ago? Yeah. That's right. Yeah. That's right. And so, you know, look, I mean, the idea here that America after just 25 years of catastrophic failures, launching wars of choice, wars of aggression, lying the American people into it, just slaughtering millions of people and like bankrupting this country and really severely degrading the country with these wars. The idea that we would jump into another war of choice for Israel is just two, like this is too crazy, man. And especially when it's the administration that really ran on and promised that we want to get out of this, out of this game of fighting stupid wars in the Middle East. That was what we were all supporting. Yeah. That was the one thing that he was saying that was so promising to so many people that were independent. They were on the fence. Like this guy wants no wars. All right. He wants closing the border, which I think is a great idea. He wants no wars. That enough. Let's go. Well, especially considering the fact that well, like even if there are some things about Donald Trump, that maybe you don't like, but the other guys are saying we want to keep fighting forever wars. And this guy is saying we should stop doing that. That's enough to go, well, then he's better than you on net. And don't get me wrong. I mean, I endorse Donald Trump in 24. You know, people give me shit for this. Some people like that. Some people give me shit for it. But I do I kind of view it like this. Like and I really I will say maybe I'm a little bias here because I love you. But I don't think I'm being biased. I really think you played an enormous role in in kind of like standing up to the progressive democratic establishment and their narrative over the last, you know, decade or so. And it's really hard to kind of overstate how crazy they were, how much of a threat to this country they were. And so for anybody who wants to give shit to anyone who voted for Donald Trump, it's like, hey, man, the alternative was the party who bragged about the first off insane woke shit, like poisoning the minds of children in a really grotesque and abusive way. They gave us open borders flooding the country with people. They gave us all types of COVID tyranny based on pseudoscience. They gave us the most reckless foreign policy in American history, which was this proxy war on Russia's border. And they were running, they were pretending the president wasn't senile when he clearly was. Then they in the fourth quarter threw up a cackling retard who was not democratically picked in any process. And so sorry, like it does make sense that a lot of people went, okay, we're going to go back with with this other guy. Yeah. Also, there was an interesting dynamic happening in 24 where, OK, this was And spent a lot of people went, okay, we're going to go back with with this other guy. Yeah. Also, there was an interesting dynamic happening in 24 where, okay, this wasn't, you know, Donald Trump, they had actually tried to throw him in jail. Maybe even tried to murder him. We never really got any answers on that one. He now had Bobby Kennedy with them. He now had Tulsi Gabbard with him. He now had, you know what I mean? Even JD Vance. Like a lot of these people who were supposedly much more non-interventionist. There was reason to hope that maybe it wouldn't end up here. But anyway, I guess my thing is that you played such a huge role in this. And I, to a lesser extent, played a role in standing up against a lot of that progressive insanity over the last 10 years. And I just feel like after 24, you know, this coalition came together. We're Donald Trump for the first time ever. When's the popular vote? When's every single swing state? And really more remarkably, one, the youth and the culture. Like Donald Trump went from being like the cultural pariah to be in the guy like John Jones is doing the dance and it was just, it was, and that whole coalition has been destroyed over this war. And now he's going to ham the country right back over these Democrats who we've been fighting so hard all for what? All for a war that Netanyahu wanted against a country that dude, by the way, the justification for the 12 day war was bullshit. They weren't trying to make nuclear weapons. They were trying to negotiate out of that. Yes. Well, that's right. But then all that. And I want to, you know, he said some nice things about me when he was on here the other day with you. So I will say some nice things about Constantine Cassen who, despite our disagreements, I really like that guy a lot. But he is, I could be wrong. I could be missing someone. He's the only guy I've seen who supported the 12 day war, but is really skeptical about this. And I've seen so many people, it's unbelievable. Like they just, so like the 12 day war comes for the first 48 hours of it. They're like, dude, Israel's doing this on its own. All they want is for you to stay out of it. Then like the third day, they're like, all right, they do need some help shooting down the missiles that are coming back toward them. But whatever. This is just defensive. You know what I mean? Like you don't have to get involved. Then it's like the next day like, all right, we don't, we don't have bunker buster. So we do need you to drop the bunker busters. But then their whole like defense of the 12 day war was like, look, no, Americans died. They didn't cost us a lot. It didn't turn into this disaster. And now we're at the, okay, we'll find all of that happened, but it's still a good thing. Constantine was the one guy I saw who was like, nope, I supported that one, but I am not getting on board with this one. And I give him a lot of credit for that. I give him a lot of credit for that. I like that guy a lot. I like him a lot. I like Francis a lot too. I do too. They're show trigonometries. One of the best shows agree with them are not agree with them. They're always reasonable. They're never ideologically driven. They have opinions that you may or may not agree with, but they're real clear about their opinions and why they believe what they believe. Yeah. That's right. And I will say the great guys. Yeah. Genuinely big dudes. Great guys. I really liked, you know, I get in a lot of like the shit show like arguments. I find myself in them. I probably should be better than them and just not engage, but I'm not an I'm petty. Would you be a shit show? Like where it just becomes like an insult thing or, you know, I had to be a little bit of an alice baron set or it's just kind of embarrassing in hindsight. But like, I don't know. It gets me really angry when the guy is calling me a Holocaust an I or something like that. But what he was saying was kind of silly. The way he was saying it was silly and he was just trying to play got you with you. Yes. And then you call them a faggot. Yeah. And it's not my finest moment. You can tell he was really shaken by that. Well, it's just unexpected that I kind of have a thing where like, look, I'm really into this shit and I nerd out on it and I'm obsessed with all of this for whatever reason. It was just like my calling in life. But I'm also stand up comic at heart. You know, and so like as soon as someone goes like, Oh, I want to be vicious. You're like, Oh, you want to be vicious? Cause like I'm pretty good at being vicious. So like I could do that. And you're probably not used to here in this type of vicious shit that like comics say to each other. Right. But one of the things that I really appreciated about Francis and Constantine was when I went to do their show, it was just like, it was genuinely a good faith conversation. And they weren't trying, they weren't trying to like win the point or get a clip that they could go, we destroy Dave. And then once they do that, I'm like, okay, well, then I'm not trying to do that either, man. Like let's talk about this shit. That's that's always what I'd rather do. Um, but the thing that's, I guess the thing that's really interesting about this moment is that because the kind of corporate media propaganda apparatus has been completely destroyed. And because the internet and social media and podcasts are where people go now for, for, you know, conversations and debates and news and all this stuff, they're kind of like, they're like, they're running without a propaganda apparatus. You know, like Israel, just Israel in the last two and a half years is down like 50 points in the polls, like in terms of American approval. But they've just been this, it's a drastic change. Like I've never seen on any issue over the last few years in our lifetimes where it's been an issue that we are dealing with the consequences of the relationship. That's right. There's never been a time in the past where people were completely aware of, oh, there's no other reason why we'd be going in the Iran. Like most people, most people don't think 100% wasn't for Israel asking us to net in Yahoo's consistent visits to the White House. Molly, you can't even, you can't even pretend otherwise. I mean, people can't do. Yes. Well, they try to. But people in use just got into debate with going green walled about it. I saw that they did it. I have not had a chance to watch it. Somebody sent it to me and it was, you know, I'm being a good boy and it comes to social media. It's been so good for my brain. Yeah. It's kind of remarkable. So I got to stay in off. Yeah. Yeah. My new phone, I'm not going to put anything on it. I'm going to have my old phone and leave it at home. And I'm not going to be able to look at it. So when I have to post things, I got to post it on my other phone. That's not going to be with me. I'm not doing that anymore. Because I just think eventually, ultimately it rots your brain. But you do get some cool debates and some insight into what's going on. And I don't know what Coleman's argument was. But Glenn and Coleman were arguing about Israel's influence on this. Well, I'll be very interested to watch that. I do respect Coleman despite disagreeing with him very adamantly. Very smart guy. Very smart guy. No question. And a very nice guy. And look, I, one of the things I really respect about him is when I did his show, he literally starts it by going, he goes, you know, almost all these debates I see you in, like your kind of debating issues and then people just debate your character. And he goes, I'm not doing that at all. I want to talk about the issue. He does a whole time. And I do. I just genuinely appreciate that. No, I agree with him or disagree with him. He's a super reasonable guy and a very nice guy. I like him a lot. I like him a lot. Whether I agree with him or disagree with him, he's a wonderful person. I, this, this, this is what I will say about his position on this, which I think is, is kind of interesting. So number one, um, when I was on Pierce Morgan with him, well, right after Venezuela happened and he was his position. I don't want to mischaracterize it, but I think this is pretty accurate. Was he was like, look, a lot of people are comparing Venezuela to Iraq or Libya or Syria. But like that is a different region, a different culture, a different religion. And so really what we should be comparing this to is other interventions in, in Latin America and South America. And, you know, I didn't completely agree with that. I was like, actually, I think there are some lessons you could learn from other wars that we've been in that might apply here. But I was like, okay, fair enough. Hey, let's look at other interventions in central and South America. Cause we've got a long list of really disastrous ones. Like if you want to look at Guatemala or Nicaragua or, you know, Cuba, Mexico, a whole bunch. But then when this war in Iran starts, I don't see him going. The equal opposite of that going, Hey, now that we're at war with Iran, we have to judge this by Iraq and Afghanistan and Libya and Syria. Because, you know what I'm saying? Like that would be the flip side to the other position. And so I don't see that. The other thing is that when he's arguing with me about, cause I was arguing that, you know, that is the Israel lobby and the Israeli government were a huge part of why we fought the war in Iraq. And his big point that he stuck to a lot of the hawks stick to this is that Ariel Sharon was actually, who was the sitting prime minister at the time. He was actually against the war in Iraq. Now, that's not exactly true. He, he wanted George W. Bush to invade Iran first, not Iraq. And then when he got assurances that Iran would be next, he got on board. You could go look at Sharon's speech. He gave a speech. I think it was in August of 2002 to the Kineset. And it's all about how Iraq is the biggest threat. They have weapons of mass destruction. But the Mossad was cranking out all types of BS intelligence about the nuclear weapons that he could detonate in 15 minutes or whatever is all nonsense. But if you're going to say that that is evidence that Israel was not pushing us into this because the sitting prime minister at the time didn't like this war. Okay. But again, then how does the current sitting prime minister of Israel feel about this war in Iran? Because he's fighting it with us. And he said after it started that this is the culmination of his entire life's work. He has been trying to lie our government into this war for my entire lifetime. Coming here, he testified how many times in front of our target testified with the cartoon of the UN. The air tune a bomb cartoon with the percentages of the enriched uranium and like a daffy duck bomb. Not like like a bomb that will blow your beak around to the other. Yes. And it was he was already up real high. He was already up real high. No, he was on record saying that Iran was three to five years away from getting a nuclear weapon in the 90s. I mean, it's just he's just been lying through his teeth. And there is something. Look, man, there's something really profoundly dishonorable about trying to lie another country into war. Like not even trying to sell the word of your own people and have your own military do it. But because you can't. Yeah, there we are. We were up to 90% first stage. No, it was first stage we were at. He was saying they've hit the first stage. Oh, excuse me. Okay. Yeah, you're right. I guess this is we can't we can't go in there. It's just so ridiculous. And he knows he knows he's lying. He's like your friend that like you've been friends with since high school. And every time you go out, he gets you in a fight. Yeah. Like do you don't do this? Like those guys over there are fucking problems. Let's go over there and fuck them up and like, you know, all your buddies like dude, do I again? Do I use that exact analogy when I debated Josh Hammer, a digger Princeton University. And or maybe it was with the Charlie car. It was one of the times I debated him. But I used that exact analogy. He was like, is is real an ally? And I was like, no, it's like they're not a good friend. If your friend's getting you in a bar fight every night, stop hanging out with that guy. Bro, Tim Dylan did an ad for neuro gum and neuro mince on his podcast. Where he's like, I have a friend. Let's just call her Erica. He does this Erica Kirk ad. He doesn't say it's Erica Kirk for the neuro gum. Have you heard it, Jamie? Oh my God. Oh my God. It's so funny. Oh my God. It's so crazy. He's so out of his eye, fucking love him so much. I'm so happy Tim Dylan's in the world. He is the best. If you're not listening to his podcast and you want a rational, but hilarious take on all the fucking madness that's going on with not just this war, but the Epstein files. His episode of the MC files. I hardly ever tweet about other people's podcasts, but I hardly ever tweet. But I posted it. I'm like, this is one of the best podcasts about anything ever. His ability, Tim's ability to like rant. It like a hilarious rant that is laced with excellent points, but it's just hilarious the whole time. And just him going off is second to none. Any sober, he just puts on his magic glasses. It's him in the front. The top two are by he buries front. His front is, but well, it does is really good. Foyntus has done some things different than anybody else can do. Yeah. Well, his ability to blend sarcasm and just celebration of chaos. Yeah. He's second to none. Best rantor that's ever walked the face of the planet. I remember when I first met Tim in New York, that 14, he moved out to LA after that. But when I first met him in New York, and he was, I think, like he was a green stand up. I think he hadn't been doing it for that long. I remember just like being on podcasts with him. I just being like, yo, this dude is going to be a fucking superstar. Like, it was just like his his ranting like a bill. Like he would go off on things where you just find yourself like, like you almost have a moment you forget you're on the show with him. Yeah. You're like, I'm just sitting here watching that and then I'm like, oh, shit, I'm here too. I better say something. But like he's just. Unbelievable. Listen to this that. Listen to that. She told us, but it does show how effective neuromens can be. A friend of mine, that's called her Erica. She she's in a wildlife this woman. She was in Romania. She had an orphanage. She was on a reality show. I married this famous guy. She was in intelligence. As said. And I said there are how do you do this? And she says, Tim, it's neuro's energy and focusments. I said, but how do you do it after the guy, the husband and father, the kids gets murdered and you're out there doing all kinds of stuff. You're doing fundraisers and you're dancing around with glitter pants. What happened? She goes, I could lie to you, but I'm telling you it's neuro's energy and focusments. Really? She goes, sure. I said, how are you running this organization seven hours after this guy? She goes, a lot of people speculate, but it's neuro's energy and focusments. I go, really? She said, yeah, neuro energy and focus is powered by natural green tea caffeine, alphineanine for calm focus and vitamin V 12 and B six. I mean, whatever their pain, they should pay him more. Yeah, it's not enough. No, we could pay him enough. He's the goat. Well, that'll also just make you remember that product forever. Yeah. No, he's the greatest of all time. I might be, I'm trying to figure out how to turn our racetrack sign on all the way. Is it broken? God damn, we need a new one. I'll get a hold of Bobby. Uh, he's the goat, dude. He's, he's, he's, he's, he's, I had someone in the White House. Come up to me and goes, it's too, Dylan really gay. I go, yeah, he's really gay. Like you think he would fake that? Yeah. He was hung if you know him. I go, I've known forever. He's really gay. Yeah. Well, he will, he's a, he's a real good undercover, but every now and then you see it come out. Every now and then you see like a, like I remember, and this back when he was young and, and he was broke at the time, but Tim was always kind of a snob, even when he was, like it was always kind of, and I went, uh, I forget what it was. But I was like, I was like, oh, we could get food from this restaurant. And he goes from there. I go, yeah, I got good food. And he goes, you think that's good food? And like, because he's like a real like foodie or whatever. Right. And there was just like, I saw it for a second. Well, you still have money because he had money when he was selling, he had money and finance. They decided to be a private mortgages. Yeah. He was a part of the housing crisis. That's right. And he was doing cocaine back then. He, he did topple the US economy for a while. He was a part of it. But then he got into comedy. He more than made up for it. He's more than made up for that. This is where he belongs. Yeah. He belongs in front of that screen with the glasses on, just going on these insane rats. Oh, yeah. He's so funny, man. And as the Epstein-Vile's take was fucking genius. That was great. Dude, his thing about Sam Harris having a meditation app and also supporting genocide. He's like, what's happening? Like what human being does both of us? Such a great take on that. He's so funny, man. Yeah. We're lucky, dude. We're, we're, we're part of a really cool group of people right now. You know, it's a very unusual time that the mainstream has lost all of its power of influence on people. It still puts out information, it still puts out shows. But they're trying to look like you, but they're fantastic. The Jake Taberning was so crazy. I was like, what are you doing? Are you doing a podcast now? Like what are you doing? It's, it's such a perfect, like little microcosm though of like, it's almost painful. Like I'm like, guys, just can you hire me? I mean, like I, but I would explain this to you. No, no, I work either because they're so trained. There's, it's like if you get a dog and that dog has been, maybe a cat might be a better example. If you never had a litter box in the house and the cats been pissing all of the carpet, you are always going to have that cat piss on the carpet. That's what that cat does. You're not going to fix them. If you're entire life, you've been spitting out nonsense from a teleprompter. And now also, and you have to be yourself, you've been functioning in a world of executives and producers where everybody goes over every little thing you say and do, you 100% read things you know aren't true. Or at least partially. Yeah, it's for like everything. Oh, yeah. Yeah, their, their whole setup is they're all trying to look like podcasters. No, wait a minute. They put mics out like podcasters. That's crazy. Imagine if they think that's all it takes. Well, this is, but, but Joe, talk about completely missing the point. Right. It's just fundamentally missing it is that they go, they actually go. Okay. So all of these people have left, you know, watching cable news and in droves. And now they, a lot of people listen to podcasts. They'll listen to you or theo, Vaughn or whoever it might be. And the huge reason, right? Why people, a huge reason why you've been number one for so long now is because however anyone feels about you, you're authentic. It's very hard to deny that. You know, one of the biggest questions I get when people like meet me, if I do, like, meet and greet after shows or something, it's, it's what's Joe Rogan like? Is a question I get all the time because where buddies and I've been on the show a lot, a lot of times and, you know, people are love you. And they'll go, what's Joe Rogan like? I always tell them the same thing. I go, you already know. You know, like, you already know who he is. He's that guy. And then offstage, he's that guy. You know what I mean? Like that's who he is. And people like that. People like that. Whatever you think about the Ovon, he's telling, he's authentic. He's doing himself. That's who he is. That's a, well, that's why it works. And because you guys in the corporate media are all professional liars and have lied to the American people about the last 17 crises, you know, they don't trust you anymore. And so then their reaction to that is you go, well, what if we pretended to be podcasters? You're like, no, you tell me. That's the whole thing. This is just proving further how inauthentic you are. They take tears meetings on this 100% one hundred percent. They do. They all, this was to me, despite the fact that I, you know, and people can ship out voting for Donald Trump and they could say, I should have known better and whatever. I was a huge critic of him in his first term and I'm a huge critic of him in his second term. But the best thing about Donald Trump winning in 24 and I did predict this right. I'm not always the best with predictions. I'm pretty good on issues, I think, but I'm not great at predictions. They're tough. But the best thing about Donald Trump winning was that the corporate media finally admitted it. They had been pretending for so long. I mean, we used to joke about, I remember coming on like a few years ago and we would joke about how Brian Stelter would always, whenever he talked about you, he would always kind of go like the fringe Joe Rogan. Like as if he's the mainstream and you are the fringe as if the numbers aren't readily available to all of us that we could be like, your show has like 200,000 listening and his has 20 million. So how is he the fringe and you're the mainstream? I think they would pretend that they maybe they believed it. But that 24, the election, that's when they all admitted it. And then the talking point moved to we need to find our own Joe Rogan. The Democrats need to find a Joe Rogan. Oh, that was a great one. Remember, that was like, so they kind of admitted that, oh, the podcasts have become the new mainstream and we're the fringe. But the dumb part of that statement was you already had me fucking idiots just lost your mind. I'm not right and I'm not left. Yeah. I'm stuck and I think the adherence to the ideologies that the left supports or the right supports is out of their fucking you got to be out of your fucking mind. Whether it's these crackpot Christian nationalists that think that this whole war is a way to get Jesus to return on a white horse. Yeah. Do you see those guys are we're talking? Yeah. During the readiness fucking meeting, that I think that's nuts too. I think the woke shit and all the chaos of the fucking last four years of having a completely open border and the justification of all these things, that's nuts too. I'm not on either a buddy side, but I think the Democrats are ever going to get someone like me because I'm not with either or. I'm not with either or. I'm with whoever fucking makes sense and no one makes sense. Until AI comes along. I think they're a really good job. President perplexity is going to run this country fairly balanced. I'm willing to try it at this point. I'm fucking dead serious man. As long as it doesn't like do something to harm people, as long as like that's it's goals just to manage society. It's a big if that you got there. But yes, if we can get that. Well, you just said I think is really well, this is something that I'm encouraged by. Is that I think what you just said there. I really do believe that you speak for super majorities of the American people. And that's why even though Donald Trump has shattered his coalition by lying us into this stupid war on behalf of a foreign country, that coalition is still ripe for someone else to pick it up and run with it. And that's kind of what I'm hoping. I hope Thomas Massey runs for president. I think by the way, they're doing a big money bomb for Thomas Massey on March 30th. And I think him winning reelection in Congress is like the most important political election in the country right now because he's done nothing wrong except actually stand up for America first and for all the stuff that Donald Trump and Tulsi Gabbard and all these people ran on and he's gotten the the Israel lobby and the Adel sense, but I repeat myself have been pouring millions of dollars into his race to try to unseat him for the crime of not going along with the Epstein cover up and not going along with another stupid war and having some like fiscal sanity. So I hope I hope he wins. I imagine those big. No one's free negatives. Imagine those big three negatives that people are saying he's not magga. Yeah. Well, then okay. Well, then if that's like I don't know like my position is always like, if you're saying if if not supporting covering up the Epstein files or not supporting a stupid war of choice, a war of aggression on behalf of Israel means I'm not magga, then okay, I'm not magga. I don't I'm not attached to the the, the, you know, the phrase make America great again. I don't care. Then find that phrase sucks. Here's the thing. Like first of all, America is great. Let me make America greater. I'm down. Make America great again. And then it becomes a movement of a bunch of fucking dorks because a lot of them are dorks. A lot of them these really weird fucking uninteresting, unintelligent people that have got something they cling to. And there's a lot of people that are just real genuine patriots. They're all lumped into this one group and you got to accept the dorks to fuck that. Like the concept of making America great is a great idea. But as soon as you have a fucking team and you allow anybody to join up, you've like, you don't even have tryouts for your team. So you've got a bunch of fucking dipshits that are running around spouting out opinions and you have to go along with them because they're magga. And then you've got bots online that are probably from fucking Indonesia or Russia or wherever. And they're pretending they're magga and they're saying crazy shit. So that's a part of magga too. You fucked up by becoming a part of a group. Yeah, whether it's a Republican group, a Democrat group, a magga group, a fucking woke group, whatever it is, you fucked up by being in a group. Yeah, what is at George Carlin said people are great as individuals. Yeah. But when they get in a group, man, they're the worst things in the world. And that's why it should be about the issues. It should be about your principles and what you believe in. Yeah. And you should be like, look, like I've said many nice things about Tulsi Gabbard over the years and I was extremely critical of her over since last summer and to now because I think she's lying us into a war, which is the war that she was always opposed to. The one, the one, she sold no war with a ran t-shirts. She like this was really lying us into this war. So that's a big statement. Yeah, absolutely. So and it's true. So last summer, so Tulsi Gabbard had given her the as the director of national intelligence does every year. They give their annual threat assessment. Then she testified before Congress about it. And she it was very clear in her annual threat assessment that Iran was not attempting to build nuclear weapons that they had not yet made the political decision to attempt to build nuclear weapons, let alone like are actually going for it. And she testified before Congress saying the same thing. And then after negotiating while they were negotiating Israel, sneak attacks them, then she had some post where she goes, Iran could be weeks or months away from nuclear weapons, which is like was total bullshit. It made absolutely no sense. Let me see what the post has. Sure. This is if you can find that this is from last, it must have been last June. Right. But is that a fact? So if they're enriching uranium up to 60% and they just have to enrich it further for the ability to use it in nuclear weapons, that is a couple weeks away. No, but not before it would be that to build a bomb and to make it deliverable. I think all the experts say at least a couple years, but the point aside from that is that at the time, and this is over now, but at the time, Iran was still members of the JCPOA. They were still in it. So it's like what is that? This is the Iran deal that Obama got us into. Obama's horrible on foreign policy. The butcher of Libya and Syria and Yemen and he surged in Afghanistan, but in Iran, he made a deal with them. And the deal, but it wasn't just with the US and Iran. It also involved Russia and France and England and there were other countries involved in it too. And the JCPOA said that Iran couldn't enrich above, I think it was three to five percent, or something like that. And they were staying in it. And it created a new inspections regime, which Iran, so they were having full inspections, they weren't enrich. But the deal also said that if America gets out of the deal, they can enrich up to higher. So when America got out of the deal, they started enriching. And when did America get out of the deal? Donald Trump toured up in his first term, I want to say 2017 or 28. And they immediately started enriching. No, they went up a little bit. And then I think there were a couple Israeli attacks. And then they went up to enriching at 60 percent. But so the reason we knew they were enriching up to 60 percent is because they were still members of the JCPOA with an inspections regime who was going in there and saying they're enriching up to 60 percent. Right. How much do you actually know about enriching uranium and what it takes to turn into a bomb? Let's read, but you said a new intelligence confirm what POTUS has stated numerous times. Iran's nuclear facilities have been destroyed. I don't think this is after. This is her tweet was before. This is from June. Yeah, this would have been just shortly before. But recently her tweet was before we hit for it out. Yeah, this is June 25th. There's a recent one though. Oh, edited June 25th. Yeah, but it seems like it was still edited the day it was posted. Probably. Can you go to her page? And because she doesn't tweet a lot. She's not a psycho. She's not one of those. She tweets is generally something important or someone from our team is he? So is this the whole out? What about that overwhelmingly elected by the mayor? Click on that show more. I think that's it. Well, this is what she testified to Congress this time. I was referring to a different one from my, but I also think this is a lie. I mean, for her to say that the president determines what is an imminent threat or is not, one that this is like saying the president determines the weather. Right, right. But you're taking her words out of context. She's saying something that's factually correct. As our commander in chief, he is responsible for determining what is and is not an imminent threat. That is true. And whether or not take action, he deems necessary to protect the safety and security of our troops, the American people in our country. That's just an actual fact. Okay. Yes, fair enough. And she testified before Congress, they asked her like, they asked her point blank a bunch of times about this. And then she goes, that's not my job to determine what's an imminent threat. That's the job of the president. And if he says it is, then it is. Okay. So look at this here. Initially, she's contradicting Trump saying that Iran did not rebuild after the 2025 strikes contradicting Trump. So this is also from Time Magazine. So she's saying that. You know, what you're saying that she said earlier was a lie is not a lie, dude, because that is actually his. Well, I was a, I understand, but you did say that was a lie, which he said was a lie. Okay, fair enough. That was not a lie. But it was, but it is, it's a way to actually correct. And if you're in a position like she's in. But you did say that was a lie which is I was a lot. Okay fair enough that was not a lie. It's but it was but it is but it's it's a void and He actually correct and if you're in a position like she's in we've got that guy breathing down your neck and you're forced to make a statement You've got a tread Very carefully on this type what rope that you're walking fine, but let's just say hypothetically Then you know for a fact that around did not pose an imminent threat and then that's your answer when you're asked if they did fine It's not a lie, but it is very misleading to say the least How much look at hold on until chief gathered declines to say if you're on pose an imminent threat the US She declined to say prefer on her own personally, but she this is the congressional Yes, yes, yes, this is I think this is what I was referring to here And she does at one point say that it's not her job to make that determination which I do think is a her entire job It's interesting look maybe maybe I'm being a little harsh by saying lying in that Sample and fair enough to your point there like that technically is a true statement I do think it's very misleading and I do think that she really was the one who advocated against this specific war for the reasons that We're seeing unfold right now. Yeah, and I do think I get your point It's a very tough tightrope to walk the options are essentially I think to do what Joe Kent did and resign or to stay on and support the thing I mean I think it's kind of hard to thread that needle right do you think that there is any Value and being one of the few reasonable voices it has is here Yeah, ultimately it is his responsibility to determine what's an imminent threat and what is not I would imagine that she gets access to Most of the same classified information that he does as the director of national intelligence. Yeah, I don't know though. I don't know how it works but What can she do other than? Try to be a voice of reason if ultimately this guy is gonna do what he wants to do right and he's gonna do it also What is wrong to do clearly? Oh, yeah, and he's talked about it, you know and also in his first term I'll never forget this fucking conversation that he had with Steve Hilton because I think it was one of the first time since I remember I've seen a president say Steve Hilton by the way I've been friends with him for 12 or 13 years Matt him and his family and Maui on the beach when my daughter's really young and his kids really young and they've kept friends We've hung out together. Oh, really? He's a sweetheart of a guy. I love that guy and When he was interviewing Trump Trump said That there is a military industrial complex and these guys want to go to war. Yep, and we were like what? This is you're just saying that like you're just saying that it's one of the many reasons While a lot of people liked him because yeah, he would do things like that where he would completely break protocol I would just say let me know let me let me let me let you know rather Let me inform you there's a bunch of people that want to go to war by they're pushing me all the time to go to war That's what they want it was so crazy dude because also even Eisenhower when he coined the term It was in his farewell address to the nation He was literally like this is my last stop and then I'm leaving Trump was just in the middle of his presidency and he goes all of them want war They all want me to be in war all the time if it was up to them We'd always be at war and I do you know now Look that was great. I thought actually the one to me that was even crazier Was if you remember when Delo Riley was interviewing him and he's talking about Vladimir Putin And he goes he's like oh well you won't you know at the time Donald Trump which he had run on He was he was saying we should have date on with Russia Mm-hmm goes like why do we you know we have all the poop people people yeah goes he goes Putin's a killer you want to have a date on with a killer and he goes we got a lot of killers too and then he goes Whoa, what do you mean we got a lot of killers to and he goes what was a rack? What was that we got a lot of killers on our side too and then Delo Riley said well I mean a rack was a mistake, but he goes yeah We got a lot of killers too. I love that by the way. I mean that was a That's breaking protocol. Yes. Yes. Well. I think this is kind of I think one of the main reasons why the establishment Revolted against Trump the way they did there's something very scary To the powers that be about a guy who like by his very nature Like I don't even think he's capable of not letting things slip, right? You know what? I mean like he's just that's who he is And that you know was a big thing that people really didn't like about him very interesting to me is that so many of the never Trumpers Have come to define his presidency Like if you if you remember back in in 2016 the The warhawk kind of Israel first are Republican crowd the neo-cons and all them they Hated Donald Trump hated him with a passion Ben Shapiro Was a never Trump or he said because of his deeply held principles he could never support Donald Trump Mark Levin was a never Trump or all of national review all of them and now They are the biggest Trump supporters ever as kind of he's blown up the coalition that got him elected It's kind of interesting that they all you know You know, but again that those guys to all stay off Twitter There's not one thing that they ever say that makes them look better They get in these silly fucking they just feel like they're gonna make some stupid fucking statement And then refute a couple of people and don't understand the crowd reaction when you've got Thousands of people tweeting against you now Thousands to tack you destroying you posting memes posting videos you said this and you said that you piece of shit It's amazing. It's crazy. I gotta say I do love that dynamic of it. There's others to there's something that's why I stay off Yeah, well, that's you look there's problems with it But there is something about that dynamic now that was just never true in the past where it's like Well, I'm not saying it's perfect and obviously there's bots and there's things like that So it's not like up but the people kind of get a voice in a way that they never had before right and there is something Kind of cool about that behind the other person. I love it But it's not all the people either it's a lot of fake people. There's a lot of like sponsored actors. No, that's true That's true. There's manipulation But there was always manipulation in the old order also do you see this YouTube bot farm that they just busted? No, they busted this this fucking warehouse had cell phones All rigged up for YouTube views where people just they would just hire a company and say hey, you know The part of the problems Fuse I'd really like to blow the fuck up and get to number one and you hire them and they can get views Interesting. Yeah, but that's also I mean, I guess I advertise means that's legit 100% like actual for a hundred percent and kind of a weird loophole where I don't think it's illegal Yeah, that's gotta be It's gotta be some type of fraud though if you're like if you're intentionally doing that like maybe if you didn't know Right, you could but but listen Twitter pays people X pays people to post So you pay based on engagement right that's how you get right so you farm out engagement So like what percentage of what we're interacting with is just horseshit well I got so I know this story just happened look I got Guilty because he made I think I think what happens he made a fake band Yeah, yeah, he had a nay our generation song he got oh wow played billions of times in an effort to mimic the genuine streaming Activity of real consumers Smith pled guilty today conspiracy to commit wire fraud wire fraud check this out though I heard a similar story in Japan were first of all let me stop right there Michael Smith generated thousands of fake songs using artificial intelligence Hey, hey, hey stop talking shit about AI music because it's not fake those are real songs Yeah, don't say fake songs. They they're real songs and some of them are fucking bangers Unfortunately Some of them are really good. You're gonna like what I was gonna say then it's a guide was doing this in Japan and it got viral and so he hired People to be the band and now the band is a real band Kind of popular so AI is creating jobs in this case. Yeah, well, you know, so shitty Brent rules though You can never create him in real life. He's the guy who does the 50 cent ones. Oh, yeah I've seen I've seen quite a few guys first of all that guy was really you'd have lungs like a fucking ultra marathon runner Because the flow like how can you even hear it say what you're saying Like someone was saying that to me she was like I think you couldn't do this and my argument was Eminem I was like, yeah, you could you just have to be wicked at it like Eminem like Eminem and his prime that motherfucker Yeah spit in a way where you're like I can't believe he's still talking. Yeah, it was a I remember there were a couple of his things where I was like I don't can he actually do this and then I saw him do it live and not like I was there He could do it like where you're like, oh, he can actually rambling recently. Yeah, I saw him recently It was fucking great. He's still great. Then he looks good Yeah, he's killing it man. He was killing it But those the speed in which that he can rap maybe go maybe AI is not bullshit But you know 50 cent himself was like much more casual in his delivery. Yes, you know and it was Much slower this shifty Brent AI version is like damn That was a real person It'd be pretty great. He would be the greatest artist. I got there was a guy I can't remember his name, but just like the other day Some guy he works for Fox news and he came out and had a whole post about me and he goes He goes Dave Smith's account is clearly bought it by far and like and I'm almost like when he said that I was almost kind of like There's a weird thing like I know I've never paid for anything But like I don't know you know what I mean like what someone else might have done or something like that But I asked him but I said replied to him and I go wait What evidence do you have of this and then he his post was that he said because I had 900,000 followers on Twitter, but I'm playing laugh bossed in this weekend and he goes That's a 300 seat venue I play that obviously times to I was like first of all he does an under I think you just don't get comedy clubs dude Like this is not at first of all I'm doing five shows there by the way come on out this weekend Great club great club great. What am I one of my favorite weekends of last year? It's a fun great room But I was like look man I sold that all the shows last year hoping to do the same this year But I go that is any like I just know the industry of stand-up comedy pretty well I was like anybody who you're saying would be selling more than that so what selling out big theaters or selling out a stadium or something like that All the people who do that have more followers than me So like he's not even right about the ratio of whatever he doesn't understand numbers But then I kind of like I grilled him on it a bit more because listen I'm kind of like you like when you were talking about suing CNN back in the day for slander in you like I'm never actually gonna do it But I don't mind Saying it you know what it means like you know so I tagged Fox news I go hey Fox news shouldn't you have some evidence if you're gonna make a claim like I'm clearly Botted by foreign influencer whatever Fox news actually said it the guy works for Fox news So he's on Fox news no he said just went Twitter Twitter, but he's like a Fox news contributor or something Right, but I mean UFC contributor wouldn't be like the UFC Yeah, I guess I guess that's true. So I don't know maybe it would just be him in either way I'm not suing anyone god, but I did want him to just I go just just admit you don't have any evidence for this like just yeah Retract what here's the thing I would agree that your account is bought it because you're very controversial public figures I'm sure all of them. I'm right. I'm sure my account is bought it, too. Right. I'm sure Jamie's account is bought it 100% right I think Jamie like he bought himself. We're all bought it man the if you look at you know, we brought up this up a million times But there was an FBI former FBI analyst who analyzed Twitter before the purchase and it was his take that as much as 80% Might be artificial now this is back then. Yeah, before Elon purchased it I think they've done they've taken some steps to try to ensure one of the things is you have to you could go to the person's page You can see what country they're posting from yes I like that. Yeah, there's a lot of people that are like pro-America and you're like hey, man You're in Pakistan. Yeah, what's going on? Yeah, this is kind of cookie So there's a lot of that going on I've had I've had Before where people go like oh Dave you always say Israel's trying to lie us into war But this is America. We decide what war we're gonna fight and then you click it Israel Israel Don't say at least we're getting steps to know those listen if it wasn't for Elon Musk We would be fucked I've said this before. I'll say it again History will go back and look at his purchasing Twitter and it it has changed the course of Communication in this country for the better. No, I know a lot of you thought oh my god the racism is up and all the stuff is up That's people that's the internet that is an accurate Representation of people. It's not good But it's also accurate and the only way that's gonna change is if the other voices are more compelling And at least now they have an opportunity to do that. Yeah, well and you and you have to kind of engage in this whether And I'm not saying you have to be on Twitter or something like that, but I'm just saying like if you want to You know, I would love Very much to get to a place where like you're like hey Let's all agree that we're not on board with the bigotry stuff And I mean this like whether it's against white men or whether it's against black men or whether it's against Jews Or whether it's against Muslims or whatever and I see a whole lot of all of that and I'd love to move past that I also would Like like I wish there was a way that like Mark Levin and Tucker Carlson could have like a cool conversation. You know what I mean and not like not like be like But look it's not Santa Claus and Jesus would come meet me for dinner. Well both would be nice The latter is more likely I think too at this point. Yeah, I know weird thing. I don't know if you saw this but Ben Shapiro He made this video about like about Pierce Morgan and and like going at him over having me on on the show And he went this whole thing and so he he says to me or he said, you know Insult me a few times or whatever and then he goes out now I I can hear Dave Smith right now and his response to this is debate me bro Which fair enough that kind of is always but I only have one tool in my toolkit like Right come let's podcast about this. I don't know like this is what I do. I talk But he goes on to do that. He goes no Because you're like so he said because I won't I don't debate such intellectually dishonest people or or something like that Which I thought was a weird criticism of me like you could say I'm wrong, but I do believe the shit I say yeah, I don't look you're in the I don't think in any demonstration of any I don't think there's a single moment that I could point to that I think that you've been intellectually Dishonist I think that is like factually incorrect Well, then that that is gaslighting you are very honest You're a very honest person. Thank you. I tried to be no you are One of the things I love about you you you're honest about your fuck-ups You're honest about you what you're incorrect about and what bothered you About things that you've said you're very honest So that's a silly thing to say that's total gaslighting well It's also well I look at it like this and I don't you know Honestly like obviously bench pair wanted to debate I would I would do it everybody before all this You go dude. You can't say I'm beyond the pale when you're known for debating 19 year olds who are confused about their gender You know what I'm saying like it. No, I don't know if you remember this and this to me I actually think is very interesting But I don't know if you remember this but on this show it been was on years ago And there's you know years before October 7th or anything like that But he was saying it he was talking about Israel as defense for Israel and you went you got that's Interesting would you ever debate someone? You know who's a critic of Israel and just generically not about a specific person and he goes absolutely I'd be happy to do that and You know the thing about guys like that is that a particularly with Ben Shapiro for the last two and a half years His number one issue Israel has been the number one topic of conversation and in that time Israel support has been bleeding. I mean just like to a level you couldn't have imagined you could have imagined two and a half years ago This will be a pro Palestinian country that was unthinkable and it's become that and forget me There's way better people than me. Ben Shapiro debated no one He never once had a conversation with a competent critic of Israel and that listen people saw that people noticed that and so I kind of in a weird way feel like it's like hey dude I don't care if you do the debate with me or not I wish I don't think we ever can I wish there would be a world where we could have a good faith Conversation like a guy with me and Ben Shapiro, but he refused to do it with anyone Anyway, so while you're smearing everybody who's a critic of Israel You're not willing to like you listen there are some people who don't debate But he branded himself as the debate guy right if you don't like Dave sit down with Scott Horton sure absolutely Scott Horton's way smarter than me and those way more shit than me anyway So talk to him about yeah, I mean You're saying that this is the reason why you won't do it that sounds crazy because Wouldn't you want to debate someone who's intellectually dishonest because it would be so easy to refute them with facts exactly so come Who'd be perfect? Yeah, dating it's like sparring a guy who knows fake Kung Fu You know things he's got a death touch and you're Dustin poor. Yeah, you're like, oh, yeah, bro Laster gloves up. Let's go. Well, that was kind of my thing with with the Douglas Murray thing to where it was like at a certain point You're like dude You can't just say you're an expert and I'm not an expert Demonstrate that that if that's the case then it should be easy for you to just chop me up in front of the world Right now some things that you had to correct him on Yeah, they're history of history. Yeah Which has got it wrong and you could see like the tremor in his eyes like oh shit Like they don't want to give up that ground because they're playing a very different game Yeah, and the game is not let's be Intellectually honest about what we think is going on and what we think is good and bad about what's going on Versus I'm trying to win. Yeah, and one of the ways I try to win is by I can appeal to authority You're doing an expert. You know, you're not of this. You're not a professor. You don't you've never been there Yeah, that kind of shit that that that is all like Hack ass fake Kung Fu moves You know, you're gonna try on Francis and Conno you know what I mean? Yeah, like it's like a good luck with that say you should not that I'm comparing you to Francis Certainly not Certainly not My brother fight me this rod of rousy car. They got Francis fighting Philip lens fills Philip lens who's a light heavyweight At in the UFC in the UFC cut him and he's fighting the scariest heavyweight who's ever walked the face of the earth I mean probably prime time ouster over him prime time ouster over him when he was uber I think is even scarier. I think because he was way skillful like he was terrifying when he was on the sauce. Yes, but even My chances was that's where scary earth Francis almost has a thing where it just seems like you you have to fight a perfect perfect Against him. Yep, which steep Amy Oach is dead the first fight their first fight He took a lot of shots. That's the thing about stipe like stipe could take a shot And you would see he did like jab him and he'd be wrong, but he'd still get the take down and still and he'd be all the time He'd been with skills strategy Experience everything but in the second one DC said it best he goes a patient Francis is a fucking terrifying thing Dude my favorite my favorite commentary ever in a fight was when DC said it was just so hilarious to me It was so real like he just meant it But it was when when Francis and Gaun who fought thought gone and He grappled a little bit in that fight which we had never seen him do Before there was one point where there he was on the ground and he like took his back or something like that He passed his guard or he took his backers like that and DC just goes oh my god. He's doing Jiu Jitsu now It was like he was speaking of a robot who just learned how to feel feelings it goes. Oh my god It's learning. It's advancing This is so terrifying And a guy has that much of a destroyer that learns how to take backs and strangle people to control you from the back I'm blast you unconscious like he did with that dude in the PFL in his last fight took his back and just blast in him into the netherworld Yeah, that's that's scary. He's the scariest guy that's ever fought in the UFC Like I said next to that dude for scary a fight natural clean guy I should say that okay with a gap fair enough fair enough You know because we only got us a couple alstro over in fights where he was uber in the big one being Brock Lesnar And that was the big one and of course the other fight on that car that they added which is huge as the nate deas Well, here's what here was my point. It is this fighting. I just yes I'm paying whatever you're charging. I'm going to be wherever it is and it's Mike Perry Great fight bad motherfucker Yep, that's a great fight, but my point is they also have robellus to Spain Who's on the card who's a six foot seven cubed and ticwan dough expert? Who's a heavyweight is a knockout artist like where is he if I have him? He's fighting junior dos Santos and junior dos Santos is you know is it's he's had a lot He was an all-time great But he had a long career and he said it's a bad knock as some wars to bad wars the wars came Velasquez took years off his life That would say it was almost criminal that they didn't stop both of those fights Well, it were definitely horrible and terrible to watch But the point is Robellis is huge. He's a real heavyweight. He's a big giant knockout artist like that would have been an interesting fight versus Francis big super tall guy that's hard to hit yeah, and if it just is a striking fight the problem with Robellis He got he got exposed in his last UFC fight on the ground He got beat up on these ground games not that good could have gotten better But on the feet that's a little bit more interesting to me than Philip all the Phillips is skillful fighter You know, he's just he's used to fighting it light heavyweight the UFC cut some and now all the sudden he's fighting against Francis Yeah, that's a little bit of a Miss match, but hey, I mean, you know, we've seen crazy shit happen. I said I think it's pronounced Felipe Felipe Linz But he's a good fighter and he's not it's not a bad fight in that sense But it's like you're going up against a guy with a chip on a shoulder that they're paying $20 million is the linear I don't know what the pain. I'm just guessing But he's the linear heavyweight champion of the world the real one like if you really like plot it out known beat him for the title That's a that's a crazy fight. It's like that's how shallow the heavyweight division out is outside of the UFC There's so few fights for you to get Francis for this so few fights in the UFC I mean the UFC's heavyweight division is a real mess. It's very hard to find gigantic men who are excellent fighters I guess the lot in Russia. Okay. Yeah, there's there's guys that are fighting in other countries that are really good that are coming up It's just like it's hard to get him over here. There's Josh Hokett. He's a bad motherfucker That's what that's our dude who's crazy who has these crazy speeches after the fight puts on an American flag bandana Oh, yeah, Brittany Greiner has a dick Great Brittany Greiner's a man. I love he said, but he's just nuts But he's also like really smart about market. Who's the other guy you you talked about him several times He's the Olympic wrestler guy Okay, yeah, yeah, okay, Stephen cable he's yeah, he's not in yet though He's not in I had him on the podcast. He's not in the UFC yet Yeah, but he's in the UFC he's going to be a fucking problem Olympic gold medalist elite wrestler moves like a cat 250 pounds young Super dedicated and just recently learned striking and it's fucking people up with his hands Yeah, and it's picking it up quite quickly and is a John Jones protégé so he's been being mentored by the goat and Absorbing his mindset and how that guy's helping him He's investing his time into training him But if you're a young guy you know what a fucking boost of confidence the greatest of all time says you're gonna be the man Yeah, you're gonna be the fucking man You just stick with this plan and they're bringing him up the right way He thought dirty boxing. He fought some small MMA organizations He's just like building up experience. Yeah, and there's not there's never been a lot of But there's not really right now in heavyweight landscape. There isn't really like a Frank mirror or What's his name? Minitar no gara no gara where there used to be these like guys who were like kind of known for fighting off their back Mm-hmm I mean like most heavyweights don't really like fighting off their back these even the guys who are really good at jujitsu I also think just in general fighting off your back is a lot harder than it used to be But Brazil for doom was the greatest. Yes. Yes. That's a great. He was incredible But there aren't really that many guys like that a lot of these guys you take them down Their trouble they're in trouble. Yeah, and when you got a guy like cable guess what bitch You're gonna get taken down and there's not a fucking thing you can do about it. That is a next level I just saw the one one of his recent fights where he uh He's finishing a double leg before he realized he knocked the guy out. It seems like he came Oh, so I'm with a left hook and he's so fast that as the guys collapsing on the way down He shoots a double connects takes him to the ground while he's unconscious Yeah, so before the guys a chance to drop that's how fast he is he's already on him taking him down and pounds him out while he's already unconscious Yeah, that was scary. Oh That guy's a problem. He's a problem and that's an American heavyweight motherfucker We need one of those we need some American champions. We're down gentlemen the White House. Yeah, I mean are there any American champions right now who are the American champions? Mackenzie Dern is the straw weight champion So she's technically an American although his her dad is a very famous Brazilian legend Okay, yeah Megaton Diaz is his her dad and she was a jujitsu. She presumably jujitsu champion But she is American so she's a champion other than that Who Sean Strickland's fighting for the title? Kale Harrison that's right. Kale is so it's only women that are the Americans Yeah, look at that boy. You're gonna see a lot of those dudes with those beards You're gonna see a Joshua van is an American. That's right You got a lot of those dudes that's a caveat though the Joshua van no disrespect for Joshua because I think he's an awesome fighter But he won that fight we gotta have a rematch on that one. That was a freak injury I mean he fell and dislocated his arm. It's a complete freak injury And Pantosia still hasn't fully recovered from that so it was pretty bad, but over the fuck they said his shoulder dislocated and his elbow Yeah, I remember hearing that afterward. It looked like it was just his elbow. Uh-huh But they said the doctor said it was his shoulder and so would it would the thing about the elbow is The elbow is a less complicated joint right and so when the elbow gets dislocated if someone just pulls on it It can pop back into place so like saying that there's was only didn't know what they're doing right Because you don't want to do it like you're a pro-hoscus Team didn't rip his shoulder apart and they need surgery. Probably need surgery anyway It was dislocating like that. It was probably loose But the point is that like his elbow might have popped back into place by the time they brought him backstage And that's when they realized his shoulder was fucked because his shoulder probably hurt more even right right That was unfortunate because that was a real interesting face locate a lot You know and you know sometimes people dislocate their shoulders and don't even realize they do And really and I apparently according to my The this orthopedic surgeon that I went to back in the day before I realized that stem cells could fix it This guy was convincing me that I had a surgery and one of the things he said You know that your shoulder's been dislocated and I said it has he goes you didn't know I go No, it was how long how many times you heard your shoulder? I go how much time you got? Sit down talk about every time I've been come over it How many times a bit fucking arm block? How many times a big caught a triangle? How many times? You know posting on the ground of jostled my shoulder The good news is there've been no fracture or ligament injury. That's great. Oh, that's behind. I said that so from that We have great expectations for his return, but the exact time for his still and no is still needs a lot of physiotherapy Start moving his arm Wow, then he can go back to light training and then hard training, but we got to get that guy down to fucking the CPI and You know the cellular performances that UFC uses get that dude down to Tijuana I'm worried about I'm worried about the new model for the U.S. Paramount model I'm worried about the war in Iran and the new UFC model. This is what keeps me up at night I get it. So what are you worried about with the new UFC model? I? I'm no genius But it seems to me like I'm a hardcore fan of UFC right so I was a You know like order every pay per view right everyone, you know I and and so every any Saturday if I'm on the road in my green room We're watching the UFC if I'm not on the road. I'm either at home watching it or I'm trying to go to the benefits in town right so then It's like okay ESPN is is over We're not doing that anymore so then there go we're switching to Paramount now I already had Paramount because like my kids like some shows on Paramount yep, so now landman. Yeah Oh, yeah, I actually land my creation. Oh So you know so like I have Paramount plus I'm like, oh, okay, well, that's easy enough and then I'm like So wait a minute. Hold on. So you tell me. I just get everyone for free now. I just don't have to order pay per views anymore So, you know, so like I have Paramount plus. I'm like, oh, okay, well, that's easy enough. And then I'm like, so wait a minute, hold on, so you tell me, I just get everyone for free now. I just don't have to order paper views anymore. And there's just something about that. Now, I'm not saying whether this is Paramount's mistake or the U of Season's mistake or whatever, but just like the basics of business to me go, so you just had a loyal customer who's very happy to pay for every paper view. And I'm just not now. Like this just on some, now I understand it's because Paramount gave them a whole bunch of money, but on some level I go number one, I go, but how is this good for business if the customer no longer has to pay for a thing that I was happily paying for? Okay, let me correct you. Okay, sure. First of all, Paramount, the idea of doing this and investing $7 billion into the UFC of the next few years, the positive that they're going to get from that with loyal new customers is massive. So if you're losing it to a whole new audience, if you're a loyal paper view buyer, if you spend, what is it, $70 for a paper view? I think something like that. So $70 bucks for this big time paper view card. Now you get it for free, you just have to pay for Paramount plus every month for the year. You're saving so much money. So the amount of new people that are going to go, oh, this is awesome. I don't have to pay for paper view anymore. So I pay for Paramount plus and I get all these awesome shows too because Paramount plus has a ton of no question. Great deal for the consumer. You get roped in through that and then you go looking around on Paramount plus and you stay a loyal subscriber. They have all these years with this new influx of viewers from the UFC deal to build up more of a library. More shows, it's huge for business. Okay, fair enough. Take their app from where it is now and take the streaming model from where it is now and quadruple it over the next X amount of years. So they're okay. So for them, they're bringing in a, you have see audience. How many people would look at a paper view card? And look, I would buy every one of them even when I was working for the UFC. I would go on ESPN plus and I would buy them even though I was there. I was like, I want to be able to watch it in the gym. I get home. I'm going to buy it. And so you've got all these people that were looking at those cards that were like, this one, I don't know. I don't know if that's worth 70 bucks. If you're on a budget and you look at it, this one, you're like, who's fighting? Nah, I'm going to pass on this one. I'll watch it a couple of weeks on ESPN plus because you could just wait a few weeks. I don't know how long the timeframe is. You can wait a few weeks and you can watch it. You don't have to do that anymore. It's 10 bucks a month. What does Paramount plus a month? How much does it cost? Let's find out. So we're accurate. But you're saving so much money. But also on ESPN, they charged you something like that too. Like you had to pay an ESPN fee and then you had to pay for each individual paper view. So no, I'm saving for you. Okay, $13.99 a month or $139 a year for the ad free premium plan, which includes Showtime. New and former subscribers can currently get any monthly plan for $299 a month for the first two months. So for a new subscriber, you could try it out for two months for $299 a month and watch every UFC for $299 a month for two months. It's fucking worth it. No, then you're getting it. Again, this huge influx of people that, you know, if you're on a budget, you're not going to subscribe to Paramount plus. You already got Netflix Netflix costs X amount of money. Maybe you got HBO max. That's X amount of money. Okay, I can't afford Paramount too. I don't want to pay another 10 bucks a month or $14 a month. Now you just, it's easy. Yeah. No paper views. Yeah, they made, they made a lot of wives of hardcore fans happy. Sure for that. You're like, I don't have to buy these paper views. I don't know. Yeah, they get the Paramount shows and they're going to have to do that. All right, fair enough. I guess it's just, um, in some ways, I guess, and I don't really have much of a mind for business. But in some ways, there's just a thing where it's like, we've always done it this way. Now we're doing it a whole new way. Yeah, but it's been on streaming for the last few years. Yeah, that's always been on an app anyway. And then Paramount, you could get it on Apple TV, you can get it on Android TV, you can get it on all these different things. It's like, there's no reason to not have it. Yeah. It's easy. It's just great for, as a business move for Paramount, it was a smart fucking move because you get this built in hardcore fan base. Now, have some of the cards been lackluster? Yes. But guess what? That has always been the case. Yeah, that's a matter of time. Go to the eventually the watch Rose, Nama, you know, versus Carla, as far as there's been some fights back in the day that just weren't great. Yeah. And there's been cards that even though they look good on paper in reality, they weren't so fun. Yeah, but I also, I'm with you, because I remember you used to say this back in the day all the time, but I am like a purest fan in MMA in the sense that like all of that is like, I don't care. Like, like feel like, oh, it's boring. You're like, it's the most exciting sport in the world on its worst day, even in a fight that's a bad fight because you, if you remember the, uh, Frank, me or croakop, is a good example of this where it was just a boring fight, the entire fight. And then there's a spectacular knockout at the end of it. And even if that doesn't end up happening, you're always watching like that could happen at any moment. It also like, I also, I also, I'm with you, I believe in like, I don't believe in stand ups. I don't think anyone should ever be stood up. Yeah. I don't think you should be separated for stalemate or whatever. It's like, if someone puts you in that position, then yeah, you gotta get up and get up if they're not doing enough on the top. That's silly. Sean O'Malley explains why piracy led the UFC's massive paramount deal. Oh, interest a lot of people that'll pay for it every week, but there's a lot of people that won't. That makes sense. They're streaming it illegally. That makes sense. I knew there was a lot of that because there were sites that you could go to and people would openly talk about it. You can go to it and just watch the pay review. It's a good move, dude. It's a good move for the business. It's just like, they just need a few banger cards to make people forget about the stale ones. But that will always, that will happen. It's an avenue ball. You're gonna have stale cards. I'm concerned about the White House fight. I'm concerned about it not just from security standpoint. I'm concerned about it because it's outside. It's June and it's in Washington, D.C. When you, if it's hot out and it could very well be, like, what's the average temperature? I looked this up the other day. Average 67% humidity and last year or 2024 is 100 degrees on June 14. Okay. Okay. Okay. And I think it's supposed to be at noon also. Yeah, that's that's an okay. Okay. Okay. That's a fucking big problem, dude. That's a big problem. You are going to radically affect their performance. If you make people fight in 100 degree temperature with 67% humidity outside, you're also going to radically affect my ability to do commentary. Okay. My fucking head doesn't have any hair. The top of my head is going to be beat red. I'm going to have to put some toxic sunscreen on it. You're going to see me with that white zinc powder that the surface use on their nose. It'll be over the, I'll make like fake hair with like white zinc. My head's going to get a slight issue. 80% short of thunderstorms with highs in the mid Are they building a tent? Is this outside outside or is it outside in a tent? Are they going to have like fans blowing cold air on us? You know how much DC is going to complain? That fucking dude, he's going to be right next to me. He's sure it's going to be soaked. Yeah, that's a bit of a hotel with mine because I always wear black anyway. Everybody with a white shirt or a blue shirt. If Anna has a light blue shirt on his pits are going to be fucking filled up with sweat, it's going to be ridiculous. That also like really legitimately changes the actual fight. Oh, 100% Okay. So there, I don't see any AC there, bro. How are you going to get AC on those people? What is that going to be like? That sounds fucking insane to do that in June, just because that's a fun time to do it. I mean, if I was Justin Gachi or I was Ilia Toporia, if I was Justin Gachi, I mean, first of all, he has to take the fight. It's a historic fight. It's at the White House. He's a true red blood of American. He wants to win the title at the White House. Come on. You have to do it. But he's 37 years old. He's had a long career and he's fighting maybe the most lethal guy he's ever faced. Yeah. The one guy out of all the guys he faced that can shut the fucking lights out with one shot every time. His last three fights is the craziest resume in the history of this board knocks out Alexander Volkonovski, knocks out Max Holloway, knocks out Charles Olivera to it featherweight one at lightweight. All of them level. I wouldn't even say, well, I guess it's debatable, but certainly you could make an argument. The two best featherweights of all time. Yes. And one of the greatest lightweight of all time. And by the way, I know MMA math is never perfect, but you look at what all of era just did to Max Holloway. Yeah. Who I love is one of my favorite fighters of all time. You look at what Charles Olivera just did to Max Holloway. And then you think about the way Iliad Taporia handled him. I didn't mind him. The first round. And not what was to me almost as impressive as the knockout was handling him on the ground. Yeah. Past his guard. He tried to take him down. Think about the weight. He got one of those body locks and tried to take him down. Think about how helpless Max Holloway was for that. How helped us a whole bunch of guys we've seen are when he gets his hands around you. And Iliad Taporia, he tried to do that. He ends up on top and passes his guard right away. Also, he ate really clean elbow early in that fight and just was like nothing. Right. I shook it off like it was nothing. He's a special talent. But then again, when you are dealing with special talents and great great fighters like Justin, who this is probably his last opportunity for the title, I want that under the perfect conditions. You want that to be in a arena where it's 72 degrees and air conditioned. I don't want it to be outside. I don't want it to be any additional stress or distractions because you're warming up at the White House. Like, would he have tents with mats on them and these guys are going to slip it around and puddles the sweat. Or shadow boxing in the situation room before you come out. Who's going to slip on sweat and blow their ACL out? Yeah. You know, I mean, if you ever done striking on mats when a bunch of dudes have been training like in a class, it's so fucking slippery. If it's that hot, it's going to unless they have these mats where they're getting set up in air conditioned building somewhere. Unless they have a facility. Yeah, maybe they can do that. I hope they think that through. I hope they prepare it. It's just I don't like I like the idea that it's like this big celebration of the USC that the president loves the UFC so much. You want to do it at the White House. But in practice, I don't like it at all because you've got two world titles. You know, you've got the interim heavyweight world title and then you've got this world title with Justin and Iliya at 55. I don't like it. I want those, I want those to be at the T-Mobile. I want those to be at the Madison Square Garden Arena. I want, you know, I want those to be somewhere dope. The TD Garden Boston put it, put in a fucking real arena where it's air conditioned. Damn it. Yeah, these are amazing fights. I don't want anybody fighting when it's a hundred degrees outside. That's also amazing. Wouldn't and correct me if I'm wrong, but also I would think it's you're going to get sweaty so quick and whether like that. And that is a big deal for like grappling. Like I mean, that's a huge advantage if you're trying to not get grappled by someone. Here's another factor. These are people that just were radically dehydrated 24 hours ago. And then you're asking them to compete in a sauna. You're basically asking them to fight in a sauna. That is still so crazy to me that there's not a way that we can just get two guys who weigh a hundred and eighty pounds to fight at a hundred and eighty pounds. Instead, we have to have two guys who weigh a hundred and eighty pounds cut down to a hundred and fifty pounds and then rehydrate up to a hundred and eighty pounds to fight at a hundred and eighty pounds and weaken themselves like radically weaken themselves. I see those guys the day they weigh in the worst ever that I ever saw was Travis looter. So Travis. Yeah, we're on silver. He missed weight. But how is backstage for all of it? Right. So this was back when the weigh ins were the time of the actual weigh ins. It wasn't a ceremonial weigh in like now they give them more time. You can weigh in in the morning. And then by the ceremonial weigh ins was usually 5 p.m. Usually these guys have significantly rehydrated. They do it slowly, but they have a process to it. But Travis missed weight. And so I was backstage while they gave him X amount of time to make the weight. And dude, he couldn't walk. He was shuffling, shuffling like you couldn't pick his legs up. His lips were cracked. His face was dry. He looked like he was going to die. He looked like a guy who had been shipwrecked, you know, and like lost at sea and just drinking his own piss for a week. And they finally rescued him. That's what it looked like. Right. And he was dying, I guess. Right. I mean, that is what you're looking at. And 24 hours later, he has to fight the greatest middle weight of all time. He has to fight Anderson, motherfucking Silva in his prime. And by did for that being the story, did remarkably well probably, he got viciously. Uh, elbows that it was out on the triangle. Yeah. That's hard. Dad would not have happened if Travis was in compromise. Travis was a real problem back there. Yeah. And he was the best jujitsu guys to ever compete in MMA. And he was stylistically kind of like the best shot against Anderson Silva at that time. Exactly. And because Anderson's a better look on touch. And he got him down. Got him into good positions a few times, even though he was fucked from the weight cut. But either thing was, he never made the weight. So even if he would have been in a way to go up the title, the whole thing was fucked. But it's like I've advocated for there's a solution. One of them is multiple weight classes that are additional to what we have. Have one at least every 10 pounds. And it probably should be more. And a lot of people push back against that. But listen, 10 pounds for an elite athlete is a big fucking deal. 20 pounds is crazy. So when you go like 85 to 205, that's crazy. That's too much weight. It's too much of a gap. You could have multiple champions in between those weight classes. And it's just better for the sport overall. You've got more champions and more champion versus champion matchups you can make. Well, there's it also, first of all, it's very unhealthy and dangerous. And that's the biggest issue. But then it also makes it a thing where it's like now there's there's two factors. It's not just who's the best fighter. It's also who's the best at dehydrating them so losing a ton of weight and rehydrating themselves. And also I think like I've heard, I've heard GSP say before that like some people are just naturally better at that. Some people just fluctuate and wait more. Some people can lose a lot of weight and then gain it all back the other day. And he used to always say, I just can't do that. Like I'm not a guy who can do that. But I think all of it. We just want to see who the best fighter is. Exactly. We don't care about who's the best at dehydrating that it happens. Your ability should be removed from the equation, especially if it's something like this. But there's a solution. First of all, there's a real silliness to the MMA weight classes. And by say silliness, our names that we use have been owned by boxing for more than a hundred years. And the names that we use are for different weight classes than boxing uses. Yeah. That's dumb. Yeah. That is dumb as shit. Like if you want to have a 170 pound champion, fantastic. But don't call it a welterweight. Because welterweight is 147. Right. It's been 147 for over a hundred fucking years. The fact that you have a 147 champion and you call that or 145 champion, you call that a featherweight. Featherweight is 126. Yeah. That's what it's been in boxing. Forever. Lightweight has always been 135. That's what Julio Cesar Chavez was the champ. 135. 135. Lightweight is 155. And you have to say, like, come up with your own names. Yeah. Why do we still have these stupid names? And they thought about that. It's a good point. They attached these names to it when they first started developing weight classes. Because it used to just be one weight class. Oh, another one on this. Why? And I think you've mentioned this before. Why am I not getting the leg reach? They do that sometimes. Do they? Yeah. Because I've seen like, but on the regular tail of the tape, it'll still just be reach. Yeah. But in this, because that actually for MMA, that's such a huge deal. Sure. Like it's such a huge because like if you're kicking, yeah, if you're in kicking range of me, but you know what I mean? But you can't touch me. Your jab doesn't matter as much as in boxing. Right. And some guys, they have really long legs for their torso. My friend Larry, my friend Larry Jones from my talk window days. He had this short torso. What is this? All those leg reaches longer than steepets. Well, that's crazy. That right. That's crazy. Steepage just has a way longer torso. That's nuts. It helps to help. Oh, wow. That's crazy. Well, although it's such a good kicker, it's probably part of the reason why. My friend Larry had this short torso, like really short, but he was like six, three. And he was all legs. And he was this insane kicker. He was like, a freak like he was made in a lab. And when guys would fight him, like, you'd see guys in tournament's fight him, they'd be like, what the fuck am I going to do with this? His reach was so nuts. And he was so fast with his kicks. And you couldn't get anywhere close to him. If you were in his weight class and you were normally built, right, he was built with his torso was shorter than mine. But his crazy long legs and long arms. Yeah, that's it. Some people are just built certain ways. And for striking, it's a giant problem. There's another thing that makes Iliad to pour you so fucking unbelievably impressive. He's not tall at all. Yeah. You know, and he's just flat-lining people. Oh, I mean, Charles Olivera looked so much bigger than oh, in that fight. And so much bigger than Max too. Oh, there is big. It's like, look, the sports fine. It's not, it's not trouble. Sports not in trouble. The heavyweight divisions is in trouble. The heavyweight division is kind of fucked. It's in a weird situation. The Alex Pereira thing is very interesting. Alex Pereira versus Sirogan is very, very, very interesting. Cause Sirogan is a problem. That guy has a problem. He's super athletic. He's really fast. He's super skillful with striking. His muy tie is absolutely elite. And he does a lot of things different than what a lot of people do. And as anyone, because even Francis, like I was saying before, grappled with him a lot in that fight, obviously John Jones took him down and showed them. But has anyone really stood toe to toe and beat him up? No, no one's beat him up toe to toe. Tie to Yvesa went to toe with him and tried to. But he got lit up to Sirogan is a problem. And even in the little in the little dominance on Aspenol, it looked like he was winning. He's tough. He's tough to fight like that, man. He's not just tough. He was like getting off on Aspenol. And it didn't look good for Aspenol. I mean, it's very unfortunate that he got his eyes poked. I mean, that we really never got to see what happens if he drags Siro deep, deep water. What the way Tom would adjust it for the second round or third round, which we've never really seen at a Tom either. It was very interesting that we got robbed of that. You know, but we got robbed of that. And poor Tom, he said two fucking ice surgeries. And then he felt like the UFC disrespected him. The whole thing's a mess. Well, I don't know that the UFC, but a lot of fans did disrespect him. I saw that which is crazy. It is like this is really stupid. We talked about this last night. It should be one point period. If you poke someone in the eyes, you poke someone in the eyes, one point. Well, especially if the fingers go in the eyes, if it's like a glancing thing like that, maybe get a warning. But in a nut shot, straight nut shot, one point, they're Lansing thing, maybe a warning. I think that could be up to the judge discretion upon view of the replay. Yeah. Well, the thing is that, and we were talking about this last night, if you, so if you land a nut shot and it's accidental, as it almost always is, you know, what I mean, you're trying to throw an inside leg kick and it comes up. Okay. Maybe not, I said almost, almost always. But so I just see this all the time in MMA. It's the first one. It was an accident. This guy gets kicked in the nuts. He needs a few minutes. Usually they don't take the fall five or whatever they're offered. And then you just go back. It's like, look, even if it was an accident, that's such an advantage to the guy who, who kicked him in the groin. You heard him, you hurt this guy and now he's got to get back to it. And there's no, so like it does seem like there almost has to be some accounting for that. And there's, I think there's still, it's still a very young sport. I think there is still too much referee discretion. Like there's too much, like there should be like an official rule for what we do in this situation. It's like, it doesn't exist in basketball. Right? If somebody foul somebody in basketball and everybody sees it, that that's a power. Yes. Right. And the crowd will go nuts. Usually, but it'll be like a real one, like throwing someone to the ground. I can show you examples. There are some fucking wild things that don't get called forever. Do you think that's a little bit of the, the corrupt referees? I'm not saying all of them, but that that is one thing that's been 100% proven is that referees do get paid off in order to influence gambling lines. Yeah. There was that one referee who, who confirmed that it was the, the, she's Sacramento Kings versus the Lakers, which was like a series that was like notoriously like everyone was like, you know, it was crazy. They didn't call any of these fouls on the Lakers. And they called all these fouls. And then a ref came out and was like, oh, yeah, that's where we're and it does kind of make sense. Because it was the, it was the shack and Kobe Lakers. You got to get them in the finals, dude. Yeah. It was big money. God, it's so gross. His defense weirdly was like, they didn't, no one told us what to do, but you kind of know what they want. So you sort of do it and then you keep, get them put on good games and you keep getting a good stuff. Hang him. Public hanging. Fuck you. But we can deal, we can deal with Congress's insider trading, but basketball must be a fact. Hang them, hang them all in front of the kingdom. All right, dude. Anything else? Full wrap this up? No, thank you for letting him know. In expert talking to me with you. I love, I love talking to non expert. Dude, thank you so much for everything. As always, brother. Thank you. You're the fucking man too. I love you too. We'll have fun tonight. Right? I come in. You leave him. We got to go. Damn last night was fun. There was a lot of fun. I thought it was fun. All right. Bye, everybody.