[Music] What's up, Dr. Arman? Thanks for coming, man. Okay. Thanks for having me. Pleasure to meet you. Nice meeting you. What's your background? My background, how long do you have? At least three hours. Yeah. Okay. Well, uh, right. So, I'm a, you know, I'm a scholar of the New Testament, early Christianity. Um, I, uh, I have a PhD from Princeton Theological Seminary in New Testament studies. My background uh I got into biblical studies because uh I was a Christian as a teenager, a born again evangelical Christian and I went off to a fundamentalist Bible college after high school and then went off to an evangelical liberal arts college and uh I got really interested in studying Greek uh the ancient langu Greek as an ancient language and um decided to do graduate work uh analyzing Greek manuscripts of the New Testament. And so I went to Princeton Theological Seminary where the world's expert in the analysis of Greek manuscripts uh worked and I spent uh years there working on that and did a master's degree and a PhD. Um end up teaching at Rutgers University for a few years and I've been at North Carolina Chapel Hill now for well since 1988. Oh wow. Teaching uh both undergraduate students and and PhD students in early Christianity, New Testament, those kinds of things. And you mentioned that when you were younger, you had a a belief and you were you were a practicing Christian. That's right. And what happened to you was what was your evolution through your belief in Christianity? Well, when I I was raised in the church, I was raised in the Episcopal church. Um but then when I was uh a teenager, late teenager, I mid- teenager, I I had a born again experience and became a very conservative evangelical. And uh a lot of my faith at that point was built on the idea that the Bible has no mistakes in it. completely inherent. Um that was the view taught at the Moody Bible Institute I went to uh and also at Wheaten College where I did my under finished my undergraduate degree. That view started shifting when I went into graduate school. uh as I started uh I learned Hebrew and so I was reading the New Testament in Greek and the Old Testament in Hebrew and I learned French and German so I could read what modern scholars were saying in these countries and uh learned other ancient languages and the more I studied the more I realized in fact the Bible does have mistakes in it uh their contradictions their discrepancies their geographical errors there their problems with the Bible for a number of years I became a more of a kind of um mainline Protestant type um uh who uh had a fairly liberal view of the Bible, a pretty liberal view of social issues and politics and things, but I still identified with the church. I ended up leaving Christianity maybe about 30 years ago or so. Uh and it wasn't directly related to my scholarship. It was uh trying to wrestle with the problem of why there's suffering in the world. Uh why why there's so much pain and misery if there's a god who's in control. And so I had spent, you know, I I actually taught on it. I've written a book on it. I' I'd read a lot of philosophers and theologians and biblical scholars and what regular old people say about why they're suffering. And I just got to a point where I didn't believe it anymore that there there's actually some kind of divine being who's in charge of the world. Um what is the in your view the difference between biblical scholars and classical scholars? Um they're very closely related and it depends which kind of biblical scholar you're talking to. Mhm. Most biblical scholars work in a theological context in divinity schools, in seminaries, and they would be uh they would be more closely related to theologians than they'd be related to classicists. um my training was mainly in that kind of world uh where I the theological world because my my uh even my master's degree and my PhD were at Princeton Theological Seminary which trains Presbyterian ministers but they were also very interested in serious scholarship and so it kind of was more uh kind of crossing the lines. my my professor, my main professor, Bruce Mezer, uh was actually his graduate degrees were in uh classics and uh so I had a bit of that. But once I started teaching uh I really shifted more uh kind of away from anything having to do theology and and you know interpreting the Bible for the church kind of thing and far more into kind of the classics. And so I have a secondary appointment at UNCC Chapel Hill in the classics department. And um those are the people I really resonate with are the classicists. And in your opinion, what which one of the ancient languages is the best ancient language? The best? Yeah. For what? For anything. Brownie recipes. Well, yeah. So, well, they're very different from each. Can you explain like the different in what's the difference between like ancient Hebrew and ancient Greek? Well, they're unrelated. And so Greek is an Indo-European language, right? Like English. Um, and uh, and so the grammar of uh, Greek can be taught if somebody knows English grammar, which nobody does anymore, but if they did know English grammar, the the grammar of the Greek makes sense in many ways. It doesn't in many other ways because it's an ancient language. Hebrew is a Semitic language. And so it's different in every way. It has a different alphabet. Instead of going from left to right, it goes from right to left. It doesn't have the same ways of doing grammar. Uh, and so, uh, and there aren't as many texts in ancient Hebrew as there are in ancient Greek. For Greek, we have thousands and thousands of texts. I mean, going back to Homer and Heid and on up and it just goes forever. For for the Bible, for the for the Hebrew Hebrew, like biblical Hebrew, the Bible is the only Hebrew Bible we the only sources from its time period that we have, right? And so it's it's in some ways it's harder to analyze Hebrew texts when it comes to things like just words. Like if there's a word that occurs one time in the Hebrew Bible, well, that's the only time the word occurs anywhere in that time period. And so how do you know what it means? Right. Exactly. And so there are places where you can't really even tell. You know it's some kind of probably a four-legged animal of some kind, but you don't know what. And so with Greek, it's not that way because I mean there are Greek words that we aren't really quite sure what they mean. uh even in the New Testament. Um but most of the time the words every the words are used so many times in so many pieces of Greek literature that you can analyze how they're being used in the context and you can use the context in order to establish the basic meaning of the word and how it's used variously. And so that's that's a luxury that you get with Greek and you also get that with Latin, right? But you don't get it so much with Hebrew or Coptic, which is another language that uh people in my field study or Syriak. Um, but with Greek and Latin, which is what the classes do, we're really we're really well set with those in comparison. Yeah, this is a bit been a highly contested topic on this on this podcast recently when it comes to exactly what you were just talking about with Greek being everywhere in antiquity and there being no Hebrew Hebrew outside of like the Dead Sea Scrolls. Like all all the ancient texts were um all the ancient Hebrew texts were religious texts. However, Greek, you you have legal you have uh medical stuff, you have all kinds of all kinds of stuff in Greek, poetry, comedy, everything. But then you have like the Dead Sea Scrolls come about and we just have the Dead Sea Scroll religious texts, right? And there's no other Hebrew you can find. There's no libraries with any Hebrew in them or or anything like that. So that's basically true, but it's not completely true. Okay. There are inscriptions, for example, in Greek. So inscription would be, you know, things written out on stone that are not religious in Hebrew. Yes. Okay. And some of the some of the um there have been other discoveries of texts that are in Hebrew from there aren't very many of them, but like they'll find a cache of letters, for example, written in Hebrew. And so there are some things, but not for the Hebrew Bible period itself. The Dead Sea Scrolls are much later than the I mean the the Hebrew Bible period dates basically from it's it's debated when the first texts were written 10th century maybe BCE up to maybe the 2nd century BCE but the Dead Sea Scrolls are more around the time of Jesus and so there it's a different period right and um so the the scholarly consens I don't understand that I've heard so much from Bible scholars is they always a most scholars would agree. Why is consensus so important when it comes to this stuff? Why why doesn't for me I just don't maybe I don't understand this cuz I didn't come from a university or anything. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's not important as evidence. See, that's the first thing to say. And no, no, no really good scholar ever uses it as evidence. In other words, the fact that everybody says so doesn't make it so. Right. Right. So I guess the reason you reason people say that and I say it as well is because if you have a counter opinion then it needs to be examined and you need to look at it but you need to realize that there's a reason that everybody thinks the other right and and these are you know when it comes to biblical scholarship for example you know biblical scholarship's been around for 300 years and lots and lots and lots of things get changed have been changed do get changed but if somebody says that uh virtually all scholars agree that the go that whoever wrote Matthew was using the Gospel of Mark and you say like virtually everybody agrees with that. You say virtually because there will be some exceptions. But the reason the reason that you say that is because these are most of these people are ones who have actually looked at it seriously and thought about it really hard and seen all of the evidence and on the basis of all this evidence they say you know it's probably this and so it's like you know it's like that in every field. Yeah. To me it just feels like a copout like How about if you're using it as an argument? Yes, exactly correct. But nobody uses it. People People object when someone says that. They say, "Well, that's not an argument." But nobody's using it. They shouldn't be using it as an argument. If they are using it as an argument, that's stupid. Yes. I mean, you know, uh so the you know, the fact that everybody agrees the world is round doesn't mean it's round. Exactly. But but you know, if you don't think it's round, you really have a burden of proof. Yes. Correct. So by saying it's a consensus, you're just saying, "Yeah, okay. If you think otherwise, let me see, you know, let me see your stuff." Mhm. Right. So, um, one of the folks I had on here recently believes that the Septuagent, it was originally written in Greek and that it was translated into Hebrew. And the reason he said that is because, and I'll I'll try to elucidate this argument the best I possibly can, and you can basically deconstruct it and give me the what you think. um is that ancient Greek is a language that had over a million unique words. Ancient Hebrew is a language that had maybe 7,000 at best unique words. And he he he uh made the argument that you cannot translate from something less technical Hebrew to something way more technical ancient Greek. He says you translate down. You don't translate up. Right? So you don't you don't like if I was to the the analogy I think of that I try to uh explain when I talk about this is like you find a flying saucer in the desert and you want to like reverse engineer it and make your own flying saucer. When you try to reverse engineer that flying saucer, you're not going to make something better than that flying saucer. It's going to be something not as good, right? So So that was his main argument with the translation of the Septuagent meaning like that's why he thought it was an original Greek and then it was translated into Hebrew after. argument of this is that the Greek that we read in the New Testament or the Old Testament is like coin a Greek. It's like a it's like a very unsophisticated Greek compared to like Homer and some of the ancient stuff. Yeah. Well, it's not a very good argument. I don't know who I don't know who this is, but I mean it's a it's a very bad argument. You frequently have translations go both ways. Translated up, translated down. It's just an empirical fact. Um English is a much more complicated language than many works that are translated into English. And the Bible gets translated into many languages that are much more simple than Greek. So it goes both ways and it always goes both ways. Moreover, how does he know there are 7,000 unique words in Hebrew? He's basing that on the fact that we've got these texts that have 7,000 unique words. Okay, these are the only texts we have. People spoke Hebrew. We have no idea what their vocabulary was. For him to say that it had to be only these 7,000 words is a little bit crazy. That's like saying if you get a copy of Time magazine or something or what may it's not even printed anymore, but you get Time magazine and you say this is the extent of the English vocabulary. Like in 3,000 years, somebody finds somebody finds a Time magazine and they re and they categorize all the words say, "Okay, those are the only words in English." And so it could not have been translated into a language that has more words because it doesn't work that way. You tell me. Sure, but just going off evidence, right? We have evidence. What's his evidence? Sorry. What's his evidence? I'm saying just going off evidence of word counts, unique word counts for those languages today. We only have 7,000 unique words for ancient Greek. We have over a million I mean, I'm sorry. We only have 7,000 for ancient Hebrew. We have a million for ancient Greek today. Those are estimates, right? Those are samples. Maybe they are. No, no, they're not estimates. He's basing this on account of what the Hebrew words we have. But when people translated the Hebrew into the Greek, they didn't have just those 7,000 words. This was this was this is 2,000 years ago. Okay. But do you think that there do you do you think the scale was similar though? Do you think so? Right now it doesn't matter how similar it is because it's not always that you take something more complicated and make it more simple or that you take something more simple and make it more complicated. You can absolutely just show time after time after time where that is and how it happens. There are also very good reasons for thinking it did not go from Greek to Hebrew. Okay. What would be a good example of something that went from of a translation that went from a language that was less complicated to something far more complex? Um that went from something less complicated to more complex. For example, Hebrew to Greek. Coptic is a very simple language in many ways. Um you have um Coptic uh we have ancient Coptic texts. the grammar isn't as difficult. It gets translated into English all the time. English is a far more complicated language. Okay. Interesting. So, and then my So, my understanding of the Septuagent is and correct me if I'm wrong. The Septuagent was allegedly written around three between 3 and 400 BC. No. No. Okay. When was it? We don't know. For one thing, it's not that early. But what what we do know is that I have some huge news for you folks. AG1 just launched NextGen with an upgraded vitamin mineral probiotic and it's clinically backed. Congratulations. AG1's NextGen is now one of the most clinically backed greens powders. They have gone above and beyond the industry standard for testing and have made a great product even better. The NextGen formula is more advanced and is clinically shown to help fill common nutrient gaps and gut health. Yes, even in healthy eaters. NextGen's key ingredients are absorbed quickly and clinically shown to be bioavailable in the body, which means your body is using it. We can get into all the superfood categories it hits, pre and probiotics and the minerals. But I just like to think of it as I take care of my body so my body can take care of me. After all, how can I feel productive and good if my body can't? Since I've added NextGen to my morning routine, it has been an absolute gamecher and it sets the tone for the rest of my day. And thank you AG1 for sponsoring this episode. Now clinically backed with an advanced formula. This is the perfect time to try AG1 if you haven't yet. I have personally been drinking AG1 for like 2 to 3 years and I'm happy to be partnering with them for this episode. So subscribe today and try the next gen of AG1. If you use my link, you'll also get a free bottle of AG D3 plus K2, an AG1 welcome kit, and five of the upgraded AG1 travel packs with your first order. So, go to drinkag1.com/dannyjones to get started with AG1's NextGen and notice the benefits for yourself. That's drinkagg.com/dannyjones. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. There wasn't a septuagen. So when people talk about the Septuagent, they're they're they're using when scholars say the Septuagent, they're using a shorthand. Uh there were numerous translations of the Hebrew Bible into Greek that were floating around. Um and it'd be kind of like uh today if uh you go to some developing country and you have missionaries there who are trying to put parts of the New Testament into that language. Okay? So like you have these translators, these conservative missionaries who try Wickliffe translators, they'll take the Bible and they put it into some language in Africa that hasn't ever been put into English before. So you do that so that the people in that language can can read it. Okay. in the ancient world after um after Alexander the Great. So after the 4th century, uh Jews are spread throughout the what was then, you know, at one point was kind of a Greek empire, but then became the other the the empires around the Mediterranean. The educated people read Greek. They didn't read Hebrew, right? They would read Hebrew in Israel, but not not in other places. So in different places, the the the Bible's being translated into Greek. Mhm. Eventually, there was one form of that Greek that came together and that is what they're calling the Septuagent. But it's a mistake to think it was a one-time event. Oh, interesting. And it's B people say that because there's a letter called the letter of Aristius, which is an a Jewish writing that's trying to explain how it happened. And the way it explains it can't possibly be right. I mean, it's describes it to this miracle. It says you had these these 70 uh Jewish scholars were brought together. They were all put in separate rooms. They were all given the assignment to translate it. They all translated literally word for word the same, right? Which is like, of course, that's crazy. But but it does show that that they they were aware of the fact that it it came out of the Hebrew into the Greek. And there again, this is not I know you don't like people saying there's not a disputed topic, but there's a reason this is not a disputed topic. I mean because all for one thing I'll give you one piece of evidence but I mean a ling a linguist would just tear that apart that whole idea apart one reason it would be torn ap I mean like a serious linguist who knows both the Semitic languages and and the Indo-Uropean languages would tear it apart and one of the reasons is because um there are many instances where the um the Greek embodies what are called smiticisms. a smitus, the Greek of the Septuagen, right? And the Greek of the New Testament. Okay. A smiticism is when you're taking a grammatical construction that doesn't work in the language that you're translating it into or isn't normally you is not normally used in the language you're translating it into, but you keep the the grammatical construction of the original language for the sake of authenticity or because you don't know quite how to. And so just as an example, if in in Hebrew, if you want to say um the the Holy Spirit, okay, there's no way to say Holy Spirit in Hebrew, the phrase in Hebrew is the spirit of holiness. The way you make a an adjectival attribution in Hebrew is not by using an adjective, but by putting together two nouns and saying of. So the spirit of holiness means the Holy Spirit or the the way of righteousness means the right way. Okay? So, uh, Greek speakers don't do that. They use adjectives. But when you get in biblical Greek, Septuagen, and the New Testament, you have these sept these Semiticisms. That shows these are not original Greek compositions. Okay. They're being translated from Hebrew with using Semitic Semitic forms. Okay. Interesting. And but so the the original Hebrew we don't have other than the Dead Sea Scrolls. Is that correct? Well, the I don't know what you mean by the original like the original Hebrew. So, it was so so it was translated into Greek from Hebrew, but that original Hebrew. We have Hebrew manuscripts. Yes, we have the manuscripts. Okay. We don't have the original manuscripts. We don't have the originals, but they're they're basically they're what I'm trying to say is like scholarship tries to date them to a certain spot, but we don't know actually when they are because we don't have them. I'm not sure what I'm not sure what the them is that you're referring to. The manuscripts. We don't have the ancient man. We don't have original manuscripts for any writing from the ancient world. We don't have the Oh, right, right, right. Okay. I see what you're saying. We don't have the original writings for Uripides or for Plato or for Cicero or for Senica or for the book of Isaiah or for the Gospel of Matthew. We don't have the originals for any of those. The original manus if you mean by that that the author sits down and writes, you know, so I'm I'm Mark and I'm writing my thing and I write my thing and Mark. We don't have that thing he wrote. Everything that we have is a copy or a re or a rewrite unless it's unless it's a personal letter, you know, a correspondent. But in terms of literary texts, um they're they're copies. Wow. Yeah. It's a big problem for the imagine. A huge problem. Yeah. Yeah, that was what my PhD was because my the reason I was interested in analyzing Greek manuscripts is because with the New Testament, we have thousands of Greek manuscripts, but they all disagree with each other because they're all copies and the scribes made mistakes, right? Or they changed things on purpose. So, you got to figure out, well, what did the author say then? You know, if if you've got suppose you got 10 copies of Plato's Republic or something, okay, and the 10 have like they word certain lines differently. They they certain sentences are worded differently among these 10 manuscripts. Well, okay. So, you got that, but you want to figure out well what to play to write. You got to figure it out. And there's a whole science to doing that. Oh, wow. That's so interesting. Um, switching gears a little bit. You do you think that Jesus was you you think that Jesus was a real historical person, right? Yes. And there are people you've debated that think that he's not. Yes. What what is the argument to him not being a real historical figure? Good question. Well, good argument. Yeah. What's the best argument you've heard? Well, if I were arguing that case, I would I would argue I would say I I guess I mean you saying it's the best argument is kind of like it's a very low bar, right? Yeah. Best. Yeah. Okay. You know, like you know what's you know what's my best round of golf? I mean it's like well okay you know it's like So uh so um the I think what gives some people pause not not so much Yeah. Okay. What what would give people pause is that we don't have any eyewitness accounts of Jesus. Mhm. We have uh records that go that are from um probably 40 to 60 years later. Um our first author who mentions Jesus is the Apostle Paul and he's writing uh in the 50s. Jesus died around the year 30. So, so the first time we have Jesus mentioned in any source is about um 20 years after his death. Do we know when that drawing was done with the donkey head on the cross? The the guy with the head of an ass on the cross. Um yeah, that's that's that's later. That's in the second or third. Oh, it's later. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, wow. No. And it's and it's a much debated thing. People people say they know what it is, but in fact it's debated among experts what it actually represent. It's clearly Jesus on the cross with a donkey's head. Yeah. And um and a and a gre a graffiti next to it, but no, it's it's much later. So the first reference to Jesus at all would our our first Christian writing is the book of First Thessalonians and it's usually dated to the year 49 or 50. Jesus died around the year 30. So it's about 20 years later. So the argument would be that we don't have any eyewitness reports or we don't have any, you know, things that are really close to the gospels. The first gospel is written around the year 70. So that's 40 years later. So you know, so why should we think he really lived? That's that's kind of the argument. It's not a good argument, but it's an argument, right? And it is crazy, too. I mean, that that goes with a lot of historical figures. Like I think Moses is one. Moses wasn't written about until what, like a thousand years after he supposedly died. Yeah. Well, 30 years is very different from a thousand years. Yes. Very different. So when Paul's writing, there are people alive who knew Jesus, right? And Paul knows some of them. So it's a much better case for Jesus than Moses. I mean, Paul knows his brother. Paul personally knew Jesus brother. So I mean, you know, uh, if Jesus didn't exist, you'd think his brother would know it. That's a joke. So, so yeah, Moses is a whole different thing. I mean, so if Moses lived, Moses would have probably lived in the 13th century BCE. And it's not clear if we have any sources that mention him for centuries, right? So, uh, that's a different thing from somebody talking about him who knows his brother. Mhm. Yes. Yeah. Totally. But then the claims when it gets into him being divine and doing all these things and being able to, you know, that's that's the whole thing. um which I read I read recently this fascinating book that really gave me a a really good understanding of of everything which was Thomas Payne. Um I forget the name of his I think it was the age of reason by Thomas Payne. Yeah. No, it's a classic. Oh my god, it was such a good book. Yeah. Yeah. No, those the these these uh these English deists were really something. They really they knew a lot but they you know they didn't know what scholars know today about things like the Bible. Yeah. and and you know he explains how like the first the first Christian preachers how they were you know selling Christianity and then there was a second generation of Christian preachers then the third generation of Christian preachers and you know how the ideas and the motivations and everything everything gets lost in each generation and then eventually down the road it's kind of like the starting point we don't even remember where this started, but we do know that the preachers are making a living off of this stuff, right? So, you know, someone like Thomas Payne is a very important figure for like the history of biblical scholarship. He wasn't a biblical scholar himself, right? Um but these 18th century um English deists mainly led to the development of biblical scholarship and the scholarship in early Christianity uh especially in Germany as it turns out but then also in England and France and eventually in America. If you want to know what was really going on in Christianity, you don't want to rely on what they have to say because they're at the very beginning. It'd be like um you know, if you're going to be studying um what evolutionary biologists think today, you definitely have to start with Darwin. But you can't base your views of evolutionary biology on Dar on Darwin. You've got to see what we found since then because even though Darwin was a genius, there are other geniuses who are standing on his shoulders. And so he opened the way for people to learn more and more and more. But you'd be it'd be silly to assume that like everybody now agrees with what he was saying then because they don't. And it's the same with any field. If you uh you look at the giants because they're just absolutely amazing and they make these breakthroughs. But if you want to see what people what we know now both on the basis of new discoveries and new ways of analysis and deeper analysis by experts, then you have to you have to go to the modern experts. Yeah. Yeah, I think one of the most profound things that I took away from that book was that it is by like it is the gift of reason that gives man the ability to discover God in the first place because it's impossible like we didn't come from nothing right we go backwards in time like I came from my parents my parents came from their parents like things don't just appear out of thin air so it is just by us being as intelligent as we are we have to understand that we can't appear out of thin air there has to be some sort of higher power, right? Without that gift of reason, you know, we don't have that. Well, that's what these So, it's like it's like the human brain, there's something ancient in the human brain through evolution or whatever it is that give that that makes it wired to be dependent on believing in a higher power. Yeah, maybe. I mean it's much debated about why people believe in higher power and and there are lots a lot going on but the but the whole thing project that the people of the enlightenment were doing that Payne and the other people of the enlightenment were doing uh whether you know historians or philosophers or uh theologians or biblical scholars whatever what they what they were doing is they're trying to break with the tradition of the church that had been established for hundreds and hundreds of years where your knowledge came from revelation from God. That's how you know things because God reveals it to you and the people in the enlightenment realize well actually you know we can figure things out ourselves and that's when the sciences develop and it's you know it's it's only when someone like Isaac Newton comes along and realizes even though he's a devout Christian he says you know you can't trust revelation for anything you've got to do the experiment and if the experiment comes out to be differently from what you expect it to be because of your beliefs so much the worse for your beliefs once you say that you start science science and it changes everything. But Payne is all part of that even though he's not a scientist. Right. Right. And much the a lot of those guys around Payne like the founding fathers, they were um masons, right? Um I suppose so. I'm not sure how that affected their Yeah. Freemasonry was a big thing with the founding fathers. Yeah. Well, okay. Yeah. No, it's just interesting, you know. It's just uh it's an interesting thing and but the thing but the thing about all of these pain or anyone else whatever whatever their other associations whatever their other religious commitments or non-commmitments whatever their philosophical stance when they say something it needs to be evaluated that's true of all everything you know for me I mean I'm basically a historian and so when I when I want to know what whether somebody said is true or not I have to do the anal analysis. So if he's a if he's a Mason, you know, if he's a I mean, you know, whatever. I mean, today if somebody if somebody is whatever, I mean, is a, you know, a Satan worshipper, is a Mormon, is a Roman Catholic priest, what whoever whatever it is, if she or he says something, I I look at it and evaluate it. It's not not based on what they happen to be, right? We were talking before we started about the the ancient Greek and uh I was telling you that I had a classical philologist in here who studied ancient drugs and he said that the word Christ was originally a word for drugs meaning to apply drugs to the skin or apply drugs to the eyes and um he is basically was his basic theory is that you know Christianity was founded by these pagan drug cults right these like ancient drug and sex cults And Christianity is borrowing from everything that they're doing. And most of the things that they were doing were drugs. And not only drugs, but there was in the ancient world, it was constant plague, famine, handtohand combat. Uh human and child trafficking was going on everywhere. There was pirates everywhere. And um he thinks that a lot of this stuff was was borrowed. these pagan cults, a lot of the traditions that they were doing were borrowed by Christianity. And he thinks that, you know, a lot of the words basically like the best way I can describe it is, and this is my understanding of what classics is, is that there's all this ancient literature that exists out there from antiquity, right? You have the medical stuff, the comedy, the, you know, whatever you name it. And then you have the biblical stuff, right? the the the canon and all the gospels, but then like if you veer out of that lane, there's all this other stuff that like you said earlier gives you context to what the words are. And Almond was saying that in all of these texts in like Uripides, Galen, [Music] um, Sophocles, the word Christ is being used as a drug term. And he said everywhere. He said it's not just some, you know, I'm not just like cherry-picking little things here and there. He says, he said you can find it literally everywhere from when Jesus died. and from like a hundred years before and 100 years after he was dead. The word Christ is being used as a term to apply drugs. And he even gave me some specific examples um which we can pull up. I don't know if you've heard of them or not, but um one of them was he said that in the in um the book of Revelation 3:18, God says you must crush your eyes so you may see. And then there's another one where he says that um go uh in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus says you can lift up snakes and drink death poisons that won't hurt you. What do you think about this? Well, I'm sure he probably wanted to sell some books and he probably He didn't sell books. Uh he doesn't sell books anymore. He wrote a book, but now he tells everyone to pirate his books. Yeah. Well, that's fine. uh he wants his views out there then uh no I'd say it's just categorically false what he's saying. Yeah. It just it's not it's not true. And so um you know to somebody it's it's it's difficult to kind of explain to somebody who's not a not a scholar or an ancient linguist about how it works. But that isn't how it works. The term Christ is not always used as drugs. It's rarely used as drugs. It's used the the word it comes from a word creole which means to anoint. And so of course some medications in the ancient world were used brointments but it's not everywhere at all. The term Christ doesn't occur very much actually the Christos the term Christos doesn't occur very much. In fact it's kind of a weird word. Um it's in Greek it's just the translation of the Hebrew word Messiah which means anointed one. And it it's used in the Old Testament for when when somebody becomes a king, they have a coronation ceremony like um you know today when we have a president being sworn in, there's a ceremony you go through, puts his hand on the Bible and swears the oath of office. And in ancient Israel, going back to the earliest kings, Saul and David and Solomon, they had Did you hear that? That's a vacuum. Who's vacuuming? Debt does not just show up one day. It builds up little by little. credit card bills, medical bills, car loans, and suddenly you're feeling stuck. But here's the good news. You're not stuck. You just need a reset. At American Financing, they help homeowners like you every day. They use your home's equity and roll that high interest debt into one simple, affordable payment. They're saving homeowners an average of $800 a month. No judgment, no pressure, just real solutions that put you back in control. Imagine breathing again, sleeping again, knowing your future is yours to shape. It starts with just one call. It only takes 10 minutes to get started and there are no upfront fees, so it costs nothing to find out how much you could save. And if you start today, you may be able to delay up to two mortgage payments during the process, creating an extra bonus in savings upfront. Their mortgage consultants are salary based, so there's no incentive to put you in a loan that won't work. American Financing is licensed in all 50 states, so there's really no reason not to take advantage of this. Take back your peace of mind with American Financing. Call American Financing today at 8889952440. That's 888995-2440 or go to americanfancing.net/jones. nmls182334 www.nmlsconsumerac.org. Thank you American Financing for sponsoring this episode. It is linked below. Now back to the show. Uh right. Where do we start? Back. Um yeah. Yeah, we just got erupted by a vacuum. Um, so I was trying to explain that creo comes from Messiah. Pull up uh book of Revelation 3:18. Well, here you could do this. You don't need that. You look for uh interlinear uh Revelation 3:18. Interlinear online. There it is. And the second to last word is the one to anoint. To anoint. What is that word? That's not even ho is it? Well, it is. So the first two letters are mean in uh so it's to anoint on. So crio is the the if you move the cursor you can see it better. Yeah. So you see that looks like a crease crease. Okay. So uh so it's just saying that you anoint the isav on your eyes. So an isav is it's like taking eye drops. So what is it? What are they talking about there? What's going on there? Um he's saying you've got blurry eye. He's he's saying you're naked and you've got blurry eye. Go to the pit before it so we can talk about the whole thing. Yeah. Um Oh, I see this. You know what? It helps for if I just actually look at the passage in my in my text because it's this is one of the um in re Revelation 3 is one of the uh is a passage where Christ is writing to the one of the seven churches of Asia Minor. Mhm. and he's writing to the uh church in uh see this is 3:18. So he's writing to the church in Leodysia and uh he's ticked off at the Christians in Leodysia because they are not fervent enough in their faith. This is Christ. Christ is dictating a letter to the prophet John who's writing the letter to this church in Leodysia which is in what's modern Turkey. Okay. And he's ticked off because he says, "You're not hot or cold. I wish you were either hot or cold. Since you're lukewarm, I'll spit you out of my mouth." He says, "Uh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's Revelation 3:16." Yeah. So, Jesus is Jesus, Christ is being portrayed as being ticked off because people aren't either for him or against him. They're kind of lukewarm Christians. Since you're lukewarm, I'll spit you out of my mouth. So, he's he's threatening to to take away their salvation. Okay? And so um so then he says that he counsels you to buy from me gold refined by fire so that you may be rich. In other words, uh trust trust in me instead of trust on your earthly riches. You should try and get white garments to clothe you with instead of those dirty rags of uh untruth that you're following. And you should keep the shame of your nakedness from being seen because people can realize that you've got nothing. You know, you're an emperor with no clothes. And you should get sav to anoint your eye so you can see because you're you're you you're blinded here. You've blinded yourselves. And so you need some eye drops. So they didn't have eye drops. In the ancient world, if you wanted to heal an eye problem, if you had like an irritated eye, they would use sav s a l v. And you just you you spray on the eye. And so it's like an eye drop. And what is sal? Would you do you know what it's like made of? It's anything. It's just any kind of oily substance that you put on a wound. Okay. Yeah. So, so there's no relationship to the word Christ. Well, no, it's just it's the verb. The word Christ comes from the word anointed. The word Christ is not a common word in Greek. Mhm. Like it like it's rare. Yeah. Probably if if the Apostle Paul went into some city and preach said, "I wanted to preach you about Christ." They'd have no idea what he's talking about. It wasn't a name and it wasn't word it wasn't word you would describe anybody. It just meant somebody's been anointed and they think it's kind of like, you know, somebody's just had a workout in the gym and, you know, so they rub olive oil over them afterwards. It's like typical in the ancient world in gymnasiums. They would, you know, as part you you'd have a massage and they would rub oil on your skin and that would that that makes you the anointed one. That makes you the Christ. Really? They rub olive oil on their skin. Oh, yeah. Yeah. because they didn't use they didn't use soap and things and they would uh they they'd work up a sweat and then they they had these uh instruments to kind of take the metal instruments to kind of take off the uh take off the sweat and then they'd have oil rubbed on them and uh and it could be anointed. It could be uh I mean perfumed oil and um Yeah. So uh Wow. Yeah. So those you get a workout. So if somebody's a Kristoffs they're anointed one that just means they've had like oil spread on them. So, it's got nothing to do with drugs. I mean, of course, drugs, drugs also could be you could have some drugs that are anointed, but this is just a word. It just means it just means being anointed. It doesn't Nobody thinks drugs, right? And so, when this fellow says it's all over the place, well, the word the word actually is not that common. And the word Christos is definitely not common. And it's called they call him Christos just because in the Hebrew Bible the king is called the Messiah. He's the anointed one. And so when you read that in the Greek Bible he's the Christos. He's the anointed one. It's got nothing to do with him taking drugs or something. What what um are you familiar with Uripides? Yes. I'm I read Uripides this morning for an hour. Wow. Yeah. No, I I love Uripides. So are you familiar with Uripides on when when he talks about Theodra? Uh, yes. What is going on there? Wait, the Fedra. You said Fedra. Fedra. I thought it was I thought it was pronounced Theodra. Uh, I'm not sure which one you're talking about actually. So, um, so I was I thought that so one of the passages or one of the stories in Uripides about the talked all about this Christing and he said that it gave really good context to why why it is a drug term. I I wouldn't be able I I'd have to look at it because Steve, let's look at it. Can you pull it up for us? We'll just cruise the internet. My latest passion is more of the media and the Alcestus. And so Oh, really? Yeah. So the Lady Babylon Uripides. So you just casually you just casually warm up your mind in the morning by reading. Every morning I get up for uh my first thing I do in the morning is always u is to read Greek and I've been reading Uripides lately. Yeah. Yeah. Fantastic. And you read it in the Greek. Yeah. Oh, Fedra. Okay. There you go. Well, that story. Yeah. So, that's kind of an unusual story. Yeah. Try that one. Which Which one are we looking at? Is that the right one? F. Well, this is this is one of the plays. It's okay. Fedra is in love with her. Oh, that's it. That is it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's it. That's the one I was thinking of. So, what is this story for people who don't know? Uh well uh so it's this kind of this it's this weird story where she's in love with um her stepson her stepson and wants her stepson to sleep with her and and he uh he refuses to do it and uh and it it gets all messed up because like the his father finds out and like you know it's one of these things where people are getting killing themselves and getting killed over this this love thing with uh uh with hippol politics and Okay. So, there's no drugs used in this story. Oh, well, there might be. I I don't I don't I haven't read the story for a while, so I don't that there's uh Steve, what can you find? Are you talking about his reference? If you just go to He's saying that Christ is used in the in the context here. He must mean creo. He must mean anointing is right. Okay. How do you How do you spell that? C No, just say anointing. Anoint or anoint? Yeah. anointing, something like that, or oint ointment maybe. So, and then doesn't he say something about lifting snakes and drinking death poisons about that? That's in the Gospel of Mark, but Exactly. Yeah. But that's that's bogus because it's at the it's at the end, right? It's the end. It's the end that actually was not originally in Mark. Oh, really? Yeah. So, I was just making stuff up here. So, I mean, who put that in there? Uh, later scribes. You know, as I was telling you, we don't have the original of Mark. And one of the big things they did with Mark is they added 12 verses after Jesus' resurrection, the scribes did, in order to show that Jesus really appeared to his disciples. Because in Mark's gospel in particular, Jesus is raised from the dead and his tomb is empty. The women are told to go tell the disciples that uh he's been raised. Uh but they don't tell anybody and it ends there. They don't tell anybody. So scribes thought that was a bit abrupt. And so they added 12 verses where they go do go tell the disciples and Jesus tells them this thing about handling snakes and drinking poison. And um I wonder why they added that. Well, they added it because it sounds pretty spectacular and because there are traditions in early Christianity already in the book of Acts of people being bitten by poisonous snakes and not hurting them. Paul is and uh people speaking in other languages that happens in the book of Acts. And so these Christians were adding this on that Jesus would indicate that that would happen. And there are traditions in early Christianity of people being able to drink poison without it hurting them. What So was it specifically snake venoms and snake poisons? No, not necessarily. It's two different things. You can handle snakes and you can drink poison and it won't hurt you, says Jesus. In those additional verses. Oh wow. But those are the verses. Those are the verses that the Appalachin snake handlers used to justify their practices. I don't know if you know about the Appalachin Snake handlers, but oh, there's there are these groups of Christian these Christian denominations where during their worship services, they pull out the rattlesnakes or whatever the deadly snakes and and handle them in the church service to show that they really can do this because that's what Jesus said. But they don't realize that Jesus didn't really say that and it was added by scribes. Oh no. And they often sometimes they do get bitten and they go to the hospital. That's crazy. Yeah. So, this guy shouldn't be using stuff like that. Well, it's interesting that they say that that in the gospels it says they could be bit by snakes and it wouldn't it wouldn't affect them or wouldn't hurt them. It doesn't say that except for in these verses in these verses that were added that were added later by scribes because Galen talks about he or Galen created the the act for Marcus Aurelius that had snake venoms and snake viper flesh and all this stuff in there that was like a panacea that was supposed to be able to Yeah. Sure. that and because like one of the main reasons people were getting killed was the vi the all the deadly snakes that were in that part of the world. There were people were dying from snake bites and stuff like that. So so maybe um there was certainly medicine in the ancient world. Maybe there was some sort of antivenenom or antidote to to snake bites that were that was real. I don't know then but maybe there was. I don't know. I mean I wouldn't be surprised. I mean but it doesn't doesn't mean that that's what the name Christ means. It's got it's got no real. The fact that you've got a verb that means to anoint, you can you anoint anytime you kind of spread some kind of liquid substance on your body, you're anointing it. Mhm. But, you know, usually it's not to get a high. It's it's so crazy to me because like I I've been kind of like diving down the rabbit hole of this this drug stuff. And I haven't been me and Steve haven't been able to get any scholars to debate this guy. Like there's so many of them. And we've we've had a couple of them that would be like, "Oh yeah, we'd love to come do the podcast." Right? like we want to be on the podcast. And I'm like, "Okay, would you mind debating this man?" Oh, no. Sorry. I can't do that. I wouldn't be comfortable doing that. It wouldn't be productive, you know? No, it probably wouldn't be productive. It sounds like he likes ridiculing people. Yeah. Well, it would be I mean, I never debate people who want to ridicule who think ridicule is a form of intellectual discourse. I mean, it's But, you know, from that clip you showed, I mean, he's just kind of mocking this person who's just actually giving factual information. And so I'm not interested in debating somebody who thinks mockery is a way to engage in intellectual discussion. Yeah. I don't know. I think that if somebody was confident enough in the the classical stuff and they understood, you know, where he was wrong and where the holes were in his arguments that they would be more than happy to come. Any class could any classist would be able to do it. It's just whether they want to deal with somebody like that in a public context. M so I it's not that there I think I think it'd be I think it'd be a mistake to think that he's come up with something that nobody can refute. I think that is so far from the truth. So I mean at my university we have a very strong classics department. These are people who have got international reputations in classics and any one of them could take him apart. Yeah. It's just like one of like the the top classical scholars of Carl Ruck, the guy who wrote Road to Elusus, you know, he confirms everything this guy says. And I like no other classist that Where does he teach? Uh he teached at Harvard. I think he's retired now. What do you mean he confirms everything? Let's pull up his bio. Who What do you mean he's confirmed everything this guy says? Like he says that this guy what all the stuff about drugs is real? That they had drugs? Yeah, of course they had drugs. Or no, that that Christ was a drug. This guy says that. Where does he say that? Oh, I don't There's podcasts where he says it, but this is just his bio right here. This isn't like go up. What where's this what's his um where's his PhD from? He thinks that Jesus Christ that Christ got a Harvard University classical philology. Yeah. No, this is a serious guy. Yeah. But I mean, he actually says that the name Jesus Christ means Jesus drugs. No, he he corroborates a lot of the things that Ammon says. And A is the one who says the that Christ is a drug term. Creo. Okay. Fine. Fine. Just I mean so yeah. So that's why you understand my I that's why I'm tell you I'm so perplexed. That's why I'm just saying. Well, okay. I'll tell you what you do. Please get get the there are a couple of um comprehensive Greek lexicons in existence. The the big one is called the Liddell and Scott. It is a massive volume that uh gives definitions for every Greek word and shows how the Greek word is used in every context. Right. Okay. What's it called again? Liddell. Liddell and Scott. So those are two 19th century British scholars. L I D Liddell and Scott. S C O T. Okay. Or you could get the Cambridge. Uh there it is. You want the long one, the big one. Oh, the LSJ. Okay. There he is. There's three. There are three versions of it. You want the big one, but there's also there's a new Cambridge Encycl uh diction lexicon of Greek that is also comprehensive and just look up the word Christos and see what it says. It's not hard. I mean, so anybody can do it. So, uh, yeah. In fact, I wonder it might be online. In fact, you can get this online. You can get their definition online. Let me see. How would you um So, if you will search for um I think it's like lsj.com or something simple like that. LSJ. We've been on this website before, I believe, Steve. I don't remember this. This is it. We've been on this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. ancient Greek. Yeah, I see. I guess it's It should give you like the actual There we go. There it is. Yeah. Just uh stop. Oh my gosh. There. Boom. Uh there we go. Okay. So, we're going to come back up here. Yep. Pasticles. Boom. All right. What do we got? Search all projects. Why not see what you got? Paste. paste. It's finding says, "Please be patient, Steve." I am impatient by nature. What is this? This isn't even the word. Keep going. I'm not sure why they're doing this. This website's a little bit slow. Maybe. Maybe their traffic is so minimal. They bought the like the cheapest uh the hosting cheapest hosting provider. Sure. Korea, Chris. Yeah, that's it. There you go. dogma.gr. Percy is tough. Perseus toughs. That's what it was. Yeah. Really? Yeah. That's Yeah, that's what we've been using. Oh, okay. Okay. All right. Here we go. We're making some progress here, folks. Progress. All right. So, it means to be rubbed on, used as ointment, or salve. Um, anointed messiah. Um, if you go Oh, wow. Look at that. Uides is right there. So click on Uripides. Uripides. Oh, there's Christos. Uh whether Ah. Oh, no. That's a case. Fedra. Yeah, there it is. Fedra. Yeah. Where it says uh whether it is the uh the anointment or the uh Yeah. Or the uh drug drink. Drug drink. Yeah. Whether anointment or drug drink. In other words, the the uh the poisonous drink or the anointment. So, is it used as a drug term here? No. Can we give it credit for being here? No, because it's it says the I'd have to read the context, but it looks like it's it's contrasting the thing that it be anointed on or the thing being drunk. Oh, unless the pharma uh I don't know. I'd have to look at the whole context. Oh, that's why it said 516. This is the one place. It looks like it's saying this is the one place in the Fedra that it's used and the one place in Uripides that it's used. Whoa. That would be interesting. You know, I don't think that the word Christos actually probably it'd be worth looking up. I mean, if I had, you know, my resources here, I could look it up. I'd be surprised if the word Christos like the you know the what became the name Christ occurs before the Hebrew Bible the Septtoguent before it gets translated into You'd be surprised if that happened. Yeah. I'd be surprised if anybody uses the actual word Christos before the Septuagent. Mhm. So I don't think Europe uripities was long before the Septuagent. Um he was how how much earlier than the Septuagent was he? Uh well he was fifth century BCE and so he's two or he's about three it depends when it if the septuent was done around the year 200 BCE or one yeah then be about 300 years at least before okay doesn't this say that he uses the word Christ no it's using the word creo the the verb the verb uh I think at least the passage we saw in the fedra that's a that's the verb it's not the noun look I I'll just tell you the short of it is that I think If you get, you know, if you get any uh dictionary, if you ask anybody who uh does classics for a living and you just ask them uh does Creo uh not does it sometimes refer to drugs, but does it necessarily refer to drugs or does it usually refer to drugs? Okay. They will all tell you the same thing. No, I know. I talked to all of them. There's only one that tells me that it's drugs and that's almond. Yeah. But then his argument is uh he says that the only other person that corroborates him who's been dead for a long time is a guy by the name of Julius Afrocanis. Well, he's been dead for a long time. Yes, I'd say he's been dead for a long time. He's been dead since the second century. A little while, huh? And we we actually only have um we don't have we don't have much of his stuff. And so I'd be suspic What did he say that Julius? Sorry. He said Julius. Actually, he said what Julius Ariccanis said was that the Septuagent was a or original Greek or at least parts of it was an original Greek. How would Julius Ariccanis know that? Apparently, he was a linguist or he was a classicist. He was living 400 years later. He doesn't know. How would he know? Maybe he read Greek. I don't know. No, he did read Greek, right? But so what if look if somebody today for the first time says that the Declaration of Independence was written originally in French and this is the first time anybody said it living hundreds of years later would then like in 2000 years. Oh yeah, but that person said it. Yeah, I see what you're saying. It's hundreds of years later by somebody had no idea. Right. And so, so, all right, I've already explained why the Septuagent is No, we're already past that. We're past that. I made a mistake. It applies to the creo thing. It's the same thing. It's the the word can be used, of course, for medical application, right? Okay. Um, and then the word when Jesus was arrested in the park at 4:00 a.m. in the park with the boy, we're not told what time it was. We're not Okay. So, no. Was it at night? Do we know what if it was at a night or a day? Do we know when the SWAT team came? Uh, so uh so it's it's in the evening. He's arrested in the evening. He's had his last supper. He he goes out and prays. The the uh the figure of the boy in the park is in Mark 14. Yep. And um it's only in Mark and it's a strange passage. Very strange. Yeah. So it'd be uh Yeah. It'd be night time. Um, and then the next day about eight hours later, roughly around eight hours, he d he's crucified. He dies and he dies early. Well, it depends which gospel you read. In Mark, he d Mark gets crucified at 9:00 in the morning. Okay. In John, he doesn't get crucified until in the afternoon, right? And he's crucified. Who were the guys that were crucified on each side of him? What were their uh what were their charges? We're not told in the New Testament. There are later legends that deal with them. Okay. where they're actually. Yeah. But um so we have no idea what they were crucified for or is what what's the consensus scholarly consensus? Well, there's not so people were crucified for a variety of reasons. And I guess um I guess I haven't really looked around to see what the consensus would be, but my suspicion is that they also were uh accused of some kind of insurrection things. uh because normally the people who'd be crucified tended to be the complete uh people the very lowest level of uh the social scale. So slaves. If slaves were like did something nasty, they'd get crucified. But the Romans, you know, the Romans are basically crucifying people that they see as a threat. And so probably I Jesus is crucified for calling himself the king of the Jews in all the gospels. It's like the unanimous thing in the gospels. And so the problem is that the Romans are ruling Israel. And so if he calls himself the king, he's saying that he's the ruler of Israel. And so they don't they don't like that. They crucify people like that. So it may be that they were also they're called in the the problem is in the gospels they're called um they're called a word that's often translated robbers. The Greek word is lace. Laces. A lestace though in the in Josephus the Jewish historian Josephus uses the term lace to refer to guerrilla warriors people who engage in guerrilla warfare. Mhm. And so if that's what it means when was he? First century first. Yeah. So he talks about people Yeah. He's our main source for information about first century. Okay. Uh first century Judaism. And by the way it doesn't say much about drugs. Um okay. So going back to some of the some of the stuff about Christianity and some of like the early sects of Christianity. Um one of the things that you've written about a lot is the idea of the virgin birth story, the immaculate conception. Mhm. Uh those are different things. The virgin birth refers to Jesus mother who uh conceived as a virgin, right? The immaculate conception has to do with how his mother was born. She was born. God did a miracle. Her mother was not a virgin. But the doctrine of the immaculate conception is that when Mary was conceived, unlike every other human being, she conceived with was conceived without a sin nature. Oh, okay. So her mother did not pass on the sin nature to Mary. That became a later doctrine to show why Jesus did not inherit a sin nature from his mother. Okay. So the immaculate conception isn't about the birth of Jesus. It's about the birth of his mother. About the birth of his mother. Yes. Okay. Where where does this idea originate come from? Like where are they getting where are they getting this? Uh well yeah well you know where does any theologian come up with their ideas? And so the um the earliest accounts of Jesus uh mother are in a book called the infancy. It's I'm sorry it's called the protoospel of James. Mhm. And um it is a early second century book and it actually doesn't even match mention the immaculate conception yet. In this account you it is an account of Mary's birth and it's a miracle because God gets her pregnant even though she she can't get pregnant from her husband. And but the strange thing about this story is that it's actually a virgin birth rather than a virginal conception. So a virginal conception is in the New Testament. That's when in Luke and Matthew she conceives without having sex. But that's different from a virgin birth. A virgin birth is if she gives birth and her hyman hasn't broken in the process of giving birth. The himman breaks because the baby comes through the birth canal, right? And in the uh protospospel of James, a midwife gives her an internal exam. Mary, this is a legend. uh gives her an internal exam to see whether her hyman is broken and it has not. And so now it's not just a virginal conception, it's a virginal birth. And as theologians started thinking more about it, they realized she must not have only conceived as a virgin and given birth as a virgin. She must have been a perpetual virgin. And so then you later get the idea of the perpetual virginity demon where she never had sex. And then after that you come up with the idea she never even had a sin nature. And so the the idea of the immaculate conception becomes especially becomes a doctrine in the fourth and fifth centuries. That's so bizarre. I didn't know that. Why? So they're saying that he how was he b born if he didn't come through the birth canal? It's a miracle. It's a miracle. How did he get born from a virgin? Did they do C-sections back then? Ah, well they're called C-sections. Uh because so they're ceer ceerian sections. They're ceicerians. Yeah. named after Julius Caesar. Oh. Because his mother was having trouble giving birth and so they took him out of her womb. Did she survive? I don't think so. They usually didn't. In the ancient world, they usually would take the baby instead of the mother. Wow. Wow. I had no idea. It's named after Julius Caesar. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild. Yeah. Yeah. See, that's why I'm here. Yes. That is why you're here. Wow. That's fascinating. That is fascinating. Right. But you were going to ask me about the virgin birth. Yes. Yeah. The Yeah. Yeah. I was originally asking you about the virgin birth. Um so that didn't borrow from from any other any other ideas or any other Oh, um myths. You know, I just did a class on this yesterday at Chapel Hill. Uh I had my students read a bunch of Greek and Roman myths about uh people being miraculously born because there are a lot we have them uh we have accounts of a god getting a woman pregnant uh throughout Greek and Roman mythology. Um in every case though um the god in either the woman is not actually a virgin in the Greek and Roman versions. Most of the time she's just a woman who's had sex a lot, never had kids or she's had the god gets her pregnant, but but a god gets her pregnant, but the god always has sex with her. And so, so there are these fantastic stories. My my students thought this was really bizarre because you have these stories about how uh Alexander the Great was born. And it turns out that Alexander the Great was born uh that he was the son of Zeus and Zeus came down in the form of a snake and lay with his mother and his father Philip Alexander's father Philip was watching through the door and seeing this snake cohabiting with his wife and then she got pregnant by the snake who was Zeus and Alexander the Great was the son of Zeus because the snake got her pregnant. Oh my god. with a snake. Yeah, it's very incestual and and Freudian to boot and so the snake figure. So Freudian Yeah. Yeah. So but in any event, so you have these stories of of God's getting women pregnant, right? What doesn't happen is God's getting that that she made a virgin. So that's that's different in they're all different like all the stories are different from each other, right? Getting pregnant from a from a snake is different being being pregnant by a swan, you know, or something. Right. Right. Right. Right. But uh so there are accounts of divine men, they're almost always men with only one or two exceptions uh whose father is a god. But the difference is in the New Testament, the father who's a god, the woman is still a virgin. Okay. Interesting. In other words, there's been no penetration. Whereas in the in the Greek and Roman myths, there's penetration. Yeah. It seems like the Greeks and the these ancient cultures were obsessed with this stuff. They were just obsessed with this like nast. Yeah, they were obsessed. Unlike the American culture. Yeah. Yeah. Come on. Yeah. Every culture is obsessed with sex. No, I mean it seemed way more than us. I mean, it seemed way it didn't seem like Let me put Let me put it this way. They're nowhere near as Maybe not. Maybe not more obsessed, but it didn't seem like there was the cultural sanctions around this kind of stuff that there was that there is now. Uh, depends where you lived. Oh, okay. Well, I mean, you know, today, you know, if you uh sleep with somebody else's spouse, you know, you know, your spouse might leave you. In Israel, if you slept with your if your if you if the woman slept with her neighbor's husband, they'd kill her. So, which takes it more seriously, right? But in those cultures, a lot of the time uh the sanctions for inappropriate sex were connected with uh property rights. And so already in the so already in the Old Testament um the problem with a woman committing adultery is that so a married woman has sex with another man. The problem is this other man has taken the husband's property rights. Oh, okay. I see. And so that's why in the Ten Commandments it says, "You shall not covet your neighbor's house, his wife, his donkey, his axe, his his ox." So the wife is right up there with the donkey as one of the guy's properties. And so it's a property issue, but it still takes it far more seriously than we do. Which brings me to my question about Jesus and Mary and the greater questions of Mary. What was going on? The greater questions of what was going on on the mountain with Jesus and Mary? What was Jesus doing up there? Do our listeners know what the greater questions of Mary is? They're about to find out. I saw you wrote about this in your blog which got me uh interested in it. We've actually we done it actually during a recent podcast. We brought up your blog and we were we were showing it to people. Oh, good. Yeah. people should know about my, you know, the kind of stuff we're talking about is stuff I talk about on my blog all the time. Like I post five times a week on dealing with this kind of stuff. Big fan of your blog and we'll link that below. Okay. So, um, right, the greater questions of Mary. Let me see if I remember this accurately because I haven't looked at this thing in many years. Uh, Jesus, um, does he pull a woman out of his own side and has sex with her? I think that's what it is. Something like that. From what I understood is that was that he brought Mary to the mountain and he said something like, "You have to eat my semen or something like that. Eat my seed." Yeah, that's part of it. But he he she's up there. So Mary Magdalene is up there and he pulls a woman out of his side and he has sex with her and then uh Yeah. I think they consume his semen. Yeah. And he says something about do this and you will live. And so pull up Bart's blog, Steve, so we can uh show the people. Yeah. Yeah. Pull up so I can see what uh There we go. There we go. Oh, look at that. Rated R. Rated X. Wow. Punch in on it. There we go. Okay. Uh, keep going. The greater questions of Mary. Epiphanius claims to have read this. Yeah. Yeah. Take care of the man, pray, extracted a woman from his side, had sexual intercourse with I got it right. He gathered a seam in his hand, explained this was what we must do to live. Why was Jesus doing this kind of thing? Uh, you know, well, uh, because it could. I don't know. uh then she was disturbed and uh yeah so this is so look okay the reality is that uh this is quoted in uh a church father named Epiphanius okay who uh wrote a multi-volume work called uh the English word for it is uh the medicine chest the oh yeah your guy might have liked this this book the medicine chest uh so it's called the the Greek the uh the Greek word is panerion uh And it's called a medicine chest because it provides the uh the antidotes for the venom of snakes. Oo. And the venom of snakes are the heretics who uh the heretics Antichrist will poison you. Uh no, they're Well, they might call them antichrist, but these are like Christian teachers who are teaching false doctrine. Okay, so they're teaching false doctrine and it's like being stung by a snake. It'll kill you. The heresy will kill you. And so he provides the antidotes for this by telling you the the truth. The truth will save you from the poison bites of the heretics. That's the idea of this this multi this long work. Okay. And so um one of the groups that he attacks is a group called the Fibbeianites that he accuses of engaging in wild nocturnal orgies as part of their Christian ritual. Like literal like literal orgies at night. and um Fibbeonianites. Fibbeonites. Phi. Fibbeonites. I don't know why they're called that. Um but is a group of Gnostic Christians. And he claims that this is one of their documents, the greater questions of Mary. Okay. Uh that they have a this is a book that they use to justify their crazy ritual practices which include uh having uh random sex. the manuh this is so during the worship service they meet at night they turn out all the lights uh which are on lampstands torches they they they extinguish all the torches they randomly mix men and women have sex together the man uh pulls out before he orgasms orgasms in his hands they eat the semen together and then they drink the woman's uh menstrual blood good lord and uh this is the body and blood of Christ and So uh so Epiphanius claims this is happening. When did he when was this guy writing this? So he's writing in the end of the fourth Christian century. Okay. And he's saying that these groups are doing this stuff. So basically what he's doing is he's he's trashing people by making stuff up. So he's he's making this all up so he cannot excuse to participate in this sick himself. No, no, he doesn't participate. He's a strict moralist. Okay, I see. But he's saying that this if you start hanging out with these Gnostic people, these these Gnostic Christians, this is the kind of stuff you're going to get into and it's going to send you straight to hell. And so, so it's like overly voyeristic for somebody who's a Puritan. But so, but he's one of these people who's like get he just enjoys telling these kinds of things. He doesn't tell a lot of these kind, but he tells some of these things to to scare his audiences away from this form of Christianity. Um, there are a lot of scholars, probably the majority of scholars, think that there's that there's some kind of historical root to what he's claiming these people were doing. And I don't think so. I think he's just making this stuff up. So, there's it's not likely that Jesus actually did that. Oh, no. There's no way Jesus did this. I'm saying there's no way that these Gnostics actually thought he did it. There's no way the Gnostics actually thought he did it. Okay. There's no way he did it. And I think there's no way they actually thought he did. Epiphanius is making up slanders against his enemies in order to show how horrible they are. Oh wow. So he's making the I think he's making the thing up. That's interesting. And that's another hard part of this whole field of study and these studying these ancient texts is cuz you're like reading all this stuff, all this historical stuff. And like just think about the world we live in today with like the news. Like imagine in 5,000 years from now they're going back and reading the news today. Well, like the news is how do you I watch I read a headline and 90% 90% of the time there's about 1% of truth in that headline. Oh, absolutely. No, absolutely. And if in 2,000 years they find, you know, this that or the other conspiracy theory is the thing, they'll think, well, that's what everybody thought, right? Exactly. And then on top of that, people have axe to gr axes to grind against other people and you know. Yeah. Yeah. Right. So that's that's another thing that just to me makes this this whole thing so confusing and you know in today's day and age with the internet you have people with different views on the ancient world and they want to like dedicate their whole life and build a career off arguing with people about what happened thousands of years ago or what people were talking about thousand years ago. But see this is you know again it's why expertise matters. Yes. Because experts read these documents in their original languages. They read them in the Greek and the Latin, the Coptic, the Syriak, the Hebrew, whatever. They know what these words mean. They they understand how it works. They know the history of the period. They know the political history of the period, the economic history of the period, the social history of the period, the cultural history of the period, and they study these things. So, if somebody comes along and reads Epanius, like just a regular old person comes along and reads Epanus, they'll just think, well, that's what was happening, right? And experts will be able to explain. It'll take a while to explain. It'll take a while for an expert to explain. But if you listen to them and hear the explanation, you'll understand, oh yeah, that's right. Or and if you have different experts saying different things, then you can kind of evaluate them. But without the expertise, you just say anything. And there's so much stuff on the internet. It's just people just saying stuff and getting people to believe them because they said it and okay fine but I mean you know uh there are ways to analyze ancient. So I know it sounds confusing but if you if you study this stuff for 30 years you know how to analyze this stuff. Right. Right. Is there any I don't know if you know how much you know about Sumerian but is there any links from Hebrew to Samrian? Are they any of the roots similar? Uh the Sumerian no I think Samrian is a different language. There's completely separated right. Yeah, Uggeritic is a language that's comparable to Hebrew. So there were cognate Hebrew lang. So when I said earlier that the Hebrew Bible, you only have the Hebrew Bible, right? One thing that helps translators is to know the cognate languages from antiquity. So a cognate language is like suppose you've got Spanish and and Portuguese. So if you know Spanish, then Portuguese is pretty close, pretty close. And you know, if you've got a word in Portuguese, you don't know what this means, but you know the Spanish word that looks just like it, then you can probably guess, yeah, that's probably what it means, right? You can do that with the Hebrew the Hebrew Bible. And so Hebrew Bible translators when they know when they see this word, they don't this word doesn't occur anywhere else in Hebrew, but you have a similar word that occurs in this language and that language and that language that are cognates like a guritic, then that probably suggests what it is. Okay? And you can do that with with Sumerian and Hebrew. There is a some sort of a link there. No, I think Sumerian is a different language, right? Different language group. It's got to be a Semitic language, right? Yeah, that's what I thought because there is a uh a guy who's come up on this p he's dead now, but he's come up on this podcast many times who uh wrote a book called The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross. Yeah. And the premise of his book was about taking the roots of ancient Sumerian into Hebrew. And I think I don't think you can do that. I think that basically like takes apart, you know, tears apart his whole hypothesis. Well, I'm not an ancient I'm I I don't work in ancient near eastern linguistics and so I'm not Yeah. Right. Um but yeah, no, his theory was that the the idea of uh immaculate conception was the same thing as a mushroom because a mushroom you don't pollinate. Mushroom comes from myelium basically like it's rain comes down on the earth and the mushroom is is born out of the earth. What's that got to do with Sumerian? For some reason, he was taking Sumerian roots and and applying them to Hebrew words, but and he was studying the Dead Sea Scrolls for like years. For like I think he studied the Dead Sea Scrolls for like 50 years. Is this what it's not John Allegro? John Algro. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Look, the roots the roots of a word, the etmological roots of a word are not indicative of what the word means, right? So, um, we have lots of words in English that don't mean what the roots mean. You can see where they got it. But, I mean, for example, if you say lion's teeth, okay? The teeth of lions, you're not referring to the to the thing that you go out and dig in your garden, the that the weed that has a yellow thing coming up. The dandelion, right? Dandelion. Donto Leon. uh the the the lion's teeth. And so the fact that it's called lion's teeth doesn't tell you what the when your dad tells you go out and dig the dandelions, right? You don't go around looking for lion's teeth. So the root of a word is not how you distinguish what the word means. Right. So it doesn't matter what the Sumerian root was for this that or the other thing. It's irrelevant. Right. Yeah. That combined with the fact that one's a Semitic language and one is from, you know, Neareastern. Um, I think that kind of like blows that out of the water. But it wouldn't matter. I mean, what does what I mean, for one thing, what does a mushroom and Jesus have to do with either one? He's claiming he's claiming that how a mushroom appear. A mushroom come basically a mushroom doesn't have to be pollinated like any other plant on Earth, right? It doesn't have to be it's not pollinated. So it's like it's like a it's like being born of a virgin. See that that was his connection that he made. Nothing to do with Sumerian or Hebrew. No, that idea, right? It's biology, right? Yeah. That's biology. That's just one of his arguments to to support how Jesus Christ was a mushroom. A psychedelic mushroom, may I add? I know. I know. No, you know, the thing was he was he started out as a fine scholar uh and he was an expert in the Dead Sea Scrolls, but every now and then you get somebody who's like, you know, very aridite who takes this weird turn and wow. Okay. So, uh yeah, but that gets a lot of people into this stuff, too. You know, it's kind of cool because it's like maybe they're crazy, maybe it's outlandish, but it gets a lot of people who who would otherwise not be interested in religion. Maybe they're like, "Oo, this maybe he's on to something." And they go, they fall down the rabbit hole. Well, the problem is that people who are experts in religion don't do a very good job of showing why it's interesting on its own without crazy ideas, right? And so, you don't need crazy ideas. I mean, the Da Vinci Code, uh, Dan Brown's Da Vinci Code got a lot of people interested in Mary Magdalene or in the Council of Nika or how he got the canon of the New Testament or how Jesus became the son of God. And everything Dan Brown said in the Da Vinci Code about those things was wrong, right? I mean, I wrote a book on it. I wrote a book on the Da Vinci Code going through point by point. And so, yeah, I got people into it, but it got them thinking wrong things. So, how good is that? Ha, I think it is good because then they find your book and they realize, "Oh my god, this shit's wrong." Like me. Like, I got into this stuff from a guy who told me that Christ was a was was a a child trafficker who was a giving people drugs and he was a drug cult leader. Yeah. Okay. And uh that got me interested in this stuff. Now I'm here in front of you and I'm figuring out, you know, maybe maybe there's more to this. Maybe not. Yeah. Maybe that isn't how it worked. Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. Well, sometimes truth is a lot more boring than That's very true. But but sometimes truth is really interesting and I think scholars generally do not do a good job of showing what's interesting about what they do across the fields that that people become scholars because they're really deeply interested in something and they're interested in it because there's something that is interesting in it but they have the hardest time to explain to somebody what's interesting about this right and so that so you know I think what scholars need to do is figure out how to communicate better because otherwise you just have these people who come up with these crazy ideas. And there's another thing about scholarship, too, is when you're a part of an institution like that, it's also it's frowned upon to come up with a theory that doesn't fit in with consensus. People are afraid of it's a it's it's frowned upon if you don't have support for it. If you just spout off some crazy theory, then yeah, you get fired. Well, I mean in general, would you say in general though that people in scholarship, they typically walk on eggshells when it comes to discussing new thing, new ideas or or talking outside the coloring outside the lines or anything like that? Like I never felt that way. I mean, I've been in academia since 19 I've been a professor since 1984 and I've never felt that I bound to say one thing or another except if I say something that doesn't have any support for it as a historian, you know. So like I just can't claim crazy things, right? And you know I I you know I just I can't claim that you know Constantine uh the emperor Constantine uh is uh you know is the one who uh formulated the Hail Marys and he's and that that he you know I don't know you just you you just say something and like it's just demonstrabably wrong. M well, you can't do that if you're a historian or if you're a scientist or you're whatever you are. If you if you make a statement, you've got to be able to back it up with facts. Otherwise, yes, you should walk in eggshells. But but I mean, you know, and probably, you know, if you say that that every time the word Christ used, it's referring to a drug, that's like you can't back it up. And you can laugh at people who say you can't back it up, but you can't back it up. And it can be just shown by anybody who can read a dictionary that you can't back it up, right? Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot to it for sure. I think it's complicated and it's and it's really hard to parse out. I don't think it's complicated. You look it up in a dictionary and if you don't and you don't trust the diction, you know, dictionaries can't be trusted either. Exact. Well, it's one thing I had a scholar on here who was telling we were we were discussing the word lace and we were looking it up on on um the website we were just on here. Um yeah, the Perseus and it said Perseus stuffs. Exactly. And it gave us a couple definitions. I think one of them was robber. One of it I think robber was like the main one. Pirate. Pirate and robber. And then he and then this guy goes, "Oh no, that's the wrong dictionary." He goes, "You got to look at this dictionary. It says he's a revolutionary." Yeah. See it? See that? Well, so that's problematic. He's he's problematic if he's saying that because it means both things in different contexts. All three things. Pirate, robber, and revolutionary. Yeah. But the one the one dictionary didn't say pirate or robber. It only said revolutionary. Well, it probably wasn't an exhaustive dictionary. That's why you get it was a biblical uh dictionary. Of course, it was. Right. Right. Exactly. That's the main problem with it. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Well, of course. I mean because right so that that is a main problem uh because you can't trust a like a biblical dictionary or a dictionary of biblical Greek. You can't trust a dictionary of biblical Greek to understand Greek more broadly because a dictionary of biblical Greek is kind of like a dictionary of of you know New York Times today's edition English you know so it tells you what it means in that within that but if you get within that corpus but if you move outside the corpus of the New Testament into broader Greek then you want to know what lestace means. Yeah because that might affect what it actually means in the New Testament and it actually does. So, so it means all of those things. Um, but when I but when I saying it's not complicated is because all what you do is you look it up in a comprehensive dictionary and you can't trust that but it gives you references. Uripides fedra you look that up and you and you look up all the references you say yeah it's right it is what it means here. It's got to mean that here. It can't mean something else here, you know. And you know, and so, um, if you see a passage that says that, you know, the ship of the lace stace, the lace dye was, uh, was, uh, sunk, pirates. Yeah, it's pirates. If you say the lace was caught with a loaf of, you know, red hand with a loaf of bread, right, robber. Or if in Julius Caesar's case, he says, "The lay captured me and and held me ransom." So, it's the context. Yeah. And so, it isn't. So that's the problem with saying that the etmology is what tells you the meaning. It doesn't. Jesus was in the park with a kid at 4 or whatever it was in the middle of the night and the and the SWAT team pulls up on him and he goes, "Why are you pulling up on me like I'm some lace?" Like what is he what is he probably saying here? Yeah, he doesn't but he doesn't say that in Mark. He says that in John. And so uh so the kid is one one story. The lace is in a different story. So, you're saying he doesn't say, "Why you guys on pulling up on me like a stage when the kids's there?" That's that's that's in two different versions. Yeah, I think it's in two different version. I don't think it's in I don't think that's in Mark. Hold on. Let me check. Let's find it. Let's find it cuz I don't think I thought it was in Mark. Uh maybe it is. Maybe it is. Maybe. I'm just kidding. Yeah. Gotcha. I've got I've got Mark. I've got uh John on my mind right now because the layase layase has a um uh a kind of different a double meaning in the gospel of John. Okay. And so that's why uh let me see uh states um just give me a second and I I just you don't you don't even need I will look at it right here. He's got it. We got two versions. We got the Oh yeah. Yeah. It does usually states in Mark Mark 15:27. No, it's in 1448. I hate this freaking Yeah, they Yeah, you're right. It does occur there. But what's it got to do with the kid? So, what is it? So, what does it occur? Where does what what does the passage say? Mark 14:48. Uh Jesus answered and said to him, uh have you come upon me as a layase with swords uh in order to arrest me? Right? So, like out of all the definitions we have, obviously he's not saying, "Why are you pulling up me like I'm a pirate?" Like why why would you be a pirate at 1:00 a.m. or a robber? It's it's talking about being an insurrectionist. An insurrectionist. Yeah. Why else would Roman why why else would soldiers come after him? It's not for you don't send a band of soldiers after somebody's stolen, right? Why are you coming up like I'm a lace? Yeah, that's it. Like what am I stealing here? You know, it is weird that he's with the kids. He's not stealing. It's it's here. He's It's not that he's stealing something. is that they're arresting him for being an insurrectionist. Right. And the way you know that is because they arrest him, they put him on trial for being an insurrectionist. Right. So that's why they're arresting him. Right. Right. Right. Not for being a robber and not for being a pirate. Mhm. So yeah, but I'm not sure what the kid has to do with that. Yeah. Me neither. So the kid is only in Mark, but it's a strange story because it's this they try and grab the guy and he's not pull his towel off. young man. It's not No, he's wearing a linen clo. He's wearing like a robe or something, a linen robe. And they grab him and it says he's wearing a linen robe over his nakedness. They grab for him. The only word for it again? Um, seen. Yeah. Okay, good enough. Uh, and so they grab it and he runs away buck naked. And that's it. It's Mark 14:62. And so the question is, what in the world is that all about, right? And people have different theories. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Almond has a theory. Oh god. So does Morton. So does Morton Smith. Do Do you know about No. Oh my god. Well, so you should be interested in Morton Smith. So Morton uh Have you ever heard of The Secret Gospel of Mark? The secret go I have heard of The Secret Gospel of Mark. Oh my god. You need to do some episodes. Oh yeah, please. Yeah Smith, man. I'm telling Well, he's written a whole book. Oh god. No, it would take it would take three hours to describe the secret gospel of Mark, but he what he argues in the secret gospel. Now, this guy is a serious guy. Morton Smith, he was like, "Oh my god, he was so much smarter than anybody else and he knew it." And he oh god, this guy was brilliant, but he had this kind of he had this kind of utra theory. Uh he taught at Columbia University. Okay. And uh wrote his first dissertation in Hebrew, modern Hebrew. and uh and was a New Testament scholar and scholar of early Christianity, scholar of early Judaism and knew like he was absolutely flipping brilliant. Um but he claimed to discover a new gospel, a gospel that was a secret version of Mark that had been published by Mark later than the Mark that we have that had additions to it. And he wrote two big books on this thing. And the reason it caused a big uproar is because he argued that um this passage in Mark 14:62 about the young man running away with just a linen cloth over his nakedness uh is actually referred to in this secret gospel and that it suggests that this is a uh a young man that Jesus had baptized in the nude. which is they baptize people in the nude and then had spent the night with spent the night with him teaching him the mysteries of the kingdom of God. Jesus and come on Jesus, we can do better. Oh no, he thought he was doing pretty well according to this version. And so and so uh so but more he has these two books. One is called the secret gospel of Mark which is written for lay people but he wrote a scholarly edition of of this whole thing because he claimed to have discovered this this manuscript in a monastery in Israel and um and it's not clear whether it was a forgery or not and it's not clear whether he may have forged it. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. There it is. Yeah. I love this this part right here. Some scholars suggest that the letter implies that Jesus was involved in homosexual activity. Yeah. Well, well, Morton Smith does. Yeah. And some some people agree with them. And some people think that he's just um he's some people think that he's just actually uh doing this to make waves and to to forge something that other scholars accept as authentic. Sure. Well, I mean, it is um I mean, I can imagine how that's frowned upon by by most people. Yeah. Most people didn't like that, especially if they're if they're, you know, theological scholars. But the thing is, you could you could um accept the secret gospel and not accept his interpretation of it because the gospel itself doesn't say that Jesus was engaged in homosexual activities. Right. Exactly. And so it's it's the interpretation that people objected to. But now there's big questions about whether uh it's an authentic writing or not, if it is when it was written um and so forth. So my un So my introduction into this almonds, this you're probably going to laugh me out of the room after I tell you this. His his theory, his drug his the drug theory of what's happening in the park is Jesus was participating in the mystery in the upper room prior to when he was in the in the uh garden of Gethsemane. Mhm. And he was drinking viper venom, the death inducer. So his idea of how people uh participated in the mystery was they would uh they would ingest the viper venom, come up to the edge of death to where they're about to die and then they would take the antidote. And according to Galen, the way they came up with antidotes to things like viper venoms was um sort of like antibbody therapy, like ancient antibbody therapy. So they would take young people who had way better, more robust immune systems. They would slowly give them uh an introduction to viper venom w with a a small cut in the skin where they'd wrap the they'd impregnate the bandage with venom, wrap the cut in the skin. So they would do a slow introduction of the venom so it wasn't enough to kill them, but their body would fight it off and create antibodies. So then they would use the the young person's bodily fluids as an antidote for the older people who got high on the viper venom. So you get high in the venom and then you take the body fluid so you don't die, right? So it would save you. It'd be the antidote and what Almond says was the antichrist because the drug was the Christ. The drug was the Christ. The antidote was the antichrist. All right. Okay. So the kid had the bandage on him because he was the antidote because Jesus was tripping on viper venom in the park. Right. The kid was there because Jesus needed that kid's bodily fluids so he wouldn't die from the viper venom. It was his antidote so he would survive that psychedelic trip that he was on. The kid ran away. Jesus was crucified. When he's on the cross, he's screaming out, "He's thirsty. I'm thirsty." They tried to give him the sponge. His his his followers try to give him the sponge which had the antidote on it, the antidoton for the deep sauce. according to nonus the antidote to the horned North African viper and Jesus said no he refused to take it and he died early because he refused to take the antidote and that's explanation to why Jesus died early and why he was screaming and why he was so thirsty on the cross is because when he was arrested in that park the boy was his antidote and the boy ran away so he didn't get his antidote that's a fun one isn't it well yes I suppose it is [Laughter] So yeah well you know I think that um you know every theory needs to be considered seriously I guess and uh and one needs to evaluate probabilities. Sure. And uh just I mean for uh for openers um in the text it's clearly a Passover meal. Um, in all of the gospels, uh, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, it's the Passover meal, and it doesn't say anything about Jesus drinking venom, obviously. What he does is he takes the So, at the Passover meal, we know what foods were eaten at a Passover meal, included unleavened bread and several cups of wine. And he takes the bread and breaks it and says, "This is my body." And he takes the cup of wine. He says, "This is my the new covenant in my blood." So, um, normally at Passover, they weren't drinking venom. Um, we have no record of anybody drinking venom at Passover. Uh, we have, um, uh, many, many, many references to people drinking wine. Um, and it's portrayed as uh, wine. It's likened to his blood. Normally, it's thought that's because it's red wine that looks like his blood. Uh, I don't think venom normally looks like blood. Um so uh right as to the young boy um it doesn't say anything about that and so it just um you know you can make you can make things up and it sounds interesting and people will say oh that sounds interesting but uh what's what's the evidence of it right? And what is what's the evidence that he's drinking venom? Yeah. And what is it? This is like I said, this is like it's fascinating and it would be great if I could get him in the room with a scholar that has the the capacity of the Greek who could combat him because theolog most most Bible scholars they don't understand the Greek to the level of a classical philologist. So they oh they understand it well enough to refute that one. I mean okay how hard is it? I mean blood is hima is that used for venom. M so so I you know so I think uh you don't need a I mean look there are a lot of there are a lot of biblical scholars who are very fine linguists I mean superb aren't most biblical scholars though like this is the the the contradiction of a Bible scholar is that most of them and correct me if I'm wrong they subscribe to Christianity so they're a scholar of their own belief yeah but Christianity doesn't mean fundamentalist um when I when I went to when I went to Princeton Theological Seminary, I was very conservative at the time, but when I went there, I was I mean all of my professors believed there are contradictions in the Bible. There are historical mistakes. There are discrepancies all over the map. Um there are things we don't that Jesus said he didn't really say there. I mean, just like they all agreed to that. And so it it isn't like they're a bunch of fundamentalists just going around trying pounding the Bible. These were very serious scholars who are uh you know and so uh I think it's unfair to say that they they can't be trusted because they have some religious beliefs. Um you know you have to look at the you have to look at the scholarship for the scholarship. Plus you know there's plenty of us who aren't religious at all who study this stuff who think that that sort of thing just it's just like sorry but I mean no uh no. Okay. I mean, you know, if I if I come up with some account of um you know, Joe Biden being taken out of this world by a by a Martian spaceship and that's why we don't see him anymore. I can certainly say that and there will be people who believe me, but you know, there'd be ways to kind of check to see if it's right. And the problem in the world right now is people don't check to see if anything's right. They don't they can't people won't even if they hear something they assume it's a fact and of course politically that's a big problem because on both sides people just assume things are facts without bothering to look into them right it's tribalism but it but in my field I mean you know there are ways to check out facts so people should do that yeah no it's interesting because most people you know most religious godly people they don't look that deep into this stuff because it gets messy when you really get deep into it. You know what I mean? It's it's it's the general idea of it like like we were mentioning talking about um we were talking about Thomas Payne earlier like the general idea of believing a higher power and the idea of Jesus. It's like a good moral framework for society, right? But when you really like that's the whole point of you know what your your history is and the stuff that you've looked into is like when you start to excavate all these texts of of ancient history and the gospels and all that thing, you'll find out that it it's really messy and it's not that simple. But that's like you can't you can't discount you know the the the moral value and the structural framework that religion provides for well a lot of people do and and I you know I my my view of it is that religion can be used for good or bad and there are horrible things that get done in the name of religion obviously but there are also good things that get done in the name of religion. Sure. And so it that's another complication. So I don't think that you can you know I just don't think like the way people think today it's so binary. It's like this or that, you know, and it just it's few things really are just this or that. Yeah. And just even, you know, as a, you know, I'm an atheist, but I'm a New Testament scholar. And when I say something positive about Christianity, I have some atheists who just come down my throat. How can you possibly say anything good about Christianity? Right. Well, why not? Right. It has done good. And you know, and if I say anything negative, then the Christians, you know, the fundamentalists get down my throat, right? Yeah. That's an unfortunate That's a unfortunate part of human nature. Um, what what's going on with the book of Job? Not to come out of left field, but what's up with Job? Job. Job is another book that people almost always misunderstand. Um, so um, so it depends what you mean by it. So, I learned about the book of Job reading about Thomas Payne, and he basically explains that it's completely disconnected from anything else in the Bible. Well, it depends what you mean. Uh, it's written in Hebrew, so it's connected with other things. Job in Job, interesting. It's in the Hebrew Bible, but Job is not an Israelite. Uh, so the book of I I'll tell you the reason the book of Job is complicated, and it's for a reason that Tom Thomas Payne would not have known. Isn't it the first book that mentions Satan? Kind of, but that's not the complication. Okay. It does. So, there is a figure in there called Hassatan, which in Hebrew means the adversary. Um, and um, but he's not the devil. He's not like this evil force that's out trying that we think of today, like the head of the demons. He's not that. He's actually one of God's council members. God has a like a group of like angelic beings around him that he asks advice for in number of passages in the Old Testament. So scholars just call it the divine counsel. And the Satan, the adversary is one of those figures. And so so later on, hundreds of years later, Jews started developing the idea that this adversary was actually an enemy of God. the devil. That's that starts up about 200 years before Jesus. Okay. But it's long after the book of Job was written in Job. In Job, he's one of the he's he's Yeah. Well, he plays devil's advocate. He tries to he brings up the opposite side of what God says just as a kind of to challenge him. Then God responds kind of thing. The problem with Job is that u that people have the reason they don't understand it is because um it begins two chapters that are kind of a short story about this guy Job who's very righteous and the Satan convinces God to take everything away from him to see if he'll still be righteous because like the guy's filthy richest guy on the planet fantastic family big family you know tons of cattle and sheep and every camels and things he's like filthy rich but he's very pious and the Satan figure says he's only pious because all the stuff you're giving him here, take away the stuff and then he'll he'll curse you to your face. And so that's what happens. And so God says, "No, he won't." Satan says, "Yes, he will." So God said, "Okay, do it." And so the Satan does it. Uh and then so it goes like that. But then so that's the first two chapters, but then the book is like 40 chapters long. And the almost all of it is not about that. Almost all of it is about Job having a conversation with his three so-called friends who say that the reason he's suffering so much is because God's punishing him. And Job keeps saying, "I haven't done anything wrong." No, God's punishing you. And it goes on like this for like 36 chap 37 chapters. And then it gets back to the short story. So the the back and forth of France is all in poetry and the beginning end is a is a pro-short story. And scholars long after pain came to realize these are actually two different stories have been put together. The beginning, the end is about the patient Job who suffers even though he's righteous and God rewards at the end. And in the middle, Job is not patient. God doesn't want anything to do with him. The friends are not friends, they're enemies. And so like I got so they're they're two different things. They've been spliced together. So the whole thing as a whole doesn't make sense because you got these two accounts put together. Okay. And then Job also mentions a lot of things like that like about a like astronomy and all kinds of astrological things that the Jews didn't know about necessarily. That's at least how Thomas Payne explained it. A lot of scientific stuff is not true. No, it's not true. No. At the end God um Job at the end of the poetry where the God Job saying he's completely innocent and the friend saying you're guilty. Job says, "Look, if God will just show up, I'll be able to like make my case." And God shows up and just drives him into the ground, just squishes him under his thumb and just blasts away because basically God is the almighty and you're a peeon. What are you, where are you talking to me about me for? And so, but in that God says, "Where were you when I, you know, created the foundations of the earth? When were where were you?" when he starts talking about the stars and you know all the stuff that he's created and and even in the even in the other things in the book occasionally there'll be astronomical references but they aren't things that were like unknown to ancient Israelites at all. Okay. Ancient Israelites were just as interested in astronomy as anyone else. Yeah. I heard that there's um actual there's um there was zodiacs and like the temples in Telmiddo. Oh yeah. But that's centuries centuries later. Okay. That's that's many many centuries later. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. No, you do have zodiacs in some uh not in temples, but in synagogues, right? Yeah. That's what I would say. Yeah. Yeah. In synagogues, which is interesting. Yeah. There's all sorts of stuff that archaeology has told us that for centuries, people didn't realize because it was always said that Jews could not have pictorial art, for example, that you couldn't have pictures of humans because that's like an idol or something and you can't have that. And that's just not true. Now, they've dug up synagogues that have pictorial art in them. Oh, wow. Yeah. Yeah. got dug up a synagogue that appears to have a picture a mosaic of Alexander the Great in the synagogue. Wow. Did you see there there was a um there was a recent discovery that was made and actually the University of Tampa which is close to here. They found a a mug from the god uh Bess Bess an Egyptian god mug. Huh. um that had they they like somehow did a study on it and they found out uh like they figured out the cocktail that they were using in this mug and it like Can you pull it up, Steve? Oh, no. I don't know about this. Oh, yeah. There it is. There you go. Psychotropic drugs. I'm telling you, man. It's everywhere. Look at this ritual uh drug war. When did they date this to? Oh, jeez. Let's see here. Um, ancient Egyptian mug from the god best ingested mixed psychoactive drugs, human blood and other body fluids and mysterious ceremonies. According to a new paper, 15 authors of the paper reported in the research square prior to the academic peerre uh come from institutions including University of South Florida. When did they say this was okay? 16th century. Oh wow. Wow. Yeah. Well, okay. Vessels of this shape are from the 16th to the 5th century. This particular one dates to 3rd century. Interesting. Oh, somewhere between 3rd century BCE and third century. Great. Yeah. Interesting. So, what did it say? Scholars have speculated that they may have been used to hold perfume or holy water, wine, or beer. God, the cult members may have drunk from them. Oh my god. But the residue Okay. The residue of their contents has rarely been studied. Oh, I see. They're saying generally generally that's the case. Have they studied this one? There was semen found in this one. I'm pretty sure there was not. Stop it. The Fibbeites. I swear it was. No. I swear. No, Steve. I want to say a lot of stuff made up around here. Bodily fluids. Go back down. See what it say. Type in bodily fluids. See what it see what it says. What bodily fluids? It was probably blood. Fluids. Okay. Uh, keep going. Go to the next one. uh such as oral v oh vaginal mucus and breast milk. Yeah and human blood. Wait okay. By analyzing wait the authors found could include and plant they also found in human blood of that's fantastic. Oh my god. Oral or vaginal mucus and breast milk and the blue water lily. Holy crap that they mix with sesame seeds. You know, that's the best way to consume vaginal mucus and is with sesame seeds. It's a They probably have a recipe probably on the bottom of this cup. You'll find a recipe for uh That's great. God, that's crazy, man. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's amazing stuff. Wow. And Bess was he Who was Beth? He was a guardian figure until he became a Roman era divine being. Uh Okay. Oh, Bess. Deity Bess. Mhm. Uh Roman era divine being that provided protection from danger and averted harm. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Cool. Antiquity was a fun place to be. Yeah. I tell you. And you know, they they still find stuff and it's amazing. It's really quite amazing. Yeah. Yeah. It's insane. We had a um I had a guy in here who brought in a uh he's a collector of he he he buys stuff on the antiquities markets and he buys these um these granite voses vases. Yeah. And they were I guess they were found in like um the bent pyramid or some one of the py one of the pyramids in in Egypt and they were like all just down at the bottom of them and he paid like hundreds of thousand dollar hundreds of thousands each per one he says like a few dozen of these vases he's purchased and um I guess uh Egyptology dates them to being uh around the time of like 2,00 maybe 2500 BC roughly when they were created And the way that the consensus of how they were shaping these things were just based on hieroglyphs and depictions that are written or like drawn on cave art or whatever is that they like were hammering and chiseling these things with like pounding stones and copper chisels. That's the tools that they had. But then he took one of his vases to a uh an aerospace company, like a big aerospace company um in like the Midwest, and they put it under a light scanner. And they found out that this granite vase, which is one of like the hardest stones that we have, is perfectly symmetrical from top to bottom within the deviation of a human hair. Interesting. Like it was almost spun on like even more symmetrical than you find like a piece of clay that's spun on a wheel. Interesting. Yeah. And it was made 2,000 years ago and it's like so basically if you wanted to recreate if we if our culture wanted to recreate it today, you would have to do it on like a a CNC machine or something like that. Made like make it on a computer. No, I know some of the technology, you know, they don't know a lot about how the technology worked. I mean, there are classicists, you know, who work on ancient technology. Like this is what they do. Oh, really? Yeah. Like how do you build a temple? Like how do you put a how you have this how do you have this uh you know this column that goes up you know 40 right feet that and each of the drums of the column weighs what kind of you know how do you do that and so they yeah there people who do that kind of thing but you know there's also a lot of prehistoric stuff right that uh I mean like the um rock circles like the Stonehenge things you know that they're just there's some amazing uh finds that um where you have like one of You'll have two stone circles like that uh on different uh continents that are exactly the same size to the millimeter. What? How? That's so wild. Yeah. I mean, that's stuff. And it's like, you know, you know, the ancient world is amazing and it's like Yeah. Yeah. It's so mysterious how the how some of this stuff was was was able to be created. You like root beer? We'll see. That's root beer flavor. It's great. Delicious stuff. White rabbit, shout out. Um, it's just so mysterious and and it's so interesting and it gets people, you know, and it's a it's a it does that that phenomenon where people like to fill in the gaps with their minds of what it was like. Was it God or was it aliens? You know what I mean? Like the two choices. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Those are our choices these days. Yeah. Like or maybe we had human beings had technology that was more sophisticated than we have today. Right. Well, in some ways they did, but and the problem is that so much of it is lost. But but but they they certainly did in some ways, but they didn't have electricity and so and they didn't have, you know, they didn't have ways of creating engines the way we do. And so they didn't have so um you know, they didn't know anything about internal combustion or anything like that. So, but um what they did was absolutely spectacular, but they also had a lot of people power. Yes. So, right, you know, that's Yeah. Have you heard of the younger dus hypothesis? Uh don't know that I have basically um it's the idea that around I want to say it was 16,500 years ago roughly around then during the end end of the plea scene that there was some sort of uh either a cosmic comet impact or like a solar flare ejection that happened that melted that ended the ice age, right? Like if comets hit around the earth like we went through some sort of like asteroid belt or something like that or comet or meteor stream that comets hit the earth melted all the ice flooded the earth and basically wiped out like 75% of civilization and it kind of like reset us, right? So, like there's people that like to connect that idea with the fact that maybe human beings had some sort of advanced ancient technology that was erased from the face of the earth when one of these cataclysms happened because there is there is archaeological evidence that like with like the black mat the black mat layer and other things that there was some sort of a a a cosmic event that happened on Earth that ended the ice age and would have wiped out a lot of people and potentially some sort of technology that we had and that civilization was reset. And maybe this could be an an explanation for some of the flood myths as well. Yeah, because the flood myths are everywhere, right? Like Well, they are, but they're also always around places where there's uh major water supplies, right? That all flood. So, yeah. I don't know. I mean, if I wanted to know know about that, I'd probably talk to a high level university geologist. I probably wouldn't go online to find out. So, that's the problem. on Tik Tok. Well, not anymore, apparently. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. We're getting They're getting rid of it as of yesterday, apparently. Yeah. Yeah. What happened? Someone bought it. Did Elon Musk buy it or something? Or he's trying to buy it? Well, the Supreme Court. Yeah. I forget. Anyway, who cares? Yeah. Yeah. Anyways, Bart, thank you so much for coming, man. This has been really This has been a really fun conversation. My pleasure. Tell people where they can find your work, where they can find your blog, all that fun stuff. So, there are a couple things. One is my blog. Uh so my blog my blog's this unusual thing because it's I mean you know thousands of people have blogs but my blog uh it's on New Testament early Christianity everything cognate to it ancient ro the ancient Roman world uh the ancient Judaism early Christianity up through Constantine and beyond I post five times a day five times a week five times a week uh 1200 to 1400 words I've done it for almost 13 years now and so it's like every A and I answer questions. Every question I get, I answer. So, the reason I do this is uh not for uh my jollies. Uh it's both to spread knowledge about my field, but it's also to raise money for charity. So, there's a small membership fee that people pay. It's not big. Comes out to like the cheapest level is like a dime a week kind of thing. It's like $24.95 for a year. Uh but there are higher levels where there there are more perks. But I give all of the money to charity and so I don't keep a dime myself and I do separate fundraising to pay for our expenses so that every every penny goes into the charities which are all dealing with hunger and homelessness issues. Last year uh 2024 we raised uh $575,000. What? Yeah. Holy smokes. So people just by joining and getting all these perks like like you know my post and at higher levels uh uh there's audio versions of they they can get and I do live Q&As and I do at the higher levels I do uh webinars periodic webinars with people in the higher groups. So people should just look up so it's urban blog.org okay uh and they can look it up. The other thing about three years ago we started a company that produces online courses uh on all topics. We start out doing mainly biblical studies which is what we still mainly do but uh and I start out doing the courses myself on you know I'll do something on the gospel of Mark like eight lectures on the gospel of Mark on a weekend. Um, and or we'll have short like one-off lectures like I did a thing on the dark side of Christmas where I did two lectures talking about like the the really parts that don't look good about what's happening in the Christmas story. Like why does Herod have to kill all the babies so that Jesus can be born? That kind of thing. And so so we have these courses. They can find that on bar uh barterman.com. I've got a thing on courses. But we've also started this thing connected with it where we do semesterl long courses taught by highlevel university professors. Oh wow. We have one going on now on an introduction to the New Testament uh by a very fine New Testament scholar who's a terrific teacher. And it meets twice a week like a university course. 50-minute lectures followed by Q&A each time with suggested readings. People could do quizzes if they wanted to take quizzes. and and so it's like getting a uh our first course was by Duke University professor Mark Goodacre. You get a Duke University course online for this thing. So this one is uh is not for charity. It's a it's a business we have going but uh that's called the Biblical Studies Academy. Okay. So if people just look up Biblical Studies Academy, there's a it's like a streaming service. They pay a monthly fee and they can get if they pay the monthly fee, they get all the courses that are already available. They can go to these university level courses. They have chat groups. They have discussion groups. They have book reading groups, movie watching groups. It's like it's this community for people who are not uh you know a lot of people are interested in the Bible but they don't have anybody to talk to about it like academically interested, right? You know, as opposed to being like in the church interested sense and they just want to talk about stuff that they're interested in. They don't have anybody. This is a forum for them to do it. So, we just started a biblical studies academy and uh they could look it up. Beautiful. That's really cool. Making this stuff accessible to just anyone online who wants to learn about it. Serious scholarship made accessible and interesting to people who aren't scholars. That's amazing. Yeah. Cool, man. Well, we'll link it all below so people can check it out. It's great. And uh thanks again. I appreciate your time. Thanks. Thanks for having me. Yeah. Night, everybody.