So you basically single handedly stopped the sale of federal lands. A huge expanse of federal lands. You're not a politician, you haven't been a public figure. I'm not exactly sure how you did that, but I'd love to know. Just give us the two minute background. Who are you? Where are you from? How did you wind up involved in this question? Fundamentally, I'm just an idiot horse trainer. Or a chase. Yeah, I don't know. I'm not anything important or powerful or anything like that. I'm just a regular guy. I've always been a regular guy. I have no desire. Despite how many people have tried to push me, I have no desire to go into politics. I... That's probably whether pushing you. I want to write my books and hang out with my kids and ride horses and go fishing and hunting. Yeah. That's why I've said this many times elsewhere. I don't think it's just me. I think it worked because there were so many people that were upset. Yes. To a degree, I guess I ended up kind of spearheading some things. I mean, maybe a way I would look at it is it wouldn't be the first time I've taken point and I'll take point, but it's still a team effort at the end of the day. And it has to be that way. If something this important becomes about one guy versus another guy or lose, it can't be like that. Well, and that's never a reflection of reality anyway. There are always huge forces that get embodied in individuals, but it's not so much about the individual. It's about the huge forces behind him and the forces that you harnessed, I think, just watching. Um, fundamentally we're like the great love of the land by normal people. Like people understand that land is essential. It's connected to identity. It's connected to the definition of America. And so don't treat it lightly. Maybe that's one of the legends. I think that's totally right. We talked about this at breakfast, but ultimately it's the love of my people and the land is a part of my people. Those two things are inextricably connected. Yes. I believe that fundamentally and I don't want to be like overly pious or anything like that, but I believe fundamentally we're called to serve our people. Yes. So if it took an idiot horse trainer to, you know, in my view, save a bunch of small family ranchers throughout the West and, you know, so be it. It worked. Where are you from? I'm originally from Southern Utah. I live in Idaho now, but I grew up down in, I guess I probably shouldn't say, but Southern Utah. Big town, small town. We're very small. Not a lot of big towns in Southern Utah. No. I mean, maybe St. George has gotten a lot bigger. Yeah. No. I don't even want to say the size. So but sub 1,000 people buy a lot. Wow. I would say. Yeah. Your hometown is fewer than 1,000 people. Yeah. Cow's outnumbered as probably 12 to 1. You know, and also legit world. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We grew up on a little horse place. My old man was a horse trainer, but, you know, he's an electric electrician. I think he got an electrical engineering degree as well. But that's what he did. They kind of make ends meet was the electrical stuff and the we race horses and, you know, cowboy that a lot of day work and growing up helping neighbors and family and all that. So you see the struggle from a young age. And right now what's happening. Yes, you have a lot over an interesting chapter in your own life. I just asked you to address it really quickly. Yes, sir. You clearly don't want to talk about it. But you join the military at some point. Yeah. When I was 17, we, I was skipping school as I was wanting to do at the time when I was at my cousins and we watched 911 happen on TV live. Wow. And you know, back then there was that famous, I forget it was a pace, some salsa commercial, you know, the New York City. Exactly. It's New York City. We didn't have any, there was no love loss between us and New York City, right? I mean, that's kind of the whole point of the commercial. But when that happened, it's like, okay, I don't like them, but that's still my brother. You don't get a punch on my brother in the face. Amen. So a lot of rural kids felt the same way and we enlisted. And I remember my mom, because when you're that age, your parents have to sign for you to, you know, join. And I told her I said, yeah, I mean, you can either sign this now and I'll get a little bit more money. You know, I'll go in as like a PV2 instead of a PV1 or whatever. Or I'm going the day I turn 18. So I mean, you're just delaying the inevitable if you don't sign this. So she signed it. And I went to banning and then to the war. You joined the army. Yeah, that's 17. Yeah. And well, I think by the time I shipped, I had already turned 18, my taboo camp or basic training. But you signed up at 17. Yeah. Yeah. I wanted to go to war. A lot of us did. You're young and stupid and a lot of cultural forces were telling us this was the right thing. And I believed it. And plus, it is wrong for me. Miss, Miss Guided as I was, I wanted to get, you know, take a swing back at the person in our mind at the people that are taking a swing to us. You know, I think everyone, every American, most Americans felt that way for sure. Yeah. Yeah, you get there in about three months in. You get a little disillusioned. Well, yes. So you join, you go to banning, then they ship you overseas to Iraq. Yep. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I got back to my unit and they weren't going to deploy. So I volunteered for this other deployment. Because I just wanted to get there. And this artillery battalion needed a PSD team. So they were a personal security detail. So they were looking for guys and winded up with this kind of hodgepodge of random MOSs of just guys who wanted to do this job. So we did a train up, learn how to do that. And it's funny. Like in keynote, it's how you used to say we're to try to explain it. You know, if you're talking to bankers, they don't really know what PSD is. You know, they certainly know what EP is. But I would say we're kind of like the army's idea of secret service, except for better trained or not as well trained, you know. But now, I'm like, yeah, a lot of us are rethinking questions like that. Yes. Yeah. And so we go, we end up in Ramadi. You know, the first thing that happened that really changed, I think was important, but really changed my view of the war altogether. We drove up from Kuwait. Yeah. A lot of our guys airlifted, but we had all this heavy equipment. And of course, the PSD team's going to do security for, so we took the drive. It's quite a drive, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, man. I've done it. It's scary. Yeah. You know, you first across that border. And, you know, there's all wells on, all the old wells on fire and, you know, busted up cars. And then like, you know, just poverty, like you've never seen before. That's up cars from the first to rock. Correct. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, just a highway of death. They never never cleaned it up. No. Yeah. It's amazing. And then we get to Scandinav and that night, my patients tell us story, but we stayed with some Polish SF guys and they were fun. They were like, very, very, you know, I just ended it that. And then we go from there. I believe I don't think we stopped again. We refueled somewhere just south of Baghdad, Scandinav or something like that. And then there's this, their highway system is like ours for anybody who doesn't know. I mean, it looks like a Western highway. Yeah. And there's this turn, just pass back dad, where you turn toward flute or a body. And right after that, you know, there's these compounds all over around there. They'll have like these walls around them and all like rich people, poor people rich. It's almost like Houston. Yeah. Yeah. So we we end up the lead truck spots an IED and it's dark. It's like two o'clock in the morning or something. And we had a marine escort because we'd never been there before. So the Marines were taking point and then we were just kind of additional security. Well, this marine comes and knocks on the door of our truck. And he says, hey, do you want to go help us clear this complex? And of course, I'm like 19. Like hell yeah. So that's why I'm here. You know, and so might grab and what we were told is we're going to try. There was a prayer rug. You know, they found this prayer rug and that prayer rug had, suspiciously an IED and some stuff left there. And then there was debt cord going back toward this compound. And the plan was to go in there and find whatever was at the end of the debt cord and take care of the problem. One version of taking care of the problem was going to be just blowing up the house and moving on. You know, we got shit to do. Yeah. So I'm pretty excited because I'm thinking, I'm going to get a blow up a building. I grab an extra flags and then 84 and like our frag grenades, you know, in an 84. And well, we get to this compound. There's like a brick wall rounded. And we're trying to find an ingress route. You know, you don't want to just go over the wall. Yeah. Because who knows what's so we end up finding a part of the wall that had been busted by a mortar or, you know, one of our guns or something. I don't know. And we were able to kind of skirt the side of the building. And I was in my mind the entire time I kept thinking, I cannot wait. The blow is freaking house up. This is going to be so cool. It's just like every 19 year old kid, right? I'm not saying it bless unless you've been a 19 year old boy. Like it's hard. Probably hard to understand what that means. We're sorry to say it, but this is not a very safe country. Walk through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there can be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. It was obvious on video and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti gun movement will do. They'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to burn up. It's a proudly American company, burn up. It makes self defense lawnshares that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty handed. These pistols and I have one fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from up to 60 feet away. They're no background checks or no waiting periods. Burn a can ship it directly to your door. You can't be arrested for defending yourself with a burn up pistol. Visit burnupbyRNA.com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay. Burner.com. And that changed pretty quick. We get around the front of the house and we can see this debt cord going through into the home and we're like, let's go all the way around and make sure that it doesn't go through and out just in case they were trying to set somebody up. Some innocent people. And as I was looking inside the building, there was a generator running inside and it was sitting on a piece of plywood. And I remember thinking that's that is strange. Why would they do that? You know, but we get around the front and there's right at this stoop, there's a bunch of sandals lined up and it's like oldest, youngest. So it's like dad, mom, kid. And then all the way down to this like two inch pair of pink, like foot-flop deals. And I just left my little sister with my mom who was roughly the same age. And man, I went from wanting to do that to not wanting to do that really fast. And I think I think that changed my war for me for the rest of time. I probably could have got sucked into being overly aggressive and uncompassionate, but that really helped right from the jump solidify that these are actual people. Oh, yes. Well, luckily we go all the way around and the decor was running throughout into this olive orchard. And one of our guys without warning, without warning, I said a pin flare to light up so we could see the olive orchard and my team we are just dove into the ground because he thought we could take an incoming. So he's like diving into this olive orchard. And it ended up we were able to solve the problem without doing anything to the home. And it had turned out, at least from what we were told, that what they had done is captured that family and stuffed them into a cellar and then put that board, that plywood over the hole and then put the generator so we couldn't hear them down there yelling. Oh. And they were hoping that we would just blow them up. And we didn't. And I think that, as I say, I'm sorry, just keep rambling, but you're not rambling at all. So this was like within days of getting into the country. I think day two, I think. Yeah. Yeah. It really helped understand the war. You know, we were fighting a war in cities. You know, and first of all, I've never even lived in a city. You didn't really have to convince me that cities were bad. So, so Baghdad was really the first big city you saw. Well, I mean, I had family in the suburbs of Salt Lake and stuff like that, but and we would go eat at Lamb's Cafe when I was a kid. Salt Lake used to be a fundamentally different place than it is right now. Thank you, immigration. So I had been to Salt Lake, but you remember Salt Lake in the 80s and 90s. It was very well different. Nothing like it is now. This was the first city I'd ever lived in was Ramadi when we got there. I mean, to the extent that you're living in it, right? They, I mean, kind of hilarious. The first big city ever lived in was Ramadi, Iraq. Yeah, it's true. Yeah, I've only ever lived in two Salt Lake when I was going to school for a minute and Ramadi, that's it. And at this point, I don't even know which one I hated worse. Yeah, you know, Ramadi's probably pretty nice right now. So relatively. Yeah, and then after that is just pretty typical war. You know, once we were there for about a week or two in this guy, he's driving on a truck, like a big truck, and we were on an OP out in front of Father Ramadi on route mobile. And we were kind of running a blocking position up there. And this guy comes winging in like he's just going to drive by us because he's got a cross hung on his radiator, like lit up cross. And we shot just warning shots into the ground like, hey, you gotta stop. What the heck are you doing? You know, and he jumps out waving his arms, I'm a Christian, I'm a Christian. You know, and like, you're an Iraqi dude. I mean, we're happy that you're a Christian, you know, you're an Iraqi. And that that's there. I think for the average American, it's really hard to process just how tribal those regions really are. Yes. He genuinely believed you guys are Christians on a Christian. We're just same team without any. We need no more justification than that is kind of his worldview. And looking back at that, I wish, you know, he was kind of right. I totally agree. I mean, he was right. He was right. We should have just trusted him. Probably worse. But so like, we had some things like that. And then, you know, typical over stuff beyond that. Some stuff. I think about seven months before I got wounded. It's six, seven months. Something happened. I gave by a suicide bomber at a glass factory on a security mission. And yeah, we were we were providing just to tell briefly, we were providing security for a marine element that was recruiting Iraq, Sunni Iraqis to become IP Iraqi police officers. What we, you know, Bremer and others had decided that we couldn't hire any about this. And they also seem to think that it would be a good idea to have Sunnis, police Shia and Shia police Sunnis. And that's just, I mean, talk about ancient tribal conflict. You'd have to be. How could you be that dumb? You know, you're conducting a war. This is a basic level stuff. You have to understand the people, you know, for people in general. Yeah. So we're why make it a humiliation ritual, you know, it does feel like that. Of course, it's the oldest. It's right. It's why the peace settlement after the first war, you know, the Western nations wound up sending African peacekeepers to Germany to humiliate the Germans. And, you know, how that worked out right? What it, how did the Iraq experiment work out? I mean, I don't understand. Right. So anyway, sorry. No, no, you're right. And that's sort of a Bremer era. And I try not to criticize people with the benefit of hindsight. Yes. But some of this was so dumb. So we had to, we were recruiting Sunnis to, you know, be shipped over to a allied country for training and allied Muslim country. I just don't know if you're supposed to say it's not hard to figure out who was there. Or yeah. And they were training them and then, you know, going to send them back. And so we were just the security element as all. And it was day four of what was supposed to be a three day mission, typical Iraq thing. And I was out there in my interpreter. Was with me. And we were just kind of asking questions to the people like why are you here and stuff like that? Because there was a lot of people there. And they were there early. And as I've said elsewhere, but these are not a punctual people. You know, yeah. So we knew something was wrong. And this guy comes up and he's frantically yelling at me. And of course, I barely know any words in Arabic at all. And it ends up being translated to me as I saw grenade with wires. He was genuinely trying to tell us what he had seen and help us. But we thought trip wire because he was saying grenade. Well, then it ends up a couple minutes later. We ended up in a scramble. And this semi truck crashes through this eastern perimeter that we had set up. And that morning we had been told to look out beyond the look for V beds. So he crashes through the vehicle born explosive device. Improvise explosive device. So he crashes through. And of course, we everybody lights up the truck. You have to. And then, you know, now there's Iraqi scattered all over the place. Well, and then I don't know if they changed this after my time. But in those years, you were not allowed to hire any bathous for any reason into any government position. So now we have that. So what did they do? Third time. Well, yeah. You know, so much of that war, even as a young idiot kid, you look back and just think how yeah, you strategically just so dumb. If you use Verizon AT&T team, mobile, then you're overpaying for your phone. That's just a fact. The companies don't want you to hear that, but it's absolutely true. Why is that? We'll think about it. Your monthly payment funds thousands of retail stores. Their retail stores you're never going to go to. You're also probably paying for unnecessary perks you'll never use. There's a better way. Buy what you need. It's called peer talk. Peer talk uses the same 5G networks as those other companies. Literally the same cell tower. So it's not off grid or done with a wire between cans. It's the highest tech available. But peer talk doesn't charge for the add-ons that send most bills to the roof. Instead, peer talk gives you unlimited talk, tax plenty of data for 25 bucks a month. 25 bucks a month is probably less than half what you're paying. You get the same service, exact same service. Go to peertalk.com slash talker. You save an additional 50% off your first month. The switch can take less than 10 minutes. They do not hassle you. And you don't have to switch your phone or your phone or you don't give up anything. You only save money. Peertalk.com slash talker. Peer talk wireless by Americans for Americans. So the result of that was now we have Iraqis running all over the place. And we've got to get them back into lines and get this mission done. And the lines had to be person with no ID, person with a government ID, that says Bath is on it. And we were separating them that way. And then eventually a really high-speed guy, Lieutenant Colonel McGawf, when we Colonel Mack, we call them. He came out there to help us and some dog handlers. And we were getting these guys in line. And the next thing you know, suicide bomber goes off. And this killed or wounded, like 106 people or something like that. And killed two Americans, our friend and dog handler, Sergeant Kan, and then Lieutenant Colonel McGawf. And I tried to say this as often as I can now. He was like 33 years old or something at the time and Lieutenant Colonel. And I was a 20 year old kid. I turned 20 over there. And he was out genuinely in harm's way. Everyone knew that it was a dangerous situation. It didn't certainly Colonel Mack knew. And he put himself out there and died. And they don't make many officers like that. He was a very, very brave man. He did not need to be there. No, not even at all. He was the highest ranking guy there by, I mean, the other highest ranking guy to be like an E7. You know, so he died. And I got wounded basically everything is the same explosion. Yeah, do you remember it? Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know if the concussion knocked me out. And then I woke up on the ground. But I was awake on the ground. But do you remember the truck went off? No, a suicide bomber with a vest. So what had happened is our dog handler or one of the dog hunters that was helping us, Sergeant Kan, his dog detected the bomb and grabbed the stew by the arm and was trying to pull him to the ground. And then it went off and amazingly, Bruno, the dog that had done that lived through the explosion. Seriously? Yeah. He later deployed again to Afghanistan. I mean, just incredible dog. What kind of dog? No, no, no, no, no. Well, I really, yeah. No, no. Really neat dog. I was funny. Right before they came out there, he was sleeping on my truck. Like the hood of my truck. And Sergeant Kan's like, you know, do you want us to come out and help? And in my mind, I'm thinking, yeah, put that thing to work. He's just napping. You know, actually. And he was a cool dog. We all liked him. But he lived and Sergeant Kan didn't unfortunately. And he was an incredibly brave man too. He had, I think this was his third tour. I think he'd been to Iraq once and Afghanistan once before this. It might have been his fourth tour. But he had been out at FOB hit on the Syrian border. And he requested to be, this is my understanding of it. He requested to be moved to Ramadi because they were his bored. And he wanted to like fight. So he was an incredibly brave guy. He also did not have to be out there. He made that choice and deserves, you know, admiration for his courage. He was profoundly brave. And he died. And then I, me and a couple other guys, he got wounded. And for me, it was multiple bilateral femur fractures. And like Tibbia was broken, both my hips, all the bones and my right hands, my right hand doesn't work very good. My radius and ulnar and my right knee and nerve was transsected at my wrist. So I don't really have much feeling through, through that part of my hand. And like this, my fingers fused. My little sister calls me Captain Hook. He had brain injuries and some broken ribs and broken back. I was pretty busted up. Do you remember it going off the noise? Yeah, it's funny. I remember the flash and the sound and then waking up on the ground. And there were bodies on top of me. I talked about this a little bit on Sean's. I should have done a better job describing it. But I could hear my first line later, Johnny, yelling, you know, just like every other make kid, they just call you Mac, you know. So it's like Mac Mac, I can hear him. And I'm like trying to yell back at him. And I'd had myself propped up on this elbow. I had like my left hand worked, but my left humerus was busted. And my right humerus worked, but then everything down here didn't work. So I was kind of in this. And I had myself propped up and there was this pile of guts underneath me. And when I was looking at that, I was thinking that I'd been blown in half. I mean, who else has guts would they be? And so I was like running an organ through my fingers trying to see if I could feel it. Sitting there thinking I'd been blown in half. I mean, I hadn't we'd seen people get hurt really badly, but I had never seen that. So I wasn't sure exactly what that would look like. And I was trying to figure out if it was like a pancreas or something. Oh, no. And you know, I feel an enemy. So I'm just a guy like winging it. He's a little is your pancreas. I did. Yeah. And I also didn't even know if you could feel your organs in that way. You know, so like, I didn't know if you really had external feeling on them. Most people have never had this experience. Yeah. Well, I was one of those. And eventually Johnny gets there. And like Sam kind of propped up and he he started. What I didn't know was that there were like three bodies on top of me. And these organs belong to a different person, a Iraqi person. And he started removing the bodies. And I could feel like a little bit of weight go off and then a little bit more. And then those pulled out. And I could see my hip bones or the top of my hips, not the actual bones. But like my uniform, and then they rolled me over and my legs were cooked as the kids would say. And you could tell because they were not. It was like Jello, you know, moving around and your femurs, you know, your glutes and quads are so strong that if your femurs break bad enough, they just contract. So my femur was like as both of them were like the leg was not like as wide, almost as it was long. I could just retract it like a slinky ball, which might have been the only thing they kept me alive. I have, I'm not, I can't even remember exactly how many holes it is, but between me to hip on both quads is like 30 holes, something. So how'd I not have that sort of acted like an internal turn of kit and kept me from bleeding out probably because when they got my uniform cut off, you could every time my heart would be, you could see the blood kind of oozed out of the through and through. as I had some through and throughs and you could just, it was like, I always describe it as like squeezing a water bottle, but with rhythm, you know, and it just kind of pour out like that. You could see this. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I had no, my blood pressure was so low. They weren't getting me any, it was good that they didn't, but they weren't getting me any pain meds or anything. You know, morphine will kill you if you don't have enough blood pressure. Yeah. So we started working on me and then, like, me any it was good that they didn't but they weren't getting me any pain meds or anything you know more if you don't kill you if you don't have enough blood pressure. Yeah. So we started working on me and then life leaded me or excuse me medivac me to Fobber moddy. What made the holes? What was the projectile? A ball bearings. Oh wow. Yeah and probably came from Pyran probably. I mean we don't know that. This was a SUNY person but a lot of the materials for that stuff was coming from all bearings. Do you have any of them? Yeah. I've got I think I pack around like 12 of them in my body still and then I've had like three more cut out since I got home that have kind of like surfaced in different ball bearings. Yeah straight do you have them with me? No no don't you keep them? Yeah. Well not all of them that they cut out with I didn't get a choice in my flute when they were cutting stuff out there but at home yeah I think I've three or four that I've had cut out of like my forearms and my rear hand and stuff like that. So I like a little jar. How big are the ball bearings? Like the size of a P is what they'd be. Wow. Yeah. I think we counted one time. I don't want to lie on the mega buck shot. That's what it was. Yeah. It's like getting hit with exactly. Yeah. This is exactly like that and then there was one spot on my one quad where my right side where you could about put your fist in the hole and there's been confusion since day one about whether that was a gunshot from an AK or just more ball bearings could have really been either. Were there rifles going off too? Yeah. RIP started just firing my bet. So and it's a rookie policeman. Yes I'm sorry. So sometimes when people sell products on TV I love this product. I use this product. There's the question in the mind of the viewer. Does this guy really use the product? Does he really love the product? Would he keep the product at home? Ask my dogs. Yes. Now we are in a garage. I'm gonna tell you where it is because again this is prepping but this is my garage. There's a gun safe and this is a part of my stock pile of radio. Completely real. The second I put it here. The second radio is sent to me. I felt peace of mind because no matter what happens I'm not going hungry in my house. I moved a lot of fishing gear out of the way to keep it in my garage and ever since it's been here I have felt the peace of mind that comes from knowing my family is not going hungry no matter what. Last country supply dot com. Last country supply dot com it can be in your garage along with a piece of having it. When that kind of thing happens it's hard or they do that intentionally or not. But the best IP we had I don't want to say his name for fear of he died but his family he died out there with us. He was extremely brave. Really good kid. He was like 6-4 120 pounds. He arrived. He's weird looking around. It's like running into yowl mane but in it's like your brain is trying to compute like wait a second. He was a great guy. I really liked him. I remember one time we were sidying him where we were at on an OP or something and we tried to teach each other the languages. And he points to the tire on their technique on their truck and he says tire and I was like yeah good job. He's like no tire. I was like wait that's how you say it in Arabic. It's like this bonding moment. We were just all kids. You know arm wrestling and screwing off and punctuated everyone's well by war stuff. And I think that experience really matters. It's so easy to de-humanize people that you're fighting with at that level. And I think I was really blessed to have multiple experiences to remind me that they're all people. How long did you take you to recover from all that? They retired me about a year and a half later and then it took probably another eight years to get to where I could run. That I didn't think I was ever going to be able to run again. And in the hospital, which it took until you're almost 30. Yeah. Do you like a decade to get better? Yeah, it did. I think I was 28 when I ran the first time or seven maybe something like that might have been 29. Whatever whatever that year was. I 12 maybe I can't be right. Whatever year it was. Yeah, I mean I could get around but I couldn't really walk or anything. I mean I could walk but not well certainly not well for a 25 year old. And then I finally got to get up on the mountain again. I packed a cane on my back because I thought I couldn't know what going down is going to be like. And that felt really good to get up to a mountain lake and be like, oh shit, we did it after all this time. And then I was coaching a little kid's baseball program as a girl that I was with. It was her son's team. So I was just helping. And I was throwing BP to him and this kid hit a ball batting practice and this kid hit a ball to my glove hand side. And this was like eight years later or however many. I took a couple of steps that just felt different. Like they felt almost athletic if that makes sense. And I dropped my glove and I just jogged. I was like, I think I can run. And I ran around the bases. And then I called some of my buddies from the war and Casey and Johnny and a couple others. And Casey's like where's his emotion on his sleeve. So he starts crying. And I was like, like, go here feeling like seabiscuit or something. Did you just should have asked? Did you go immediately back to the West when you got out of the hospital? Oh yeah. Yeah, they moved me back to my hometown. And I got really lucky in that my civilian physical therapist and my civilian doctor were really great. I did that in central Utah. The one guy, my civilian doctor, he was an MDDO. So he leaned away from drugs really hard, which was a blessing because I was leaving Wal-T-Read. They had me on some ridiculous amount of opioids, like 380 milligrams a day or something. Longer you there. Four months. You're on opioids for four months. Oh yeah, longer than that. Well, so in the in-wall three to take us that back, we basically everybody who gets wounded over there was contracting this infection and they weren't sure it was some bug that does not exist here. So they had us in quarantine. So I was in a nice a quarantine ICU unit for three or four weeks because I couldn't leave ICU until one I was stable and two I could be in a wheelchair of some kind. And they couldn't do that without putting rods in my legs because I had external fixators on those big cage doals. And you can't get the rods until you clear the infection. So they were trying to clear this infection. And there was some question about whether they were even going to be able to do that. I mean, who knew? And they finally got that cleared. And then I developed gangrene. Come on. Yeah, they were I don't want to crap on Wal-T-Read, but they were doing some some guys were doing their best and other guys were what changed them through and through wounds with like the packing with like a number two pencil and shit like that. You know, they sent the United States at Wal-T-Read. Yeah, in DC. But a lot of them were really great people and I don't want to crap on them. I mean, they helped me put me back together and they did a pretty good job. But so then I got that infection. So I couldn't get rods then. You know, I'm just kind of stuck. You got gangrene at Wal-T-Read. Yeah, it was perfect. And then I finally they finally get rods in me. Just picture David from his face when you're saying this, you know, just casually access a evil. We're bringing democracy. No care at all for what it means for men from Southern Utah and like destroying their lives. It just makes me upset. And I was lucky. I mean, I could have lost my legs really easily. Did you get, I mean, how are your spirits? Did you get down? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I wrote a lot about that. You know, it was like a roller coaster experience at Wal-T-Read. But they first, it's a backup even one more step just to kind of give an idea of how fragile everything was at the time. They, I first went to landstool and my understanding and this could be wrong based on Germany. Yes, they're met. They have a big medical hospital there. And my understanding and this could be wrong. But what they would try to do in landstool is really get somebody very stable and do preliminary surgeries and then send them to Wal-T-Read. But they did not do that with me. They were like, we, we got to get you to Wal-T-Read. So I was only in law and store for less than a week, I think, is what it was. And so I was in tough shape as of the owners, I'm saying that. And you know, you're waiting. All I want to do is be able to go take a piss by myself, man. You know, you're a couple days ago, you'd been a proud young former athlete and soldier and now you're this, you basically in hospice care. And so yeah, it starts away on you. And I want them to get rods in my legs so I could get a wheelchair and have some sense of independence. But it can do that without clearing these infections. And then I finally get the rods in and they moved me up to a neural award next to some other guys that it had like the same bug before and then they put a label on your door. I think that's all necessary. I'm not, you know, you should say, hey, this guy had this weird bug. We don't want to spread it, you know, but I'm up there next to this other guy. And things are now it's better because I can talk to a guy, you know, at least room to room. You know, kind of hauling each other through the wall or, you know, the doorway and stuff. And I had a pulmonary embolism and it claps, I think is my left lung. And then right back into surgery, emergency, you know, they had to decide whether to put one of those IVC filter deals. And you're inferior vena cava, I think is what it is. I guess I'm not good at anatomy. It's largest for any of your body. And if it's like, if you think of like an umbrella without a skirt on it and then some extra wiring to work as a filter, that's what it is. But it would deploy it like this. And then it had some kind of legs that would then open up and stick into the vessel to hold it there and it would break up blood clots. Because what they were trying to figure out is if I had had, because I had deep vein thrombosis already, which is like blood clots in your legs, essentially. But they didn't, they weren't sure if I had had a claw originate in my lung or if it had traveled to my lung from my legs. So that's why they had to put that in. And then, you know, that was another, I can't even remember how long before I finally got into a position where they could even think about walking. And one day my, I'm pretty sure I wrote about this too. So I'm sorry if I'm retelling stories, but an uncle of mine came out and he was really close to me and we used to bow on fish together and then he got drafted by the Royal Society High School. And so he's coming in guy and I always looked up to him, you know, and he came out to visit. And he told them I was like, they don't think I'm going to be a lot, you know. And he said, bullshit. And I got a new young surgeon assigned to our team. Because at that stage, you've got, you know, you've got like multiple troma going on. It's like an actual surgical team that's like planning out what to work on next and triaging. And well, this guy got assigned on the orthoside and he was like 27 and right out of med school and really smart and just kind of a go-getter type guy. And he said, I think you can do it, but you're going to have to get on your feet like now. We don't want to risk after paying your muscles anymore. And you know, you're just going to have to start trying. So my physical therapist at Walter Reed, his name was Solomon. And he was like, this giant black guy. He played defensive end or something with Phil Sims on the New York Giants. And then he just did this as a job, I think, mostly to be a charitable guy. He was a really neat guy. So we go down there to PT. And he said, he can walk today. And I said, yeah, let's do it. You know, so he helped me up. And my bones is like, my right hand is all in this cast thing. And then I've got a like a soft cast. They put on my humorous because they were trying to let me have at least one ambulatory limb. So I just put up my arms on those parallel bars and however long those are 10 feet or whatever and walked down and then back. And I was like, shaken, you know, I mean, I hurt like hell. And anyway, I got to the end and then Solomon helped me to in my wheelchair. And he's got my arms draped around him like a prom date or something. He sat me down and I was my first time I walked. And yeah, and so it's like the peaks and valleys at that point you're, you know, you're riding really high. I'm going to make it kind of thing. You know, what's it like to be in a hospital for four months? Oh my gosh, it was the worst. And I was just thinking, I think the blood clot might have been right after that. Anyway, it's terrible. And I'm from a cow town, you know. And so I look outside and it's drab. And that area of DC is like Soviet block with our studio and yeah, it's the government built it all right right after during and after the the Second World War. And they did a terrible job. It's funny. Like, even we couldn't learn the lesson of proton converges. No, we just did it unashamedly. We copied it. Yeah. Just made Walter Gropius in charge of America's architecture. No, I know it's it's in all that war is what did it. And you're not invited to think about what that means. But I'm not fully aware of what it means. but there's something something about that war totally destroyed the spirit of the country. Good war. That is. Anyway, sorry. But your stuck there for four months. That's a what do you do? Like what's your day like? PT occupational therapy, watch dukes of hazards and king of the hill. You know, one time Brian Denne he came and the actor, we have really genuinely gray guy. He sat with me for hours. We were talking about the civil war and he said, uh, have you ever read Shelby Foot's trilogy? And I said, no. And he said, I'll be right back. And he went to a bookstore and brought me the trilogy, which was really neat. Brian Denne, the actor shows up at your bedside and then buys you Shelby Foot's civil war trilogy. Yeah, it was it was really great. So I had something to read. So that was, you know, helpful. But you had to wait for Brian 10 and you to bring it to you. Yeah, he was great. And I don't want to crap on too many people. Orn Hatch was very helpful. Despite our political disagreements, he was very kind man to me. He was a nice man. He was and very connected. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. He was able to get things down and a good guy. Um, yeah. So there, you know, there were people that were coming around, uh, trying to boost the spirits. Brad Paisley, he was his stepfather came one day and just sat with us for, you know, hours just because that's nice to talk to a normal person. Yes. You know, he was a wonderful man. Yeah. So it wasn't all bad, but I didn't sure as shit did not want to be there. You know, I wanted to go home. Uh, missed my grandpa, you know, and uh, I just missed home. And I don't, I enjoy God blessed us with tremendous beauty out there. And I try to appreciate it. You know, and I wanted to see it again. So what'd you do when you got home? So at this point, you're in your 21 or 22. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I uh, and the army severs your term. I mean, they discharge you, I guess. Not yet. Oh, uh, eventually, yeah, they were telling me before I retired, I was basically just doing outpatient care at the civilian hospital. And I was lucky. my PT guy used to be the PT guy for like the Olympic wrestling team. And I loved wrestling growing up. So it was a good connection. And, and of course he's good at what he's doing and it's seen a lot of young guys hurt pretty bad. So that's helpful as well. And uh, so it was just that and being depressed as hell. It was your professional patient at this point. You're still a soldier. Technically. But your job is to go to PT and it was not good. It was not good. Yeah. And in, in, in retrospect, that program was not a good idea. As much as I wanted to get out of there, it would have been, um, I think this bore out in the data. I don't think it was just me. But I would have been a lot more mentally healthy if they would have just forced me to stay, uh, you know, doing, oh, outpatient stuff at Walter Reed. Because then at least I'm around guys who get it instead of like my family that's, yeah, how could they possibly? It's not there for, um, I think that would have been better. But, but certainly I was happy to be out of there. So yeah. How long did it take you to get right mentally? Long time quitting payments was the biggest thing. What was that like? Realizing how bad it was fucking my sorry for cursing, um, realizing warranted in this case. You're allowed. Yeah, there's a certain family. I'm not too thrilled with either. Um, realizing that it was a problem like really messing my mental health up was motivation enough. And then my doctor was really great. What was it? What was it doing to your mental health? The opioids and the family you're referring to has got to be the sauclers. Yeah, I mean enough people are mad at me right now that I don't know how many more flights I want to be. But if you can't criticize America's richest drug merchants, then like what? I mean, at a certain point you have to like I'm sorry. It's just true, right? I had two friends die from opioids while we were recovering. You know, they drink some alcohol and die because, you know, your represses your ability to breathe. Of course, represses rather and then drink and pass out and die. So I was lucky that didn't happen. So yeah, I don't I don't care. But what is it due to your spirit? That's the one thing I don't think we talk about that very often. I had, I was an opioids for one day for back surgery a few years ago and I don't know if you get dependent. But the first thing I noticed was it just it transformed me inside and it crushes your spirit. That's one day of it and you were on it for how long? Years. You're not, you're definitely not the same person. You know, it's linked. It's just I have read. I don't allegedly also link to this suicide epidemic. Of course. It makes you a different person and I I try to be very careful about not pretending to be more pious than I am. But I do believe in spiritual war and I do think that there is really something to ingesting stuff like that. Like, I mean, something real, not just some chemical changes in your head. I could create more. Can you flush that out a little bit? Well, yeah, I think you should be very careful tempering with like allowing things into your body. You know, the the term spirits that originated because of my understanding of this is that that term came from people thought you were putting spirits into your body. Of course. And you probably are. Now, just being a liquor alcohol. Right. Yeah. Well, there's absolutely no question. So opioids are just that in a different form as what I would think. And you know, people get mad at me for this, but I think the same thing about other drugs. Like, if you're communicating with some entity because of something you've taken, I would, do I think I would take that pretty seriously because you you probably all hate it when you say that. I've done those drugs. So I feel like I have as a child. So I feel like I have some authority on it. And I was talking to a friend of mine. So I'm really, really, really like the other day about it. And he was talking about, you know, whatever, but trip taking those students for good reasons, by the way. But he said, I was visited by demons. And I said, do you think that they were real? Eddie. He goes, oh, no, they're real. You know, I'm not a, I try not to be a judge, judge or because I have no basis for judging other people period. However, I want to say, but if you think they're real, then maybe don't fuck with them at all. Like, that's not good. And that's scary. It's really scary. It's terrifying. Yeah. I mean, even, I went through an atheistic period. I'm deeply, genuinely deeply ashamed of that period of my life. I think I was mad at God more than not leaving. Sarah from Rose writes some stuff about this. I can't remember where, but he says, it's not that the atheist disbelieves in God. It's that he believes in God and doesn't understand him and is sort of therefore angry, of course. Certainly described me. Kind of prefer, I feel like the atheists have a better shot than the, than people just don't think about it. Sarah from Rose said, not that I want to speak for anybody here, but he says, in a follow up to that, he says something to the effect of those people are actually more your brother than the people whose Christ is only on their lips. Yeah. I mean, what do I know? But that sounds right to me. Yeah. So what was the effect of the opioids on your spirit? Oh, I'm sorry. You keep trying to get me to know. No, no, no, no, I just think it's interesting. And I rarely hear people talk about it. I there's a lot of talk about the effect of opioids on your respiratory system. No, it's dark and work. I think it's all important. And I'm not mocking it. However, the condition of your spirit may be more important than anything. And I never hear that discussed. Yeah. Well, you're not the same person. And I mean, that's what I mean with like bringing things into yourself. We use euphemisms like that. Like, well, I wasn't the same guy at that period of my life. Well, think about what that actually means. Like, what do you mean you weren't the same guy? You know, if you believe in body soul, spirit or body soul mind, however you want to think of it, what do you mean when you say you were not the same person? Because do I did your soul leave and go somewhere else? What do you actually mean? And I think what you mean is that you have, you have given controls the control of you over to someone or something else. I mean, that's the way I view it. And that can be wrong. And it would sound like an idiot or whatever. But that is the way that I view it. You don't sound like it at all. And you're clearly not wrong. And that's like a central piece of Christian theology. I mean, Paul says a great length in Romans. This is Paul. This is like the hero of the early church. This is like one of the after Jesus, the founder Christianity. And he's like, I do all these terrible things that I don't I don't want to do. And that's because the sin, when he's just got was sin is like taking control of me, like something from outside came into me and is making the decisions. You know, that's that. And I don't think that's far from the experience of every person who pays attention to his own behavior. Like you do kind of like, what is this exactly? Yeah, you always want to figure out what's animating you. And if you don't think about that, you're probably being driven by something. There's probably a reason you're not taking a step back to think about it. You know, so when you say what does it do to your spirit? I really believe that it's you've given control over to something else. And so it changes you in every way. You know, you become dishonest, angry, bitter, deep weed, depressed. And when I say angry, I mean at God, you know, there's a line in there somewhere where he says even the devil's prey. I think it's kind of like that. It's like what why would what is that? What are the devil's praying to God for? Because if we believe in a redemptive God, surely, and again, I don't want to get things wrong and God forgive me if I am. But if we believe in a redemptive God, then they're not praying to ask for forgiveness, or else maybe they would be able to get it. I don't know. So what are they saying in their prayers? Well, probably they're probably bitter, you know, saying, I cannot believe you do this to me or whatever it may be. I don't want to speak for that me there. And I want to be careful here. But I think the source of the bitterness, if the root of it is being angry at God. And I think opioids do that. And the minute I got opioids make you angry at God, I do think that I do. And drinking too much, I think does it. And definitely, you know, anything that makes you not you is going to lead to that eventually. In fact, like all sin, they say, again, I'm not I don't want to pretend to know things because I don't. But I think that the end result of all sin is ultimately angry at God. And what you're mad about is knowing what you have done. You know, so getting off of those. Let me just add a vehement amen to that. I totally agree. Thank you. And I don't understand anything either. That's for sure. And may I be punished for pretending I do because I don't. But what you're saying is I believe that's true. Yeah. So you get off opioids. What happens then? It was crazy about I don't want to miss remember here. I 10 days to two weeks later. It was so weird. Genuinely felt like a cloud had been lifted from my vision like like the world felt and looked different to me two weeks later. And I don't know how to describe it beyond. It just everything felt to some degree pretty again. And like that my mind actually worked again rather than just thought negative things all the time. I could I could like think about the things I cared about. And how long were you on them? Do you think? Probably like five years. Oh gosh. Yeah. What's the first half of your 20s? Yeah. When you're the dumbest person you're ever going to be on top of that. I had gotten to where I was taking way, way less. But I still like had, you know, I had those hooks. Yeah. And then just getting rid of them all. was taking way, way less, but I still like had, you know, I had those hooks. Yeah. And then just getting rid of them all together was totally life changing. And within like two years, all of a sudden I felt like the same person again. And I usually connect that. It's funny we're having this conversation because I never thought about it in these terms. I I usually connect that to being able to run and hike again and go and bow hunting. And And I wonder if it wasn't actually like the time away from that thing. I'm sure it mattered. Yeah. So I transformed you into a different person, totally different person. You said that you lost two friends from OD, uh, accidental, I guess OD. Um, but you must have known a lot of other people who were also on opioids for years. Did they recover? No. Oh gosh. I know one person. And I don't want to give too much information because I don't want to wipe her to see anything or something. But he looks like a different human being now. I mean, it's been so long. I saw a picture of him recently and I hadn't seen him for a couple of years. And I had to look at it for like five minutes because I just didn't even look like the same guy, you know. I have another family member that went through the same experience looks like a totally different human being now. The one friend who physically physically like face, you know, like a different guy. What are the part of my ignorance? Like what are the changes like for long term opioid use? I don't know. The look on them is like shrunken, you know, their eyes look different. Like deeply said, so it's not just a weight loss or gain. It's like deeper than that. I think so. Like this, like the spark is gone, you know, yes. It's their horrible drugs. I made my daughter when she was like 13. I made her sign a contract. We'd know to rise to it and everything. That's a net. So, typically, you clean your rifles when the boyfriend comes over. This is the next level beyond that. No, it's gone. And it's in my gun safe, actually. But I made her sign this contract that said she will not do any drugs, drink any alcohol or have any premarital sex till 21. And if she's able to do that, then I'll just give her $5,000 in cash. But if she's able to take that same thing, tell she's, I could not remember where I put 23 or 25, then I'll just give her $10,000 cash. To a 13-year-old, I mean, that's a lot of money to me. But to a 13-year-old, that's like your offer. And the reason for that is I've seen how dark that world is and how many, when it gets your hooks, those hooks in you at a young age, these are ruins, kids, I mean, ruins, some of them never, ever recover. And they're, we're otherwise going to be, they're good people at root. And they were otherwise going to be great productive members of society. And, and now they're just not, you know, just the anguish, the suffering that it causes. And you've talked about this before. But the, I mean, you can, this stuff is born out in data. You can see the dead on deaths of despair across rural America. Yeah. You know, you drive through rural America, we both live in rural places. And you see in people's houses, you know, there's certain houses that are just tidy, square it away. The cordwood is at right angles. And like you can tell, these are happy productive people. And, but there are as many homes with, you know, broken children's toys on the front lawn and that are just a disaster. And, you know, everyone's poor. It's not a matter of, but like those, you know, that's like depression, the disorganization, the chaos. I think that comes from drugs. Yeah. Yeah. Although my heart is a wreck right now. I'm ashamed of it. But I have three young boys and I've been caught up in some other BS from it. Well, but there's a difference between like the happy chaos of small children and the kind of, you know, multi year, just like, I just don't give a shit at all. Do you know what I mean? I know exactly what you mean. Yeah. The not caring is a sign of drugs. I've always thought. Yeah. Deep depression for sure. So what you do after so by this point, I mean, you said it was two years before you're head fully cleared. No. Oh, yeah. After you got off, dope. So that's, I'm just trying to do the simple math here. So you're 20 when you get wounded, right? That's 27th. I know. Yeah. And I had a divorce scattered in there and, you know, a string and broken relationships and, and then I finally started feeling really good and life was going well. And then I met a new girl and she's wonderful and my entire life changed by everything. I mean, it was already on that path. I wrote it wouldn't have worked with her. Because she's like a well put together person. And then I was like back to living the life of my youth. You know, when I first started dating her, I went down. My old man has back problems. It's like every person that's rode colds her whole life. He needed help. And I remember what he called me. He had this buckskin horse and he'd rode and he's like, well, you're younger and I was like, something like my body's in better shape than you're. But I wanted to do it. So I go down there and, and this is now I'm doing good in life and at least mentally and I get on this cold and we're doing good. And what my old man didn't tell me was that he had a, he would get scared when you go to get off. But my old man didn't want me to know that because he wanted me to kind of solve the problem for him. So I go to swing off and he starts buckin and it twists my knee pretty good. And anyway, that was my first time back on a cult like that. And then we go sit in the bunkhouse and have like a couple beers and you're just feeling really good. You know, like, wow, I'm like back to my real life. And so then I started riding colds again and I backed normal. And that's where I'm, I'm out now and I was guiding Hans for a while and Elle can deer and help with some lions and you talk a little bit and occasional bear, huh? And just, you know, back being a normal kid from the non-Western. And it's great. It's like really good. So how did you go? So that's an, I think you've taken the time to tell its story. How'd you go from there to like being on Sean Ryan's show and and like becoming a figure of, you know, public adulation and, you know, attacks as well. Like you become this like polarizing figure. How'd that happen? I there's two pieces to it. I got involved in public lands advocacy around 2015 or 16. There was this. There had been this push. The public lands initiative, which was like a different version of the same thing. Like Rob Bishop, who I think is otherwise a good guy. And, you know, some other names were involved in that. And I just got involved with some organizations and learn more about it. And the more I've learned, the more my opinions have shifted, you know, more into the direction of conservation, not less. So that's kind of the root of that. And then I've spent like, I've spent like five years on Twitter arguing with people. I mean, they will write, they would write me like horrible emails over the public lands thing. And these are right wing people. Like you're pretty liberal. Yeah. It's just incredible. It's like my own side. Very angry at me. Oh, I've been there. Yeah. And then something flipped this time. Oh, but I should tell you how the Twitter platform I had been doing keynotes for a long time as source of income. And I enjoy doing depending on the group. But it made up about 25% of our annual at the time. And I had guided this guy from a big construction company in California. Really good guy. I guided him on a hunt and saw their new town. Got to be friends with them. And then he wanted me to speak as a keynote at this construction conference in Las Vegas, a real big one. So I've been booked for that. And then this freaking COVID thing starts happening. And it's evolving in the news in real time. And I'm supposed to leave on like Saturday morning to go speak on Monday. And he texts me at like 5 p.m. West Coast time on Friday. And says, bro, they canceled the whole thing. Like not just speeches, but like the entire conference. And it's hard to blame anybody for doing that at the time, given the way the machines were or the mechanisms were turning. So I had been very careful with my right wing opinions publicly for years because I wanted these people to still hire me to I mean, you know how the, you know, that, you know, bankers and things like this. They don't like people with opinions like me. So they don't hire people like me. No, speak to a lot of tech organizations. And you can imagine how that would go if you're a right wing. In fact, one time, I'm sorry, I'm doing the Trump weave. One time, a gal had hired me and she's really wonderful person. She comes up to me after a speech and says, this is really great. Everybody's really happy. But could you lean less on the like you have to learn how to pull yourself up message because that sounds too much like bootstrapping. And that's a right wing thing. I'm serious. So that made me paranoid about sharing my actual opinions on anything. So I would never talk publicly. And then this COVID thing happens. And I had created a Twitter account while we were night, we were night cabin in the fall on the fall herd. And we, this friends ranch, they have like a Frito truck that they built into like a cabin like they took the lid on or the top off and like made a cabin cabin out of it. So we're in the Frito truck. And I created a Twitter and I get on there. And I say something to a left wing politician and it kind of got some traction. I was a co-crap on Dewey to do it. You know, because I'd made it with my real name. And I thought I could just like slide in there slowly. But that was in, you know, like September. So I do, I do eat it all my tweets and then just didn't even use it anymore because I was scared that wasn't getting it hard. Well, when this COVID thing happened, that one got canceled. And then the next one, the next one. And then, you know, you start getting emails. It's like all seven or eight that we had scheduled for the year got canceled like within a week's time. And so I just got on Twitter. I told my wife, I said, you know what, forget, I'm just going to tell people what I really think about things. And somehow that grew into it's not a large platform, but a platform. And then you end up on Sean Ryan, you know, like interesting. So this one, I would just say on the outset, I'm completely 100% on your side, probably for the same reasons on this question. But it is one of those rare issues where it doesn't break down along left and right at all. And I probably should have asked you to explain what the issue is an hour and a half into this or whatever. I haven't even asked you, what is the public land? What's the, what's the divide on public lands? What are public lands? What does some people seek to do with public lands? And what's your view of that? We, so this one organization I was with for a while, I implored them to not let this become a liberals who hunt kind of thing or else we're going to lose. It made, we were, they were trying to evangelize the left on public land protection measures, which is just dumb. Because at the time, there was zero aggression coming from left. It was all from the right. And I said, just let me message this. I understand right wing people. What's I am one? Like let me do this. And they wouldn't. So I think a, a sizable portion of the land belongs on the left for the way they've treated public lands over the years. What they have done is they, first of all, their central ethos is just they don't like you Oh, 100%. So they don't want you on the land exactly where your dogs on the land. They don't, they don't, oh, I have dealt with it. Yeah. They want to build like a Truman show and you can get on like electric train and look at it or something. Right. And then the right wants to sell it. And so that's kind of the crux. So that's not so, oh, that's so good. The left wants to turn nature into a Truman show experience where you get an electric train and view it and the right just wants to sell it. That is like the, that's just perfect. Well, and we want to say we, I mean, better men from older times figured out the correct compromise to this problem. And it's basically what we have as a status quo right now. Yeah. The multiple use mandate, you know, and what is that? That got established in 76 under a flip model, which is the federal land policy and management act of 76. But that had rolled lots of older conservation laws into one into kind of one thing and established a very clear multiple use mandate. In fact, I think it's the very first paragraph of the bill. And the multiple use mandate says this, these lands are held in trust for the American people for hunting, recreating, grazing, and extraction of all forms. Just whenever it makes sense. I mean, we can't go clear cut the redwoods. I don't think anyone would even, well, people would advocate certain people would advocate for that. But I don't think anyone's doing that right now. But there are other places that we should be logging and we can, you know, figure this out. Yeah, you can manage the forest. Yes. And by the way, you should. It's a better forest when it's managed sense. I mean, I have a lot of experiences. It's like, it's great. Yes. If it's done wisely, prudently, like it's good. Exactly. And maybe the best example of what you're talking about here is the whole spotted owl stuff. Yep. They label the spot. So there's the Endangered Species Act of, I think, 73 Nixon signed it. And we basically put into, we put into effect some of the most forward thinking in this kind of way. I hate how the left is ruined use for words. Oh, I know. But we instantiated very powerful protections on the main goal is we don't let species die here because we as a people think that that would be a sin because God made them. That's the way I view it. And I think that's what that's how Nixon thought. Well, the spotted owl comes in and the claim, so they made it threatened. And the claim was that this owl needed old growth in order to survive. It couldn't survive in second growth or new growth. And second growth is like something that's been cut down replanted. And then right after you whack the forest, this is what comes up. It's very thick and yep. And they had said that they can't survive that way on and on. Well, the loggers were saying, we see these things in second growth all the time. What the hell are you talking about? And so then we end up with, I believe it's called the Northwest Forest Plan. And that was in the early 80s from memory early 80s when that happened, if I'm remembering correctly. And that locked up something like 56 million acres and just killed timber towns all through Washington, Oregon and hadn't effect on Northern Idaho and destroyed. Yeah, Western Montana. Yeah. And then it turned out down the road that the loggers were right. That spotted owl was living in the second growth stuff. And it actually was not the harvest that was killing off. It was the some other kind of owl whose name escapes me was out competing it. Yeah, it was intra owl competition. Yeah. And it was an invasive owl. It's good. So they're probably a Chinese owl. Right. I know there are some loggers who think they did that on purpose. And knowing the way seeing the way I don't want to be too conspiratorial, but it would not shock me if one day we learned that people were doing that on purpose because what they actually hated was loggers. Oh, I know they don't love trees. They just hate loggers. Oh, they don't love trees. No, they cut down the trees to put a solar farm in in a second. Yeah. In places where the sun doesn't shine very much. No, they hate trees because they hate God and they hate God's creation. Of course, it's never about saving nature, they're destroying nature. They're spraying chemicals into the atmosphere to manage the weather and poisoning the I mean, look, these are the enemies of nature. Usually offshore wind farm people, which yeah, those wreak havoc. Oh, my gosh on the fishery, of course, they don't care. So they're not for nature and don't ever allow a professional environmentalist to tell you he loves nature. You know, I mean, I'm sure there are some who do, but but in general, the environmental lobby is opposed to the environment. You know, yeah, totally exceptions and rules, right? And the exception doesn't make the rule. Well, so that's kind of where we're at, but then if you look at what happened here more recently, and this is important for understanding how we got to this new push for sauce around 2016 or so a lot was happening right then because P.O.I. and some other things, but around then some environmental groups really born out of scientists at universities who actually do care regardless of what people try to tell you a lot of those people actually do care. I mean, they've recovered all kinds of species because of these people. You know, he LaTrowd and Blackfooted Farid and the great or sage grouse, you know, these people do care that well, they come up with a science-based management plan for this because the environmental groups were pushing and saying, you can't do any oil and gas, oil and gas extraction and sage grouse country. You'll kill off the sage grouse. Well, these scientists come up with this plan and say, don't list the don't list these things as threatened. What if you, Mr. oil and gas company, give us, you know, work with us on this plan. We think if you do it this way, it can be done without just killing off the sage grouse. So the oil and gas companies give some concessions and then they do and what do you know? Like they worked. And yeah, oil and gas is still being extracted and the sage grouse have recovered. Yeah, that's really good sage grouse. So we now, we have people who can solve these problems. But if you look at the way, the right wing, the tools that they use are the levers that they use to kind of pry on the right to get them behind so offs is like, well, you're going to get locked out of it by this thing or that thing. They're going to come spotted. I owe you, you know, well, we figured out a solution to that. And as long as we keep doing that, there's just absolutely no reason to give up our birthright. So what is the idea about selling federal lands? Like what, I mean, there was a recent proposal, which I think more than any other person you killed by bringing attention to it, really hated by some people for that. But just leaving the people out of it, like what was the idea? What was the proposal? It changed a bunch of times. But the proposal was the way it was being sold was, hey, we're just trying to get rid of 0.5% of this land. But that's not how it was originally written. Originally, it was like a mandatory sell off of 0.5% of the land. And then like 249 million other acres to be evaluated, something like that, which means that's a floor with no ceiling. Now, why do they want to sell it off? My gut tells me minerals, but I don't know. Sell it off to home. Well, I don't know. They're not telling you. And we do a lot of oil and gas and mineral extraction on public lands right now. But a thing that I think viewers need to understand is when they do it on public land, there's a royalty paid back to both state and federal government. But if you own the mineral rights or the subsurface rights altogether of your property, you're not paying a royalty. I'm sure you're paying taxes, but you're not paying a royalty whatsoever. How does that work? Well, it's if you own the rights. I mean, this is like private land. You're trying to land. I'm sorry. Yes. Okay. So this is a part. If you own the mineral rights, you own the minerals. Well, and so if you're the original thing was we're trying to balance, I mean, that's how they got it in a budget reconciliation bill, right? As we're trying to balance this budget, we need a little cash flow here. That's what this is for. Well, why would you sell the mineral rights then? Wait, wouldn't you keep the mineral rights? If what you were trying to do is solve the debt problem, wouldn't you keep that asset on your portfolio? If, well, yeah. And they didn't. So I think that the, I think there are large. They didn't. So they were going to sell the land with the mineral rights. So that means the state and federal governments would never benefit from the extraction past the sale. That was what the fine. That is how the final iteration read to me. And I think to everybody else that, you know, plus it's a 900 page bill. So you're feeding it to chat GPT, you know, and trying to figure out where the stuff is. And I think the most of the public land stuff was on like page 202 or something. So what would, well, that's interesting. So that, I mean, that kind of proves that it's not about solving the debt with sale of public resources. No, and that they use to term fair market value in there. Well, on a lot of these, I mean, you've been to Southern Utah on a lot of these chunks that they were trying to sell off the fair market values like 500 an acre. I mean, you're not going to buy 500 an acre. Yeah. I mean, it's alkalized soil with like almost nothing as far as a bunch grass as it supports an ecosystem. But it, you know, to run, to make it produce, if you're thinking in terms of GDP, which I sometimes I feel like this is all those people are capable of. This is unproductive and unless you're a lizard farmer. Yeah. Yeah. So fair market. So that establishes that it's definitely not about the debt because you're either pulling money out of the coffers or selling it off for next to nothing. So this is not about the debt. It's about something else. And this is why I think minerals at one level or another was there any restriction on who could buy it? They had said, I'm trying, you know, that there was like seven iterations of that. And I'm trying to remember what the last one said about that. But I don't think so. I don't think there was any kind of guardrail. And I think Utah has like 34,000 acres owned by the CCP already. I read that seriously. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if that's true, but I read it on Twitter. So it has to be. But there is foren ownership of land in Utah. Yeah. Well, in Canada, I think they own, I think they're the largest foreign owner of agricultural land like Tilibull in the US. And then, you know, Saudi owns freaking ton of stuff down in Arizona. And they're putting all kinds of guys out of business down there. Like they'll punch a deep well because they've got money lower the aquifer. And then the rancher guy, he can't afford a thousand foot well. So in the area, but they buy up his stuff because now it's dry. So there's all kinds of conflicts spread out across this region. I just can't see why you wouldn't want to limit having more of that problem. But it doesn't. Why wouldn't Congress pass a lawsuit? You can't have foren ownership of land in the United States. You can't sell the country to other countries. And that's, I think the primary question I don't understand that at all. So far as I'm aware, I can't buy property in Canada, right? Unless I become a Canadian citizen. Yeah, a lot of Americans, I own property in Canada, sold it because I was worried about all this kind of thing. But certainly, you can't buy Mexico, there's a channel, right? So no, I don't understand why. I mean, that just seems like a real easy fix. Foreigners don't get to own our country. So pretty happy to have you can do whatever come on vacation here. You're great. We love you, but you can't own our country, right? Right. Yeah. The recreation, the last number I read, was $1.2 trillion contributed to our economy through outdoor recreation. Yeah. That's extraction by another means. It might not be pulling oil and gas out of the ground, but that's still a form of extraction. You're extracting wealth off of the thing. I mean, right. And with the multiple use mandate, now you're doing both. It's like best of both worlds. You're, you're maximizing value in that way, you know? So, so why should I mean, this has been this we both acknowledge kind of a partisan issue. You referred to liberals who hunt. I think there can't be more than eight of those. But there was this effort in the last 15, 20 years to like create these astroturf groups, you know, hunters for Kamala, but it's always hilarious. Yeah. Learning the shotguns are the muzzle kind of. But, but there are also more serious efforts to do that where these are clearly fake groups and they're trying to subvert something here. So, that's it's all real, but it's kind of axiomatic. I think that like hunters, some fishermen, ranchers, people of train horses, like these are not Kamala Harris voters. These are almost all conservatives. So, why would you as, you know, a product to that world, so many shares, the values that world, why would you be all of a sudden on the side of like not selling public lands? Why is this a kind of, why do you have a conservative position on public lands? I fundamentally, I think I've said this before. I'm not sure. So forgive me, but it's, I love my people. Yep. I mean, that's why. I mean, I love the land, but my people don't exist without the land and small ranches. Wait a second. If the country's an idea, as long as you have that idea, you're part of it. No, I won't. Sorry. I think we probably have your he on this one. I said this elsewhere too, but some people on Twitter will say it's not magic dirt. You know, yeah. And I understand what they mean when they're saying that, but it is magic. 100% magic dirt. I completely agree. Yeah. I keep some in my travel bags. I can sniff that one out of the country. No, I mean, for real. That's cool. Well, yeah. But why, why do you, why do you, so flesh that out if you don't mind? I think you have to start at the, I believe America as a people, I believe the ethnogenesis of that happened on our frontiers. I, if you, at least, you know, history is a thing that's interpreted. So people get mad when I talk about history sometimes, and I'm like, okay, well, this is my interpretation of it. Fuck off. You know, like, this is the way I see it. The revolutionary war was in some ways a very European war. I mean, we, you know, we kind of did some guerrilla stuff. So that was a new invention in terms of The Revolutionary War was in some ways a very European war. I mean, we kind of did some guerrilla stuff. So that was a new invention in terms of European people doing stuff to a degree. But it was kind of a civil war between Anglo peoples. Yes. But then something happened as we, you know, from Manasseh Color in the Ohio River Valley to the 49ers where we developed as a people out here. You know, if you stop somebody on the street in New York City and you said, well, maybe not there now because it's like 60% foreign-born pick up an actual American city or you're not traveling internationally and stop Americans on the street and ask them what it means to be an American. They're going to say things like hard work, perseverance, you know, grit, love of country and county and all of that. They're going to use all of these ideas that actually tie back to knowing what our people went through crossing those planes, you know, fighting Indians and fighting, you know, Mexicans and then the Brits again and you know, the Spanish and all of this, you know, all of that stuff fed into where we finally somewhere, I don't know exactly when I don't think I could put a pin in it. But at some point, we became a people that are Americans. We never describe ourselves in the same way as it seems like Europeans do to me. And so I think that's a very important piece of this. And I also think it's somewhat ironic that the area where the frontier closed is now like the primary source of the people trying to kill the country off. And then another thing, why do you think that is? I don't know. Well, resentment, leftism, I think leftism is animated by dark things. I don't think every leftist is a bad person, but I think that that belief system is fundamentally animated by envy and that's like the earliest story in the book. And hate, yeah. So I think it's that. I don't think it's too much more complex than that. Think about the Civil War, the reconstruct the period of reconstruction. It had there not been the pressure relief valve of the frontier. We would have fought it again because that boot on the neck of those proud southern people was not going to last forever if they don't have somewhere to go. And we have towns in Idaho that were established by Confederates. And they had had enough of that shit. And so I think it's an important part of our identity, a very important part of our identity. So I think in many ways this entire, I'm sorry, I'm doing such a bad job addressing your actual questions. I'm like pontificating over here. Well, I think to describe what you're saying requires what you're saying, which is it's part of like a multi 100 year story and evolution. Yes. And it's also one of the reasons that the country was able to assimilate people from different parts of Europe had no, he's been friends. I mean, the Irish and the English. You know what I mean? Totally. And like the true melting pot was was Europeans from like non-friendly countries didn't have that much in common actually. I know now they're all white people, but the English and the Irish didn't feel that way. Right. And but they were able to come together and build this amazing country. And but I think it's through the process that you're describing like that that really is America. Absolutely. And then now as a modern people, there's no, there is absolutely no way like small ranches. A lot of them are running like 90% of their ground on public allotments and 10% on deed. And it's been this way for a very long time. Like basically since the Taylor Grazing Act, which was I think 36, 1936, another one of these things that rolled lots of laws into one, but it essentially protects the right for Americans to graze on these public grounds to protect the cattle industry, small family farms. And on that 10% of deed today, Grisjuleshwar, I'm from much of that is going to be like their alfalfa, their hay production for the winter. And then of course a pasture to feed on in the winter. So my people from just won't exist anymore without this. And some people say, well, then after then this is welfare for rich people who are scraping by. If you want to call it welfare, I don't add all view it that way. But these people are scraping by the margins on cattle or thin. And if you kill Grisjuleshwar, and we are all over. Everyone in the country is on welfare at this point. And people who are paying half the tax rate that you are through the Carrot Interests loophole, that's not welfare. I think it is. People who are taking their income as dividend interest, interest income, and paying half the rate of people who work for a wage. I don't know. I mean, what? All of these things are aimed at the same group, which is legacy Americans. So they're shorted of everything. I don't think that's an accident. No. My family went out there in the 1930s, the 1830s, not the 1930s. Well, the 1830s. Yeah, I think I think 36 somewhere around. 1836. Yeah, they moved out a lot of more Mormons. So pre-door dash. So 47 is when the Mormons got to Utah. But a lot of them started that journey west back around that time, like from Connecticut, New England area, started in New York. Yeah. Most of my family has been here since late 1600s, but they were over here, Yankee-type people. And then they moved, I don't mean that as a pejorative. That's where they were at. In New England. And so yeah, it means a lot to me in that sense. But another thing, the people who are not connected to this industry should think about, we have less than 90 million beef cattle in America right now. Our herds are beef herd is smaller than it was in like 91, like 1991. How? Can we go off small? Not like almost 100 million more people. Maybe 100 million. I mean, because they're so much lying about population. Because there's so many illegal aliens here. But we have a much larger population than we had in 1991. Yeah. I mean, what is it? Like 330 million or something? I mean, I'd say 360, but like go outside. I know it's insanely crowded. So there's just as with GDP and inflation and every other relevant number from which we make decisions about how to run the country. It's a lie. Population is I think the biggest of all lies. Now we're saying, I mean, three years ago, we've got 10 million illegal aliens. We've had 10 million illegal aliens for 30 years. And now since Trump got in, they're like admitting, I think it's more like 60 or 65 million illegal aliens for nationals living here in violation of our law. So anyway, no, no, pardon the lecture, but like I agree with we've got more than 330 million people in the United States. Yeah. And that ties into this whole idea of a housing shortage. Someone said, well, illegals are not impacting housing. And what's that? I don't mean this. The leftists were saying this. And one of my buddies had such a good way of countering that. He said, I don't know. I assume these motherfuckers live inside. Yeah. So I'm sorry. That's, yeah. So food security is a national security risk. I think you hexeth even endorse this idea recently, the food security is national security to a degree of course, food water energy. Those the building blocks of any society, such civilization, food water energy. And if those, you don't have though, I mean, that's why people go to war. That's why populations, that's what migration is about. I mean, everything is about those three things. And but only in America that's been rich for so long, we'll be like, no, it's really about self esteem or, you know, or what? No, it's about food, water and energy. Right. And you think, so our beford is smaller than it was 35 years ago. Yeah. So why is it zepers, oh, it's a lot of it is yeah, import imported beef and the artificial deflation of prices. And due to illegal immigrant labor, you know, every time they go to one of these packers, it's like 1600 arrests, you know, those are the whole plant is illegal. Yeah. And you're not going to tell me these people don't know they're doing that. And then yeah, I think there's about, I think 30 plants in the US process 80% of the beef in this country. So now you've got, you're also sort of as a byproduct putting your old local butcher out of business, he can't compete anymore with like $6 hamburger and a tube from Walmart that's got 70 animals packed into it. He can't compete with that either the local guy can't. Yeah, it's a huge problem. And then if you add on sell off a public lands and squeeze the last of these guys, they're hanging on with their small family ranch, and they're not going to get better. What role is immigration play in the story? I mean, it's fundamental at both legal and illegal. I think I would say to right wingers, so I really try to think about these are of low population states. They're high land mass, but the density population densities is extremely low. I think Wyoming, I've said this elsewhere, but I think Wyoming has around 300,000 voters, but that was 300,000 people voting for Trump, which means we don't know what the next turnout would be because he is a once in a lifetime figure. There's only one of that guy. So presumably there's going to be less and the next election cycle who knows? Well, 50,000 new votes, if you sell us off and fill it up with illegal or legal immigration, whether it's H1B, H2B, whatever, I guess those people aren't voting, but aren't voting. Yeah. And then illegal is just important of whatever variety. There's not a ton of electoral votes there, but it is. We said the idea was to take public lands and build housing for immigrants on them. Wow, they say not, but there's a crap load of money going into immigrant resettlement in the West. I said it's everywhere, but Rando land on Twitter, go look at that. And you can see these grants for yourself. It's like 4 million, 15 million, 50 million, whatever. We're going to all these different NGOs and state governments to bring to put refugees like I see burkas and Idaho falls now. What? I know falls was in southeastern Idaho. Always, I think it was the most Mormon town in the United States, surely the most Mormon city in the United States. I had to be up there. Yeah. I had to be like that in Provo or whatever, old Provo, not new Provo, but you see burkas there? Yeah. And this is another thing, I always you call it a racist. And I don't have to hate someone to not want to be replaced by them or how my children replaced by them. I don't hate people still calling you racist. I'm like, yeah, she has still. Oh, it's just incredible. Boy, that's 2,000, so 2021. I know. Yeah, that word's so shut up. But I know. But I don't. And also here's an important thing to this. That person in a burka did not choose to live in Idaho Falls, where it's 40 below for a week of year. You know, they moved here from whatever desert. And now they're living in some of the harshest climate in the US and choose that someone put them there. And then you have to ask yourself why someone would put them there. I've seen a lot of it. Yeah. What's empty there? refugee camps of Somali refugees in Kenya and fly them to Lewiston, Maine, an impoverished dying, milltown full of French Canadians. Just see how that works. Yeah. And didn't work. No, of course not. And I love my people. And I don't want I don't want them to be replaced. But from just a basic in terms of politics, practical level, if you flip these states in the West, you're done. You're not winning another. You're not beating the left with the electoral college, not without Wyoming, Utah, to some degree Nevada. Like if you lose all of those, if they all go the way Colorado did, it's going to be over. Yeah. And Colorado is such a Democrat. It's like a firmitively evil. We'll take your kids away unless you've let them become trainees kind of thing. It's like it's it's a place that Christians are having trouble living. It's so anti Christian in Colorado. And some of the best people on earth live there. All right, couldn't do very well. But I'm just saying it has ramifications. It's not just that like, oh, they get, you know, they had a sort of conservative center now. They have a short, a liberal center. It's like, you know, when the revolution comes, they're not joking at all. They're not it's not like what we're going through now where it's like, do a Fox News hit and, you know, we're fighting the liberals. Okay. No, it's like, you can't live there anymore if you believe in God. So they are you familiar with the wolf reintroduction out there and very familiar. Yeah. And you know who's driving that and it's not working and look at where they put them. They did it via referendum that one by one percent. So the front range voted to dump wolves on ranching communities is what they did because they hate them. I mean, that's why why do they hate them because the ranchers are just so mean or just hate the idea of them. Man, you know, sometimes a left is just hysterical by nature. So it's hard to know if they've just been propagandized into spirit independent minded white Christians are the enemy. When they hate Russia, it's what they hate the ranchers. I mean, let's be honest, let's stop lying. Yeah, I think that's probably it. And then they also think the cows are destroying the climate and so beef production is a great evil despite the fact that beef have largely reoccupied the ecological niche that bison used to. So you have to replace those with something. I think you're actually giving them too much credit by trying to be rational. It's like they don't think that, you know, Jeff Bezos' G4 fleet is wrecking the environment, but they do think that cow flatulence is they they pick the group they hate and then they backfill the justification for crushing them. So it's climate. We hate the ranchers because of climate. No, they hate the ranchers because of who they are. I agree. I mean, obviously. So is so the idea was that this land was going to be used for housing. I mean, that's what they told us. But if you why wouldn't you just kick out the 60 million people here illegally between that and the hard something like 16 to 18% of homes in Utah are owned by investors. It's like, well, the sake had passed a law that would solve this problem real fast, you know, like, I don't I'm not against anyone making money. And I'm not one of these hate people because they're rich. I've got a friend of mine who's a billionaire is a nicest guy in the world. He does all kinds of good for people. One of the best people I've ever met. Uh, so it's not that, but also, I mean, I'm not going to filate people who are trying to ruin me for greedy, greedy reasons. You know, I'm not going to, they are not my friend clearly and they feel the same way right now. Um, sorry to be in fidgety my back is stiff. But uh, so it's not about housing. If it were about housing, there are solutions to that. And what they're not doing that, whether they're trying to, you know, I don't want to impune motives, but it ain't housing. It's not. They're trying to do something else. Oh, and then from a legal perspective, I'm nearly certain of this. Please correct me if this is not right, but when you are building a affordable housing like apartments and condos or whatever, uh, that comes with stipulations. And I think part of that is that land has to be sold for very cheap to the developer. And it's like 50 acres, not, you know, three million. I mean, how many acres do you need? What kind of apartment complex or we're building over here? You know, three million acres. It's very clearly not about affordable housing or your kid in his ability to buy house. So here's the problem that I have within why I'm so grateful that you have done what you've done and why I want to talk to you is I'm worried about what the end stage of our debt crisis looks like. So when you're in debt to a lender, that debt is secured with assets. So you take a car loan, your loan is secured by your car. Same with a home mortgage. They could take your house. United States is trillions in debt to a bunch of different countries and investors all over the the world, but Japan, China, South Korea, et cetera, Europe. What and we can't pay it, obviously. And so how we make good on that debt? Well, what is the United States? The United States is a continental size land mass that has some of the most valuable resources in the world, which would include the largest body of freshwater in the world that great lakes, which would include some of the biggest oil and gas deposits energy and which would include some of those productive farmland in the world. So I'm really concerned that at some point sounds stupid now, but at some point not so far in the future, it would be like, well, actually the Chinese own like superior. I'm sorry. I know me too. And they're oil and gas fields and the nation itself. And so if you set up, I don't think that's crazy at all. Like in the end, the US dollars joke and everyone knows that. It's backed by nothing. So like what do we have? Well, we have federal lands actually land minerals, water. And I just don't think you want to set up set the precedent in motion where you could just sell those if you needed to because they don't belong to the current occupants of the White House or Congress. They just don't belong to the people. Correct. And another thing they lie about is the actual numerical value of that land. Oh, yeah. There was a number floating around 100 trillion they were saying. And I kept thinking, how on earth did you get to 100 trillion? That just does not make sense. Just a round number. So I started plugging in to, you know, calculate or like, let's see what this would actually work out to. And if you sold at fair market value, every piece of federal land in Idaho, it'd be like 110 billion. That is not going to touch the national debt in any serious way. Not to mention now you're losing all the other revenue streams that come from that. Of course. So I just it's not, I don't believe it's about debt. I think if you did it all by, if you did it all, let's say you could get to 6.2 trillion if you did 10,000 an acre or something like that. It's I'm having a hard time remembering what I came up with, but six trillion has a crap load of money. But we spent 2.2 or whatever it was in the CARES Act a couple of years ago. I mean, that's in the grand scheme of the way we spend. That's not a lot of money. And now the everyday guys just losing. What are you doing? I mean, are you going to retreat from public life having achieved your goal? Well, I don't know. I don't think it's over. It is in fact they're already pushing forward again. I started my friends and I started a thing called the Sage Roche Institute and it's just kind of a small brain trust of people that are much more qualified than me. And we're, we're just going to do the best that we can to message and get these ideas out in front of people. I take no money from it. We don't even have a bank account right now. It's absolutely in no- My kind of foundation. Yeah. We in no ways at about money. We collect the emails and we're just trying to disseminate information because I think we need a lot more than one voice out on this stuff. Because here, like here's an example, the everyday American here is, well, why don't we just do a new homesteading act? And that sounds good. You know, that'll take care of our kids. No, it won't. The all that, first of all, the very last iteration of homestead acts, I think the average more than 50% of the people that claimed land on that left it after two years. Yeah. So you're just doing a sell-off with a slight delay if you do that. I think they've this in Zimbabwe. Yeah. How long we homestead act? Rodeja, you know. I think. So we're just going to try to pass information as best as we can and also help. I think we have a golden opportunity right now to do two really important things. One, reshape the narrative and make conservation cool on the right wing again. I think Zumers have been let down by everyone. Their whole life. That is like constantly getting screwed by someone. And we got a win here and we cannot let them down. We want to help them keep stacking wins here. Like we want to be something that doesn't end up screwing them in the end. So the next time they push, you know, we can help Zumers. And if we can shift this narrative with Zumers, Zumers, and tell them like, this is yours, man. This belongs to you. regardless of what people tell you, this is yours right now. You can go to Burch Creek Valley and Idaho right now and go camp and fish and do whatever you want. Get off your ass and go do it. It'll be fun, you know, and it's yours. Experience it. If we can get them to understand that, then that is a huge accomplishment for posterity in the future because then they'll want to protect it forever. And that'll give us at least until they have grandchildren, which would be great. And then the second thing I think we have a real opportunity to do is shift the narrative and science back to people who actually want to do real science. I think COVID for righteous reasons made a lot of people very skeptical of any expert class. And I mean, I am one of those people. But there are scientists out there who genuinely really want to save this stuff. That's the guy that's trying to save the healer trout or whatever. Exactly. So I think we can help them establish some more credibility. Like, no, we actually, we are scientists not me, but them as scientists don't actually want to pave over the Mojave Desert. No, you know. So we have an opportunity to shift two narratives that are really important. If we can do that, then I think we've got another couple generations of security from my children and your children and grandchildren. And that's what I care about. So that's what we're going to do. It's not an accident that the most articulate voice in this debate is you and you spend the most amount of time outside. And maybe part of it is convincing people that nature is more compelling than porn or video games or anything that's happening on your phone. And I mean, the decline in hunting and fishing licenses nationally as much as I so enjoy being alone. I don't have to be for a spot because there's nobody there. I do think that's ominous, right? Oh, yeah. It's terrifying. Yeah, people don't even know what public lands look like. Right? I mean, it's hugely important. Yeah, that one is there's a lot of advocacy groups that are trying to get people into boat and like get into bow hunting and stuff like that. I think that's great. And we should try to do more of that. And then just think of like shooting, how many kids are going out shooting on public land? I've seen this weird narrative every once in a while where guys will be like, they won't even, they don't even let you out there to shoot. The leader of a huge gun rights organization tried to tell me this a couple of days ago. And I was like, first of all, why the hell are you trying to fight with an ally? And then secondly, what are you talking about? That's everyone shoots on that stuff all the time. So even things like that matter, like go out and take your bear 15 and go shoot a bunch of rocks. You know, have a good time at a distance. So because of ricochets. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Don't shoot one for feet away. Don't Adam Kinzinger your buddy. Never happened to him. I don't know. Does he still exist? Adam Kinzinger. Oh, I hope he I hope he's happy. Said guy. There was a funny, my brain is doing a squirrel thing, but one of the funniest tweets I ever saw. I don't mean this guy disagree at times, but right after that, first thing in the morning, Josh, all he tweeted, I wonder who Loomis will shoot today. Like an hour about the, but yeah, we need to get those kids engaged. And there are some college programs that do this kind of thing. A friend of mine runs one of these at a university in the West, takes kids out and teaches them how to hunt ducks and you know, food and so we need to do much, much more of that. And that's important as well. And then I wonder what thing I guess if I could say, and I apologize, I'm so bad at answering your questions directly. Oh, I love it. I can understand why someone from Maine would be thinking right now, well, I'm never going to see that. Why do I care? And there's one answer I think I would give to that that no one else does is we are union. And even if you don't want to come out and enjoy the land that is yours, helps support us because we support you with various policies that help protect your fisheries in your way of life up here. And we are union. So, you know, we help you, police help us back kind of thing. Same thing with like I've heard other people say this and it's true with like the Farm Bill, which is just although it's like 60% snap now, but the Farm Bill helps, you know, a guy and I will or whatever. You know, and that's Farm Bill 60% food stamps. Oh, I think it might even be more than that. It might even be more. I don't think the real threat is around. I'm just saying. I mean, that's wow, that's sad. It's horrible. So if people want to learn more about you and about these debates and I think anyone has made it two hours into this trust you. I do. Where do they where can they find? I mean, because some of this stuff is complex. So like where's a trusted source for learning more? Very sagebrush institute.org is where we're disseminating everything. And there's an email sign up. And that's it. We're just going to keep pushing. That's it. Eventually it's possible that we could try to bring in small funds for like leaflets and stuff, but I'm not getting paid. Nobody on the board is getting paid. That's not happening. And we'll be straight up. If that ever like if if there ever becomes a point where we're asking for money, we will always be straight up about it. And you will see that I believe that charity should be for the sake of charity. So no one's paying me to do it. I can promise you that. I agree with and we'll live by that as best as we can. And that's where you can go to just sign up and we'll start emailing you and you know, this is what's happening with wolves or whatever. Keep you informed. Thank you. That was amazing. Thank you, sir. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, So time, we're not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel, subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.