Joe Rogan, the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast by night All day Look, camera, these headphones are no, we don't need them Okay, you know, whatever you have to wear your sweet hat and fuck it up There you go, just got it But we got our American flag, we got a skull, we got camo What the fuck else do you want? Are you American or not? Of course, oh nice dude You're all in for the 50, the 250th anniversary It's also the only socks I brought on this trip somehow So I wear them every day now You only brought one pair or one style? No, one pair of socks and no underwear Oh God, I've done that before, we have to wash your socks in the sink With shampoo, with a hotel shampoo And then wear them with their wet And it's like I went on a run here, it is muggy Oh yeah, baby, what am I asked on? That's the fear of this weekend at the UFC Yeah, because it's East Coast, it gets very muggy Yeah, for sure And DC, so these guys are all working out outside right now I saw a video of Aemons of Hobby, working out outside And Iliad Taporia is working out outside And you know, you have to feel that heavy, heavy air It changes things Oh yeah, man I remember when I was a kid, I went to the Olympic Training Center And Colorado Springs I see those thunderstorms, dude Oh yeah, we're fucked Fuck There is a canopy that's over the cage They put a canopy over the cage Lightning hits that, that's not good Well, if it's a canopy, I think we're okay I mean, I don't know, I'm worried about terrorist attack And I am a full of lightning No, that's true But I probably should be more worried about lightning I actually have friends that have been hit by light We do, Remy, Remy is hit by lightning Yeah, for sure, so I know it's full I don't know anybody's been hit by a terrorist attack By lightning? Yeah, we had crazy storms here You know? You're playing golf, but I was outside Thank you I thought the storm was over And I was out on my balcony And I was like, wow, this is cool Oh, that's not a good spot One hit, I'm 500 feet in the sky I'm already up there And then it hit And I started hearing sizzling near me I'm like, holy shit, I gotta get inside Like electricity sizzling Fuck is that where he was sitting Oh my god, that's so scary That's such a fucked up way to go Do you ever see that one video where the guy is walking down the street And he gets hit by lightning He wakes up, walks down the street A little bit further, he's recovering And he gets hit again Dude, guy hit by lightning twice And like, I don't know If it's time lapse or well, I don't know how long he was out for Because it's like one of those ring cams That catches him It's kind of a fucking cooked twice You know you're having a bad day I forget what Remy said happened to him After he got hit, but I remember his hearing was fucked up for a long time I was on the bench Something like that We uh I always We do the mountains back home Like run them And we were up on Diamond Peak Me and Tanner Last year And a storm You know, it kind of like the weather report Like having some clouds Or whatever, it wasn't supposed to be thunderstorms But you could hear Kind of growling And you're like God, does that come in this way? And it doesn't have to be that close I mean, I think I think lightning can hit from 10 miles away Really? Yes, it can go that It can go sideways So anyway If you see that building, you should get off The top of a mountain Right Well, me and Tanner were up there And we're still wanting to get the summit And then bomb off Well, we're up there And he goes He goes, dad, he goes watch And he had, we had trekking poles And he had him like this And they were like Ticking Like For electricity But electricity was in his trekking poles Then we I said, let's get the fuck off this thing And so we bombed off And there's these kids down That were like They said, should we go up? And I said, I'd wait a little bit And the girl's hair was standing up Oh my God Oh my God Yeah So crazy Yeah It is not that Yeah, so they Just got died in Florida last year And what they call blue sky lightning What? Yeah It can It jumped from several miles away Whoa You just stand on the beach It was a blue sky above Storm as a meteor Yeah and I think it can go What? I know I looked it up after that Because I was like, why do you need to know I'm in the mountains all the time His death on the lesser of the Grimer my Florida Led the US in both lightning fatalities 12 And strikes per square mile 76 Holy shit By the way, did you see that guy in Florida That he was running from the cops And he got killed by an alligator No You see that one? Uh-uh Dude, it's body cam footage The cops got the gun out And he's like, stop, stop, stop The guy's running He's going in the water And all sudden Boom Like right I'd rather get shot I'd rather get shot Better get shot And killed by a fucking dinosaur Oh my God Shot You get the bullets going to hurt like fuck You're going to be in shock You're going to realize you're bleeding out You're going to have to say, I wish I was a better person I'm going to miss my family But that fucking alligator's going to take a while to kill you It's going to roll with you It's going to drag you into the water You're going to realize you can't get free You're going to try to poke at size It's not going to work Fuck It's going to be a miserable existence Tell us over You see that one video of a dude He got attacked by an alligator Lost his arm So it bit his fucking arm off And he made his way back home So he there they're like talking to him Like right when he got out of the swamp And he got one arm And he looked like There's not a chance in hell he was sober During any of this experience He looked like he had been messed up since the fuck at 12th grade Oh my God This dude, yeah this is the dude Just fucking lost his stump That's where I was He wanted for three fucking days with one arm Oh my God But first of all, how do you not bleed out? I know dude I was sure he's getting sick He freckled on that So my arm went back It was like this completely I'm just saying Well he said You know on my right hand side So I went to swim And she got she got my forearm So I grabbed her like this And like he's trying to roll But she snapped her head So my arm went backwards Like this completely He says he fought for his life She drug me out He's like cut up hairy He comes in so forth He says he fought for his life I could she match them in an editing bay Should I do that again? Is that good? I know He says he fought for his life Yeah we got that part with the no arm I went in and assumed that He fucking wandered Through alligator and snake infested swamp for three fucking days Thanks for telling us what we need to be Believing here You know what I would alligator hunting out there A few years ago You know that alligator that we shonlets in the front Bro they're everywhere If you ever want to come it's really fun I know you don't do much hunting outside of bow hunting But they need to be killed They're vastly overpopulated But you can't do a bow You can Yeah Yeah Well that's like everything It's Bruce Getchy But this This You know That's a grisly hunt He's killed alligators with a bow and Florida Yeah You just gotta catch him in the right spot You gotta basically hit him like right behind the head Yeah I think you'd probably hit him with a fixed plate Yeah For sure There's a real will or something There's a you gotta brain him Yeah So there's like that bump back there Then it's like halfway in between the eye And the bump Something like So you want to be like 20 yards Yeah it's gonna be close You can exit Right in there For sure The good thing about that If you fuck up and just kind of ricochete It's gonna be fine You know what I mean It's like Literally It's not making If you go for the lungs and miss Hit it in the stomach That's not good It's gonna be pretty sick and miserable death It'd probably still live Those fucking things are such monsters They're such monsters I always think You know We've killed bear Up here Kip killed a bear up at the rivets with three legs Oh yeah Just like How? One of them will eat the other ones leg Yeah Don't bite their fucking legs But like How do you survive? Yeah we have to get antibiotics for Like a hang nail I think our Uh whole biome Is probably all fucked up From washing it all the time Yeah Probably I mean completely makes sense Right So yeah Animals don't seem to get a whole lot of infections Like we do unless they're farm animals Right Or like Occasionally Well it happens all the time in the rut Right Like when you're addressing an animal You find all these holes in the side of it With their like pussy I remember one time one of the elk That we shot at to hone Had his back leg was just filled with pus Like the whole bat it was all pus Because he had gotten stabbed It's usually in that bat Because usually they turn because they know they're getting their ass kicked And so it's in their hindquarter Like the dominant bowl Will get said jab in before they go And you've seen those to hone bowls Those 1100 pound fuckers Do you imagine one of those stabbing you in the head? No And also if you see Antlers there that are broke because they're so heavy Uh huh Like that bone is so thick for their antlers If a bull's break Imagine the foref required to break that And imagine that going right up your ass God For my camera guy that'd be a dream For most of us now They find them You know with these holes in them Like when you shoot them and you find out like what they've been through Like no wonder why they barely moved when they get hit with an arrow Yeah They probably didn't even know like when two bowls are fighting And then one of them gets hit with an arrow they barely react No That'd be like what? That was that Yeah They landed on crazy They're just so Just locked into war Especially if you like getting between the ribs And don't hit anything Right just like that Just like that bull would be like Ow Wait what? What was that? Nothing And all of a sudden Whoa I feel uneasy Hey did you find that video? See if you can find the video of the guy with the body cam footage Getting killed by the alligator You see it a little bit though I just think it's exciting It's just you love watching chaos online I don't know why Put the headphones on there See what I like the music Okay So here it is The cops got his gun out Oh this isn't a very good Yeah See the cops got his gun out Yeah And he's like trying to think of what to do And this dude's getting jacked Oh there goes the alligator too Yeah Whoo shit Yeah Oh did you see that line of that Yeah I'll get it up a little bit So you can see it So the dude's trying to swim away Look at the alligator Boom That's a rap son Did he put his hands up I don't think so I think he just So I got there Back it up a little bit more So you see the guy swimming away What's that? It's a different version Very good scenario Another same lady narrating That's what a gator That's what a gator Slammed right towards him And that's not good It's of his arms I mean it was a full on attack It was a full on attack Like as if what a halfway attack Oh there's a fucking dinosaur Yeah That's a nice story In Florida a few years back where a guy was running from the cops And then goes a high-speed chase Gets to a bridge Stops the car throws it in park Chumps off the bridge Boom alligator gets them Literally like landed right on a fucking alligator Hey That's the reality of the water All the freshwater in Florida is filled with alligators They have to check Disney land all the time Yeah Disney World They have to check it all the time Yeah Remember a little kid got killed there a few years now? Why do you take your kid to fucking Disney World And it gets killed by a dinosaur? Rough Well and also it's like You know how I don't know You have dogs but Are they ever around when you're eating And like something falls on the ground They're always checking the ground Well that's what Alligators do in the water They're just sitting there just chilling out They're here a little splash You're like Oh Like a dog Was that a A crumb Hitting the the floor I've The dinner table Yeah So there's over there And they'll just eat whatever hit the water Especially if something seems like It's struggling Yeah Well I see Opportunists Yeah they're So they're just chilling Just waiting for shit to hit the water Which is that's what fishing is too You know you see that The fly is hatching You try to match it Try to put it on there And like they're like Okay got one hit the water Right But yeah alligators are masters Of taking advantage of opportunity And everyone's while some Comes off a bridge And hey Did they meal? Really shocking how many of them there are In the Everglades It's like You know I went I guess it was three years ago And when we were there It's like everywhere you look You have to look for an alligator It's like nothing I've ever seen I thought it'd be hard to find them I thought like we go out there You know you look around You probably glass a little Sea eyeballs pop up No They're fucking Early Over the water Like how many would you see? We saw 15 20 Maybe more It's chilling Maybe 30 You see like some movement on the water And then they dunk under And you're in the fucking swamp Yeah It's sketchy as shit Yeah The whole thing It's very weird It's very weird Because you're like This is a mess Yeah Like there's the feeling that you get there Like oh this is infested Like you're infested by dinosaurs And then meanwhile You go an hour and a half later You're in Miami Have a steak DRAKING an ice Peanut in the water You think you're in civilization You're fucking Half a day's dry From monsters An infested jungle Filled with monsters And imagine if you weren't in a boat Like what if What if you were to somehow Something happened in the boat Oh you fucked Yeah What would you do if Like the boat sank out there Well we weren't in a boat Oh okay We drove out We were with guides And we drove out in trucks And they know Like where the lake areas are Where the You know It's very dense out there It's very thick It's just hot and muggy And these fuckers just You see them pop up You see the eyeballs pop up You see some motion But you fucking see them everywhere And then you look around And how big the everglades is Yeah I mean you go how many of them are out here Because it's not like we Found the honeyspide Right You know what I mean It's like the whole everglades And they're When I was a kid You know I lived down there In Florida When I was 11 years old From 11 to 13 I lived in Gainesville And there's alligators back then But they were endangered And so you weren't allowed to kill them And so they would kill people's dogs And shit I remember this lady And my neighborhood Her dog got jacked She was walking her dog by Lake Alice And it just snatched her dog It took her to the web Jesus Like the late 70s And we were Filled feeding the marshmallows So you go to the docking Throw marshmallows And the alligators would come up And eat the marshmallows And it was You know it was weird It was kind of cool The thing there Freaks you out a little bit But they weren't dangerous Right Cut to all these years later Now because no one hunted them Because they basically were making shoes out of them Right in the day Now almost hunted them to extinction And they should probably start that again Yeah probably stop We need to bring out The seventies happen Like back in like the seventies Like that was the cool shoes Like in the pool halls Where I used to play pool Like the old guys would talk about how a guy was really dressed up He had his gators on He looked good he had a nice suit He had his gators on His gators Like you got gator boots Alligator shoes The Casey Yeah Gator boots seem to be a different thing Because it kind of Almost makes sense Because like Like you get boots that are made out of Like snake skin And ostrich And like that's kind of a cowboy boot thing But alligator dress shoes Is it heavy You got your gators Right Very hard to get Polish it Nice Ricks player Black Oh yeah I Love that Bro I got a Paul just Ricks player He got scammed So some some person Reached out and said that they were representing this podcast And they were gonna that he was gonna come on the podcast I think Tim Dylan has happened with him too It didn't happen with him where they got him But they send you an email saying that they're gonna have you come on a podcast But they need your bank information Yeah they'll pay you Sometimes it's like 3,000 bucks Because I got those too And what it really is is they're just gonna empty your bank account And it's just a scam So if you get an email like that for me it's not real sorry Ric Flair So Ric Flair I don't know if he lost his money But Tim Dylan they tried to get him on Amy polar show So that's the scam The scam was They've reached out to he talked about it on his podcast They've reached the The scammer reached out said I'm representing the Amy polar show We would love to have you on And he was like that doesn't seem like that would be a good thing for Amy polar I don't think I'm a good guest He's like I don't think he's real Yeah And it says you know we need your bank account information And so many people just like Don't think about it or their boomers or Well they make it seem legit because I know Pat McAfee I got an email from them about coming on the show And I'd been kind of communicating with some of those guys before And so I'm like maybe I mean for me it's like a big deal like ESPN and Pat McAfee He's like to me here reminds me of you he just kind of does what says whatever he wants Does he's free if the bosses say whatever he's like fuck off I just love that Unfiltered like true thoughts He's a guy's got fucking money that says fuck you That's what I love It's just it's beautiful So I mean I celebrate That's that's a you know first amendment in his glory right there Seems like a genuine good. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know one But it's I don't know me either But when you hear it talking enough. Yeah, yeah, you can assume Or you can like put the pieces puzzle together But and they've wore my stuff on there So I'm like oh maybe this is real right and so the guy I asked it He's just a ao He's just a great guy But he uh he said no, it's not not legit But they had me because it was like it almost seemed real Fight night is here title shots debut killers and the rising contender nobody's talking about yet And only draft Kings has you covered every step of the way The draft Kings app is now available in all 50 states and includes all markets Bringing the game straight to your fingertips Wherever you are no matter where you're watching You're always connected and in the game with one app new draft king customers Sign up with the code Rogan spend five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days That's code Rogan in partnership with draft kings the crown is yours Bed with DK sportsbook gambling problem called one 800 gambler one 800 my reset new york Call 877 8 hope and wire text hope and why Connecticut called 888-7897777 Or visit ccpg.org on behalf of Budho casino in Kansas that text pass through may Applying Illinois 21 and over void an Ontario event contract trading with draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss Sportsbook bonus bets expire in seven days $50 in predictions dollars issued weekly for three weeks expire in one year Team one on with marble reward availability varies predictions offer void in New York And's June 28 terms at DKNG.co slash audio. Yeah, somebody asked me like hey, you know They said well. They said can you do anything about it? Unfortunately, I can't like there's nothing you could do other than tell people it's a scam I don't want to tell you how I get guess. I don't want to like give up the process but I have a guy and I have this guy reach out to people and you know I don't want to talk too much about it because I don't want people to imitate that and pretend that's how they do it But if you get a new guy here Yeah Get an email asking for your bank account information. It's not me. No, it's probably not Anna Ferris or Amy Poehler or Tim Dylan or any of those other people. It's all bullshit No, just scumbags out there. Unfortunately if you say you have some elk meat you'll share that might be real. Nope. Oh Share friends and family. That's it. I give it out to weirdos. I know you're bringing some bear meat. I know you know Dude, you're I said you're in trouble. I know we got a lot of notes. We got notes. I got I got shit We're gonna discuss today. They're like I had a scientist on yesterday. He had less notes less. I know I'm ready. Well We had some first of all before we go any further. Yeah, what's going on with your tooth? Well, you got a gold tooth I love it. Yeah, it's a Well, it's it's kind of a joke, but I've been like for years obsessed with like perfect teeth, right and That's I Adam Greet. She's always bust your walls. Yeah, you know I did like the white strips and all this other shit and like I always cared about what just probably cared too much so now I don't care what I look like, but um what what changed? I don't know. I've just like been playing the game too long now. It's just like I'm just done it and the game's not over unfortunately even though I'm saying I don't want to play anymore Game still goes on so it's like I'm still part of it, but anyway I was getting this okay long story short um I had I broke this at high school so I had to fake tooth in high school and uh Yeah, this is like long story kissing this girl basketball him back at head broke the tooth anyway broke the teeth on her teeth Yeah, so she had pieces of teeth in her lip. Oh, that's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it was uh Jack never did that but anyway um We uh so I got a fixed got a few different iterations of it finally found one that looked good Well, I go in there I hadn't been in the dentist and forever because I just what hate going and they said oh you got a Cavity under that what are composite is what it was called and I'm like okay cool So we got take it off fix the cavity then you get a whole another one and I'm like Whatever um so I go back in there next next appointment They take it off no cavity But now I just have this like whittled down regular tooth just like a like a post of a tooth So because they removed the cavity because they or there was no cavity. There was no cavity. They just great thought on the x-ray There was so they had they anyway that cap or the composites gone so they said well you need to go and Match the color of your teeth for your new fake tooth and Spring and in Springfield swing by this Springfield Whatever they do there for for dentistry So I go in there and they said uh the girl there goes hey my husband they make some really cool gold teeth He does a really good job. You want a gold one I was like wait and so she's like we'll do white one too, but A gold one might just be fun and then I'm like yeah, it'd be fun. So I told trace I'm just gonna do it just Day or two So this has been months now you're gonna keep it. I don't know. I kind of like it. I kind of like it. I like it I kind of like it's like everybody fuck it. You know everybody's got Regular teeth nobody's got gold teeth or something anymore It was a thing back in the day. I remember Mike Tyson had a gold tooth for well This is like my savings account because I figure that I'm gonna lose everything because I'm such a fuck up But I'll still have this I can still that sucker out you can buy a cheeseburger. Yeah If I get in a bind right it's like hey well I got this I have one crown have one fake tooth back here I crack one of my molars. I had a root canal and then It like so then they had to put like a crown on it and then it cracked yeah, and so now I gotta get another one Could I got a little piece of it missing? I think I'm gonna get a gold one nice to go over here Do it do it now you're inspired me Also, it's in the back so you won't see it all the time until I yeah I like you have big cheese. Yeah. Well, we get it when you're copying you get when you're cracking up You always do a big smile. Yeah, so that one being people see it. That'll be fun. Fortunately. I laugh a lot I know of a happy life. Yeah, you do you're crushing it lately. Oh Just keep is just say most stuff right? I can't believe I look at your guests It's just like non-stop dude. It's like it's people see like all your success You think most people would be like can't good. I'll you put off the gas You don't know you keep I mean you work your ass off well you very rarely get an opportunity in life to do anything like what I can do and very few human beings get this opportunity and I feel insanely fortunate and also very responsible like I'm responsible for this whole thing I have to keep it rolling I know people are addicted to it. They love it. They want the variety They want scientists they want guys like you they want athletes and fighters They want all this shit. They want to hear all these different people talk all these different perspectives and So huge obligation, you know, I feel like connected to all these people I know I don't talk to them all the time. I don't know see but I feel it I know it and I'm Dedicated so I just keep my phone the gas. I never I never say oh I can't believe I have to do this Oh, I can't believe I'm sure up. I just yeah, I always try to reset every day go God, I'm so lucky It's so fortunate and then you know when you have that opportunity I think it's a terrible tragedy a travesty to not capitalize on it to not like make the most out of it because I know that it's like very few human beings in the world Well, I mean how many people have ever had the number one podcast? It's always gone like back and forth. I've had it for like six years now. Yeah, six or seven might be seven years now And it's like I'm not I'm not keeping my foot off the gas I'm not exactly what I'm doing. I'm gonna do it my best I'm gonna keep doing it until the fucking wheels fall off. That's like the people have said like with bow hunting and stuff like If you you know you work your ass off to get this place where you're respected right and then there's gonna be people They want your position and like with your attitude my attitude too is like Fucking come get it. Yeah Come try to take it because I remember I'm working my ass off still We were hanging out somewhere and you said one of the coldest things to this dude This dude was we were all just fucking around I really even forget who it was because it didn't matter and he said Yeah, and after that I'm gonna challenge you to a race and you go good luck with that Even remotely taken seriously it was like a five-year-old saying they're gonna kick my ass Yeah, okay good luck with that Yeah, I mean you get you get confident when it's something you do like further down the line than anybody Yeah, so if you're gonna take my spot Right I mean it's been a grind dude 40 years. Yeah, the whole taking the spot thing is so stupid because everybody's on their own little journey And you could look at it in terms of I'm gonna take that guy's spot and maybe that's your motivation and That's cool and all that but there's a negative attach that motivation if you don't have an actual personal beef with someone and you Hate them just because they're in a position that you wish you are you're wasting energy I know this sounds like very hippie, but it's true like your that energy instead Should be celebrating that there's people like that out in the world that do inspire you and are out there Pushing themselves to like extreme limits and just and it Excelling at whatever it's whatever it's fucking playing guitar or doing stand-up comedy You should look at those people like wow what are they doing that I can do to make myself more successful or better or what? Where where can I get to a point? How can I get to a point where I'm like them? But most people don't do that most people like fuck that guy like I fucking socks This sucks and fuck it is a pussy and he's a dirts and he's using steroids and he's fucking lying about how many miles You've gone it's there's always gonna be people like that and I'm telling my message to the haters I Was a hater when I was a kid. I was 100% a hater 100% like all the other people like when I was fighting everybody else was a pussy They were all pussies. Yeah, unless they were wearing my weight division They're one of my weight divisions that I could celebrate a bit everybody in my weight division was a pussy that guys I'm gonna fuck that guy up. He's got nothing. I could never celebrate people even like national champions people with the right Couldn't celebrate them right it's a waste so waste of energy Yeah, and you get more energy out of looking at what they do well and Analyzing it and being inspired by it. It's a hard struggle because your ego wants you to compare yourself to them and find flaws in them You know fuck that guy fuck this fuck that it's a waste of energy Yeah, you have to be selfish with your energy your energy is very critical It's everything in life. Yeah, everything you do in life is dependent upon you having energy and for you to waste your energy in some Stupid ego driven direction just because you're too weak to recognize like oh This guy can kick my ass. Oh this guy could shoot a bow further than me. Oh this guy runs way farther than I can run Oh this guy's way better at playing guitar than me. What the fuck can I do to get where he's at? Yeah, you gotta just That's a it's a trap because not only does it take away energy it takes away progress It takes away energy from you investing and you being better in the future right it's bad all around Yeah, there's no good to it at all. No I agree with that and it's like that that energy is a resource that we have to protect I think that when you talk about like you talk about all the outliers that you you have this conversation with or sit across the table from you and I think you're Protect. I think that when you talk about like you talk about all the outliers that you you have this conversation with or sit across the table from you And I think you're attitude and how you look at things like in that lens that makes people Want to come up like you said you listed all these people and people want to hear what they have to say People want to hear what they have to say to you because you have a way of drawing out more information in a different way because your attitude is so pure I think like Even if you didn't believe what you said It was still if if you just said like I want to be positive, but your questions were all negative like in tone or Like confrontational in tone people wouldn't want to be on here like they want to be on here now You being positive and looking at things like how can I get better? How can I grow? How can we all learn and Get better from this that's the lens that you put the information that comes out through these microphones out into the world Which means people are attracted to you people are attracted to the guests you have people are attracted to the show and So yeah that energy we even though even if we don't admit it we are attracted to it You know what I mean you seek it out and I know when I'm I like to hear people Paying a picture of something that gives me hope. Mm-hmm. I don't want to hear About how fucked up everything is all the time right I want hope How can I have hope because hope gives me purpose and like okay? I can do this? I can I Got get to work and this will this will pay off. Yeah, so I think it's like it's more complicated Then we then we think but there's a reason why your number one have the number one and it's your attitude and it's how you speak It's a little that it's also I got in really early right so I got in at like 2009 and there was hardly anybody doing it back then yeah So you could you could also I wasn't as famous back then so you could do it for a long time Before anybody noticed you were doing it right you get good at it. Take it on your craft right Yeah, you didn't have a bunch of comments that you had to sift through you didn't have that you just did it if you started now Maybe you wouldn't be number one. I wouldn't be you know what I mean because there's there's there's so many pot There's I mean how many podcasts are there now? Yeah, like what's the number? 10 million five million It probably keeps growing every week so because everybody thinks they can do it because everybody can talk well And the people starting now they might be you down the road. Oh, yeah, for sure there might be some you know There'll be them incredible conversationalists that they'll be them. They'll be a different thing than me, but they'll be amazing at it but you had Because you had this inside or you know you saw Tom Green or whoever it was that like hey, maybe I could do that you started this process of This decades of honing your craft To where it is now and now you've been on top for six seven years, right? And it's just because of all those reps that you did it's No different than anything we always talk about everything everything is reps. Yeah, and it's just like you want to get good at something You know fail keep doing it fail. Chari's reps pools reps martial arts or reps It's all reps. It's all experience and it's all like being like super focused on what you're trying to do Whatever it is. Yeah, I think like I even think of you know, I love Sean Ryan and he's has an incredible podcast but I Get I get why this is happening. He's pretty down kind of on a lot right now just with government with Israel with Epstein with all that which is By design almost they want us to be hopeless and I don't want to be conspiracy theorists But they do want us hopeless because we can be controlled but Sean his podcast lately has taken more I don't want to say dark because it's more real, but it's like it's darker so I just think that attracts Less people in a different type of person than yours You have every reason to be dark about things and you are sometimes But that's not the theme of you. Well, I think these it's like first of all people that aren't comedians They're very they're limited in What they can talk about in the way they can talk about things, you know being a comedian is there's a little bit of a safety freedom, yeah You know is like yeah with the fuck Fucking around get a little get get a little you can write it off a little bit It's also there's that's real in terms of like Another layer of conversation like there's a layer of conversation that is commonly known as talking shit and talking shit is a thing that you do Where you're with your boys and you say things that you don't really mean because they're funny Yeah, and you make each other laugh you talk about how many dicks you suck last night, you know Why is your mouth so sore? You know like you fuck around you say things you're silly You know you talk about oh, you know, it's hard doing all this math, you know, you don't you're not really doing math Right there's you're not really having gay sex right you're fucking around Yeah, and when you can't fuck around there's a whole realm of the conversation that's missing after sure and there's a whole like Like get out of jail pass like let's have fun. Let's loosen up a little here And then we're losing up you're serious right and then where does the conversation go back to the serious part which changes it? It's also the serious stuff is what gets engagement. Yeah, and that's a little bit of a trap Or if you only focus on the bad of the world and it's not saying you should ignore the bad of the world You certainly shouldn't but if you only focus on the bad of the world It's kind of a trap. Yes, it'll fuck your head up to that's swimming in negativity all the time That's where I see Sean that's a feeling I've got with Sean lately Where is with the differences with you? There's a reset there's always this reset back to good The message is good. Yeah, I think and I don't think you're I don't I don't think you That's not by design. That's just who you are Yeah, no, so I'm like design. It's just I that's all I think yeah You can only dwell on negativity so much most of your day is not negative in fact. Yeah, it's there's things that you need to be aware of You need to be the pair of them and the problem is is no it's not but our voices are oftentimes negative so It's easy if like if you get in that trap where you're listening to negative and you're thinking negative It's a lot of negative dude. Yeah, so it's like knowing that you know I can go down a negative rabbit hole pretty easy. I try to avoid Waiting in that well sometimes it's like you just get fed up you look we're the fuck or these Epstein files Yeah, what the fuck is this? Why is this reacted? Where is it with a fuck killed JFK? Right? Like come out with it with a fuck who fucking killed Charlie Kurt for real? Yeah, like what is that why is that fucking story so clouded and mystery? Why do they pave over the fucking ground right after the shooting? What the fuck is going on there? See now you're making me in a bad minute. That's but that it's easy to do It's easy to do You see my notes look at my two on the very top was it say stay positive be nice and what's that other one say you have Terrible hammer be positive be nice be positive My hand buddies terrible it should be a doctor But no, I have to remind myself like because I if you start mentioning those things that you just did It was hard dude. I will fucking lose my shit because I'm so pissed I know and it should be and we we all were all pissed we're all You know we all thought that you know all that stuff is gonna be released right after the election It's gonna we're gonna drain this swamp and find all the pedophiles and well The first term was more like that. That's what gave me hope for this term the first term There was some draining the swamp going on. I felt Then we had the Biden disaster and now the second term has been I don't even know what this is I don't even know what it is well it would have been a whole lot different First of all if we didn't bomb Iran. I feel like we bombed them the first time. We were good The second time was like good even the first time was like what the fuck are we doing? Yeah, and then when they were saying like this is it the the escalations over we're gonna work this out like oh Yeah, and the second time when we bombed them I was like oh fucking great Now and the most people don't want it. That's the real problem most people in the country don't want to know look I know fucking foreign policy expert. I don't know what's going on over there But I do know that all the people I know that really support Israel above everything else they're fucking super happy about it And I'm like but all the people I know that are like America first and where people that are like no new wars that really thought that We're gonna change things and this is all just for money. We're not gonna sacrifice soldiers for fucking money Those people are upset. I don't know really what's going on though. That's the problem and I really wish I understood Iranian politics more and the the ronnting Ronny and military structure because it seems like that super fucking complicated Like they've been preparing to be attacked like this forever and so they have like all these layers of control Like when this guy gets taken out new guys are like ready to fill their spot and then we're Negotiating with the new guy Israel kills them Going on And then what happened yesterday they captured like 20 oil tankers. Oh, did they I didn't see that yeah It was some I don't know it might be bullshit Another on the toilet in one of the rare week moments where I travel to X Yeah, it's a boy boy, but so healthy lately last few months just staying off a fucking Instagram really saying off a Twitter Just not reading anything. Yeah, they're not anything but Instagram started funneling me schizophrenics. Oh I don't know how I've got one schizophrenic. My name is Dolores I am the real granddaughter of JFK the gold that's in the basement is all mine They're trying to stuff shit inside my vagina. They wake me up in the middle of the night crazy people yeah, not just one but like a whole fucking series of them and I started getting those a couple of weeks ago and Again, I might spend like 10 15 minutes, but it's all schizophrenic people might I got to get off of this There's no reason it's interesting It's that's what it raised now. It's what gets you hooked. I got this one lady. She she was a hooker and she's a crackhead And she thinks everyone's a man like so she she'll show photos of all these different people. That's how fucking man She's just fucking out a lot One guy thinks he's the rightful president of the United States and he wears like this dirty old suit You look in his eyes like he's out there. The dude's gone. He lives in a completely different dimension than we do He's on Instagram. I start watching like sometimes street fights. Oh Watch a lot of those there's a lot of those out there or the joke the prank or the jokes or pets it's like that's cool and then it's just like But they it's just a trap. Uh-huh just keeps you there and then an hour's gone And you're like, what did I do for an hour? It's just terrible for you, but since I've been really good about it Just so much health it when I take like full days like days off I feel so much better and I'm like never will wear a Hawaii We went to Hawaii a few years back and we went bow hunting and for access to here on the night and I broke my phone I don't remember this. Yeah, I do my phone just start calling people. Yeah, I believe this is crazy I hang up and start calling new person hang up so I had to get a new phone it took like three days and It was only three of the happiest days of my life. Yeah, and I'm and I'm like Oh, I should just get rid of my phone. I was thinking that but I was like, oh, I can't wait for my phone gets here Well, there's stuff that words really handy is taking pictures of cool stuff. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah And I capturing those memories. That's yeah, it's if you have a question. Yeah I love it for because I've always have a question about something I love that Siri now you could just press Siri and ask it a question like yeah How many minutes are in a month and it'll just tell you yeah? Like right on like you'd be driving on the car you have a question just press a button and you can see the answer Yeah, fucking nuts. How many times do you have a question? You're just like, oh, probably never figure that out exactly now No, no, she goes unanswered literally instantaneous. Yeah, you know and you know I'll use perplexity all throughout the day to just ask your questions because I'm just Driving around or I'm sitting at home and I'm like, I wonder how that happened And just now you know like instantaneously. Yeah, but the dealing with all the people stuff That's that's where I checked out. I'm like I'm not interested in that I don't like it's like if you get a bowl of soup and there's little pieces of meat But most of the soup is shit. All right. I would recommend not eating that soup Yeah And that's what social media is like it's like I get some meat out of it here and there I get some interesting stories about science and some new discovery from the James Webb telescope like whoa This is fucking cool and it'll send me down a nice rabbit hole where I'm like studying things and getting Excited about things and then I just deal with some fucking cooks and crazy people and shitheads and grifters And people are that are mad that people are white and people that are mad that people are black and like oh fuck Christ It's exhausting too much it's exhausting. Yeah, it's just it's just eating soup with shit in it Yeah, it's like it's not worth it. Yeah, we're gonna wish you brought in some of that bear perhaps some of that sun And so a lot of people are of the opinion that black bear is not an edible Meat and that is that is incorrect People can't hear you unless they're on that microphone Give me some also this no one can hear that either you got to get to the microphone Also this think down and have a seat There we go So if you have a casey brooks is I've heard the name so he killed the world record elk. That's right. Yeah. Yeah that giant Well, that thing is crazy. He does this is like super hot stuff Oh, here's what it's called what if they need to know about Shilead and Whatever it's yours Everything you know you didn't know about well, it's all worn. I know it's maybe on the ball But mighty Chili and chili yeah, okay, but chili yeah, you put that on like when you're cooking steaks. Where's that knife Jamie? Thank you look at that. Oh sweet. Oh look at that fucking yeah, oh my god Nuts that thing is literally nuts. What was the score on that? It was like 386 or something no 486 or no 486. Yeah, yeah 500 yeah, well the smell straw does it oh my god. Yeah, so these are the chili. Oh, so this is Yeah, he said you don't need much it says what did it say 480 it says sprinkle this shit on everything Okay, yeah, this is cool. Yeah, so I brought and also Do you know his son? It's a really good elk color. I mean I don't know I know it makes calls. Yeah, we don't usually mess around with that I learned how to either do these just last year his son is Bo Brooks. Yeah, I had a makeup female Okay, cuz I had a little one that I blow on yeah, so I never learned how to use a read. Yeah, the mouth three I definitely don't know how to make a elk set with the tube. I'm fucking terrible. Well, let me see that knife real quick My yeah, this is your packout skinner for Montana night Here's a good stuff right here. So we got some of this Tell me what you think of this I've had it the last time you brought us from the same No, this is butcher company this lights up in Portland and this is Ronnie Ronnie's the man dude Portland, Oregon has a good wild game I think it's more like greshear processor, but it's so good That is good That's my job. Yeah, that thank you Ronnie and then this is no trick analysis, right? trick analysis free Then this is I'm if you ever test yourself to trick analysis if you have it You might already have us in bear jerky to you might have it and ignore it So that the jerky so good and then also like this says whites on right here White's country meats, so we got sausage. Probably made breakfast sausage. Yeah, so good. Nice Rindered bare fat right here. Oh, wow. Oh, she that so you can cook with that dark. Yeah Why is it so dark? I don't know That's crazy. Yeah Clay Nukem gave me something did he yeah, okay? Have you ever used it? Yeah, I cooked it Stakes with it. Okay. It's great for searing steaks, you know, just like even beef towel Yeah, but it gives it a different flavor sure definitely So he did it's like and also like the the bear in the spring their fat is a little different So it's it just reacts differently. I for me making the pepperoni and in rendering the fat It just reacts a little differently because they've just come out of hibernation up there. This is one of the big bear I just killed and yeah, so it's just perfect timing for I guess rendering fat and making I was watching those videos that Jen was making from bear camp. Yeah, where she smoked that bear for like 24 hours. Yeah So good. All right looking same. Yeah, it looks like so good They're like she's like a gourmet chef now with bear. Yeah, and then they had the meat church guy up there this last week. Yeah, and so they were like You know bear meat when you put a whole back ham on the trigger So she She let it soak marinate for four days, right? And I saw people saying oh if you did chew other for four days It'd be good whatever. I'm just telling you what it would it was four days And then 20 hours of a slow cook on the trigger best meat you've ever had It's like incredible That's bear and you know there's like people talk about The set it was back in the day They would eat bear and just kill deer for hides To make clothing because bear was superior meat So people have fallen into this trap of like believing that bear meat isn't good and it's amazing Well, it's because of yogi. Yeah yogi fucked us probably yeah yogi and the one that tells you not to start fires Who's that guy smoky smoky smoky smoky the bear yogi? Yeah? Yeah, that fucked us. Yeah, they did and Disney Disney fucked us You know if it wasn't for those anthropomorphizations of animals where they turned them into sweet You know beautiful creatures that talk to you. Yeah. We would have a completely different idea of animals and they have much more Realistic idea of animals for sure which I think most hunters have you love them you respect them but they all have to be managed I said Whitney Cummings a video that they got in Santa Monica the other day of a mountain lion and someone's backyard big fucker Just laying in the grass in the studio's backyard in Santa Monica, man I mean, I don't know if you know anymore Oh, okay, too much people get annoyed. Oh, yeah, it's true. It's good though It's that's a jalapeno cheddar. How's it taste you tasted the one the first one I had was jalapeno cheddar Yeah, fucking great. It was really good. So good. Yeah. Yeah, I know what people say All you can make anything look at that. That's the cat in the backyard. Oh man. That fucking nuts man. Look at his eyes. Yeah, fuck you man Fuck you. Yeah, it's uh, I mean while they build a stupid bridge for them and it's a way over budget It's over a hundred million dollars now for the stupid fucking bridge So they can cross we have to make sure that the monsters can get across the highway safety I am of a completely different opinion I say put one of those fucking big-ass grills on your car like I have in my landcruiser And let's hope we get a few of them. Yeah, so they don't kill people's dogs. Mm-hmm. Look at this right there The middle of the year is 14. This is not that is bananas look where it is like look how dense Look how dense the housing is there is a mountain line right there and they think a mountain lies You know go find this bridge Well, they they probably will eventually find the bridge But there's a bunch of retards. It'll still make their way across the highway and they're supposed to get hit That's nature. Yeah, let's figure it out. Yeah figure it out. Yeah figure it out or die. Yeah, there's too many of them They they're so unrealistic about their mountain line numbers. Yeah, there's way too many of them They're all over California. Yeah, because they don't manage them. That's how we talked. Yeah, we talked about that last time and it's like I just wonder what is You know, what's the goal because now you know, I wore this shirt today Because now public land is again back in the cross here. I don't know if you saw that. Yeah. What is going on? This Mike Lee guy Yeah, that same guy same fucking guy from he he's trying to like This is you talk guy right? You talk guy Yeah So right now it's like there's this this bill that was going to be introduced. He was like talking about wildfires essentially But it's like uh What he's done is he's tied in this public land piece to it Like they always do there's always these other provisions tied into with all these bills right and you don't really know What you're agreeing to or what you're not But he put in this roadless area section because there's four hundred or 45 million acres of roadless area that he wants access to basically They're not saying this they're saying for some other reason. I think oh, here's what they said We have so many acres of roadless area that to fight wildfires. We need roads Okay, they don't care about fighting wildfires. It's care about resource extraction or development Maybe development but development's a tough sell in a lot of those wilderness areas But what's not a tough side with this remember the affordable housing. Yeah, like oh just the air just say that's what it was That was supposedly affordable housing which Like years ago. I went back and talked to Jason Jefas he was uh, he was a representative there in Utah And I went back there and spoke to him in but at that time it was about a surplus acreage So there's three million surplus acres nobody's using Someone told me that has something to do with the Mormon religion That the Mormon religion has a philosophy about selling land. It's very different than our philosophy I'm not sure of the land. I'm not and I'm not and I told me that see if there's any reality to that The Mormons almost have like a mandate to try to sell land. Mm-hmm. I don't know if that makes any sense This is not my thought. Someone told me this and I was like wait, what and I don't think I ever looked it up right that I do that too I'm like I need to look that up and I never do and then I never know anything more But yeah, so I went back talk to Jason at that time. It was a surplus acreage then this time It was affordable housing now this time is wild wild fire fighting which if you get into the weeds on fighting wildfires It's there's the national forest service already has 10 billion dollars of Roadwork they need to do on roads that are failing right now. So they're saying you're gonna add more roads to the 10 billion dollars What the work that the roads already need maintenance on don't think so um What they're gonna do is and then also if you make roads this the stats say 85 to 90 percent of fires are started within a half mile of a road of a road So it's not the wilderness areas that are in danger that we need to figure out how to fight fires back there This hardly any fires back there. It's always about the roads we've created that we can't maintain That's where the the fires are starting right? Right because it's usually people it's it's human cause 90% of the time is human It's that's only like a small percentage of fires that can't be fought here it is some Utah politicians who are members of the LDS Mormon Church have pushed proposals to sell or transfer federal public lands But this is a political movement not an official LDS church program and other Mormon groups openly oppose it So Utah's see more disinformation so they try to feed me. Yeah, and I kind of helped spread it right Utah's heavily dominated by federal land 42% of the state is managed by the Bureau of Land Management alone Even more under other federal agencies because so much federal So much of Utah's federal fights over with a retained transfer or sell some of that land is especially intense there Yeah, this next part is about Mike Lee which conservative Utah Republican such as Senator Mike Lee have proposed budget or legislative plans that would make millions of acres of Western public land eligible for sale Arguing it would boost housing or local economies the housing thing is like hey man fuck you You're not putting houses in the mountains. I don't believe you. Well, I think most likely what you're doing is there's natural gas out there or minerals out there or something It's a Mean they don't care about First of all they'd have to build infrastructure out there in the mountains which you know water power It's not gonna happen. What is this Wyoming thing? Says that Wyoming case would have been the first time a registered national historic site was sold into private ownership Which is why it drew attention. What did what did they referring to though? Uh a national historic site among Oregon Trail could end up in the hands of private owners At the request of members of the Church of Jesus Christ Latter-day Saints Oh, so the church tried to purchase public land so Down down that next one it says LDS teachings require strong stewardship and especially advocate preserving and protecting public lands So okay That goes so it's just politicians like what he's and I think he's like beholden to Trump Trump's like his Aaron boy for this public land thing because Trump doesn't give a fuck about public land But his son does this is what doesn't make any sense like his dog John Jr. Does he listen to anybody? I don't know. I don't think so to me about psychedelics. Well that okay We'll talk to him about this thing Is that it again with sneaky roadless rule amendment? Yeah, well maybe if I see him this weekend Well, I will see him this weekend, but maybe I'll talk to him about that But I don't think there was a there was a sentence in there that I just saw it says 99% right here Not right in the middle of 99% of Americans opposed repealing the role this rule, okay, so Why they work for us? Isn't that right? So there is a way I got to this is because you talked about the mountain lions It's like why don't they listen to people Do like the public the public would say yeah, we probably need to hunt mountain lions keep a man or I don't think the public of California would I think I'm opposed to that right post the ballot box by all no no me too So they got wolves in the Colorado, but I'm just wondering like with this this roadless rule They didn't ask a public anything right in 99% of the public oppose it. Yeah, that's way I think I would say way more people oppose that than oppose any kind of hunting thing. Yeah, I'm good with Okay, so on your point then I want biologist making the decision on hunting 100% I don't want politicians making the decision on land use 100% all right So that's that's all I'm yeah, that's all I'm saying. It's like let's have experts in the field Decide these things. It's like who is expert in the field who decided the White House needs a ballroom Me I called in But it's like how are these decisions being made like this roadless rule This was like a last minute add-on that the public did not get a chance to vote on How is that how is that okay? No, it's not okay. It's it's super fucking sneaky And I think all of our positions should be like your t-shirt The Teddy Roosevelt position. Yeah, not one acre like we have a amazing system here We do the public land system in the United States is completely unique to the rest of the world It's very different and the fact that you can go out there and that is your land if you're a citizen of the United States of America Public land is your land and you have access to incredible wilderness beautiful places And if you've got the endurance and the ability to go deep in there You could go to places where there's no fucking people and it's unbelievably pristine wilderness and it's owned by the entire country and we got to keep it that way We can't we can't let that slippery slope Get get into play as soon as they start giving away some of it or selling away some of it they'll they'll fucking keep going It not one acre what once once you lose something you don't get about ever and this especially with this public land like at this time When we all came together it was outdoorsmen in all regards. It was hunting hiking fishing Whoever Recreators yeah like What it's like people who just love and appreciate public lands we all came together Shaught it down and the public sentiment was was vicious, right? They couldn't ignore it. We need the same thing now because at this time. I know We did so much everybody came together But when they do these they wear us down with these these last minute deals and add on these things because it's like how many things Can you keep fighting and fighting and fighting and you're like I thought we already got this didn't we solve this already And now it's back I think that's one of the reasons why they keep somebody fucking balls in the air at the same time Because you can't fight at all, you know, it's like do you really care about the Epstein files already care about UFO disclosure? Yeah, I know the U.F. U.A.P's we're gonna have a big meeting on Monday. We're gonna have a big release on Wednesday So so I think they took To me it seems pretty nefarious that they're like say oh we got all these fucking dip shits worried about this real loose rule Okay, we can just So I think they took to me it seems pretty nefarious that they're like say oh we got all these fucking dip shits worried about this real loose rule Okay, we can distract someone with aliens got an alien stuff. All right. Okay. Oh we could we could distract someone with fighting We got the White House fight coming up Okay, that's and now of us sitting out it's way quieter because they've distracted some of these group core groups with this other bullshit Right and it's the bread and circus thing and like I kind of agree with Bryce Mitchell who said this that it's not for the White House to be putting on Sporting events this not we hire the government to run our country not entertain us True yeah, no I look I don't like it because I think they should be fighting indoors always I think world championship fights at the highest level should be fought in a controlled environment That's that it's gonna be sick It's gonna be I'm gonna watch I have to like people to go with Rogan's negative I got a nope. I'm not negative, but I'm not positive either I don't if it was me if I was running the the UFC I would never run the UFC But if I was running the UFC I would have never Wanted to do it. Yeah, I don't said we can't do it. They have to be in a controlled environment We can't have a world championship fight we can't have someone win or lose because they're outside and it's muggy Yeah, that doesn't make any sense to me. It's gonna affect the grappling. It's gonna be like hot oil wrestling Everyone's gonna be sweaty as far. Yeah, it's gonna be completely different than and also your endurance is gonna be less No, no submissions going probably gonna happen Well, you know, maybe but also you can get under a neck way quicker. All right, just slide your arm through there Yeah, you could cinch up a rear naked choke with someone's wedding. Yeah, you get get it right under the chin. Yeah, that'd be slides in there but Most grapplers would not prefer that most grapplers would prefer an air conditioned arena like normal It should be fucking 72 degrees just like it always is You know, it should be air conditioned like it always is but even that the controlling the hands because you know like if your top or bottom Mm-hmm like the big part is like the risk control. Yeah, like if you're sweaty. Oh, yeah That's tough. I mean ching the old days dudes used to lie down in a bathtub filled with baby oil Yeah, and then they would wash it off and so then they would You know get warmed up and then when they would start sweating the baby oil would come out of their pores Because it's like when you soak in baby oil for hours I'm not accused of getting individuals doing this, but I know for a fact it happened And guys would be completely greased up. Yeah, you could wipe them down with a towel. It wouldn't matter I mean the grease is everywhere. It's in their fucking pores and as soon as they start sweating You try to get a hole of missiles. We it's like trying to hold on to a fucking salmon in the middle of the water They just slip right out of your fingers. Well, that happens to if you eat McDonald's all the time Grease out your pores so they should try that maybe that'll work. I think that affects your performance But the the sweat is gonna be a big issue the outside the bugs. That's gonna be a big issue thunderstorms. Oh, yeah Another forecast this is around two o'clock Rain three o'clock thunderstorms seven o'clock rain. It's a little great. Oh by eight o'clock. It's only showers. Don't be a pussy Just showers. Yeah, maybe they'll cancel it. Look. I think if they canceled it and moved it indoors It'd be better for everybody. I don't like it I think the idea was like they want the the octagon the White House behind it. Yeah for image and everything like that It's gonna be dope the card is sick. It's a fucking amazing hard the car It's only seven fights and all of them are bangers from the opening one with Steve Garcia and Diego Lopez bam right off the gate. It's like Bow nickel and Kyle darkest bam right off the gate. I mean it's it's gonna be a sick fucking car. The car is amazing I that does look incredible. That's the lightning catcher that they put over Yeah, it's gonna be nuts. It's gonna be nuts if it happens, but if it rains like crazy You know, but I mean everybody will love it if it rains all the people who hate it Yeah, rain on those mega folks. Oh, God. I really are country man. I know it's a very divided time Oh, it's it's nuts. Yeah, but like I said my Concern is for the athletes Fighters careers very short a loss is devastating and to not have perfect conditions to fight in I think it's crazy Yeah, but it's also gonna be sick. It's like being there is gonna be nuts Maybe it's worth it. I don't know. We'll find out well, you got to hand it to Dana for going big like he always does He always does I mean, you know, they always does he was at The sphere and Vegas right it's like wasn't that was out of the box, but it was amazing That was a one-time only thing that was so much money But this is a one-time only thing supposedly too, but apparently Trump doesn't want to take the octagon down He wants to leave it up I don't know man I'm I think it'd be great have guys like you know coming in train at the White House for a couple weeks That'd be the next gimmick. I don't know. I'm not fuck it. Yeah, it's just old things chaos anyway It's a crazy time. I mean what what Biden could have a giant L.B. GT flag in front of the White House and have trans people pulling their breasts out Remember that I know they had big pride day. They had big pride flag in front of the White House like I'll take I'll take this over that It's like all of it is silly. Yeah, it's also that should have nothing to do with the White House This should have nothing to do with the White House, right, but you know, and then there's a lawsuit right now Trying to suit keep to stop the off the way. They'll probably lose. Yeah, I don't I'm not a lawyer I don't know, but I would imagine they're not gonna win. I'm a huge fighting fan UFC fan I you know Dana White is like it in icon. I love all the fighters. I just love everything about it. It's a I just You know I kind of agree with Bryce Mitchell's take on it which you can get in trouble With agreeing with him because he has a lot of takes but but on this one I kind of get it and Yeah, I mean I don't blame the fighters at all for jumping to the opportunity. No, it's like the whole world is gonna watch It's gonna be probably the most watch sporting event maybe in history I mean It's on paramount so to be on CBS as well, right? I don't know you probably vote on CBS So it's on CBS as well So it'll be available to everybody and then all the haters are gonna watch it too I'm for sure gonna want to talk shit. Yeah, so it'll probably cover it on CNN what a disaster They've already talked a lot about how I'm not into it Yeah, I have to be honest about what I'm into and what I'm not into I can't just agree with something if I don't agree with it I'll be respectful. Oh, you know, I'm obviously a huge fan of the UFC And it's always an honor to work for them and I love it But I don't like it But I'll still yeah when I'm there. I'm like oh, this is sick. Oh, maybe after it's over I'm like they were right or maybe it'll be like oh fucking reigned. It was what a shit show Yeah, it was lightning that canceled the fights was a huge disaster for CBS. It's live sports. It's like you never know I mean if they pull the entire audience out and just have the guys fight in the cage under the the canopy Now I'm in yeah, that's like apex style now. I like it. Yeah. I like it. No crowd just us just me DC and Be pretty fine now. I like it now like it and you know We're protected by the rain, but everybody else isn't so they all have to leave Fuck yeah, because I think it's gonna be also a lot of like look at me People gonna dress up nice for it and like because they know they're gonna be on television. Oh, yeah You know, I get it, but it's really for me. It's about the fights There's gigantic fights on that car. They just engage the Iliotoporia fight. I am very interested in that fight I'm very interested in that fight. I really wish it was like at the T-Mobile or Madison Square Garden or whatever, but Who cares I that's a fight. I have a lot of questions about yeah, I see that fight. I mean Justin's quite a bit bigger But Ili is so skilled bro. He is I watched a whole I've watched his entire career last night So there was a the UFC put out a video about Iliot's saying is Iliotoporia the goat and it goes from his first fight In the UFC To his last victory and you watch every single fight of his career and you watch him get better over time And you know it gets Deeper into his career and then you you see his last three fights and you're like good Lord Yeah, he was awesome when he first entered the UFC, but he just kept getting better So the use of the law fights the first fight that goes to a decision you know and and then You you watch the progression he starts KOing people his last three KOs over the biggest stars There's some of the greatest of all time max. Yeah Who chal over yeah, Charles. Oh, you know one of the greatest of all times max hallway one of the greatest of all times And then Alexander Volk and Omski the greatest featherweight of all time Yeah, like fucking crazy Not them out knocked all three of them out. Wow. That's one of the greatest resumes of all time CBS won't air UFC White House event viewers would need Paramount plus to watch what happened? Did they back out of it? Oh They were not televised it that means you I wonder if like Paramount white decided cited the plan to tell America story during the show as the reason CBS would not be involved What the plan to tell America story? What does that mean? We don't want to talk about America story on CBS No because there's only X number of fights and it starts from the first one white said we start at the beginning of time And like the Mexican Independence Day fight We're gonna have the story of America from the first fight to the last So no they'll all be on Paramount So it's gonna start out with European settlers coming over and giving everyone smallpox and then you're gonna see all the Indians die And then we're gonna go oh look at all these buffalo because there's no one there to kill them And then we're gonna see people come across on wagon trains and kill each other. It should be fun Yeah, it's gonna be a good story It's gonna be a very accurate story So what's how the United States started? It'll start from back when we fucked up Mexico and like what was that? 1861 to get Texas No, what year did they know it was like 1821? Wasn't it like that the Mexico owned Texas? Well, we'll start from the beginning. We'll go all the way to buying Alaska for like 50 bucks Yeah, people love it. Why would you? It'd be good. It'd be great. Yeah, it's uh I don't know it's it's gonna be A spectacle for sure. I'll be tuning in. Yeah, but I'll be there. Yeah, it's gonna be you're at the White House all the time now I've been there a couple times Yeah, it's weird. It's very weird. It's also very weird because As much as people hate Trump and hate his decisions and hate what he's doing and hate how he talks and I My experience is with him personally. I've always been fun unfortunately. Yeah, unfortunately for everybody else like uh You know if he likes you and you're on his good side. He's a fun guy to be around. Yeah, he says a lot of fun shit The fucking man loves America. He genuinely does He really does like he wants to make the White House look better He wants to build this ballroom because he want like he has good intentions in terms of America It's just There is not a single fucking person that's ever taken the job of the president of the United States. That's loved by everybody Yeah, but his the issues that he's having right now is a lot of the stuff that is going on in this country is Contrary to what people voted for and that's what people are upset about the war the war specifically that I don't You know we voted for Protecting a border. Uh-huh They did that. Yeah, it's a or American manufacturing protecting America's interest like with trade with Just protecting people's jobs. So we have a way to work and provide for our family America first that was what that sounded good to me and it feels like this isn't any of that like I It feels like even his administration at first. I was just like oh fuck these are some this is good But it feels like if you go against him in any way you're fucking gone Well, it's that for sure and then it's also You know the amount of political pressure You know you have to make deals right? So you got the pharmaceutical drug companies that are trying to squeeze this in there and then you have the oil Company is trying to squeeze that and the military is trying to squeeze this and There's a lot of compromises that have to be made and that's where things get dark Yeah, because there's people that come in with these ideas that we're gonna fix this and clean that like I've had long conversations with RFK and that guys in Struggle all day. It's a battle all day. Yeah, it's dealing with all these pressures and Look, they've made a lot of headway they've made a lot of headway with with peptides They made a lot of headway with eliminating some of these unnecessary food dies and all these different things that we've been subject to but they lost with glyphosate Yeah, that was a big one man glyphosate was a big one point You know, I've got a guy coming on who's an expert in it. It's gonna talk about it soon and it it is the people that are Gaslighting you to say it's not an issue. We don't really know how much of the health problems that a lot of people have Who consume Glyphosate written products have we don't know how much it's affecting you. What is it taking away from your immune system? What is it taking away from how much is your body? Processing this fucking toxic herbicide that's in your system verse. I mean how much of that is contributing to people's health problems Yes, there's a lot of people that think that that's what a lot of this gluten allergy shit is People just reacting to yeah, bro mate and pesticides and herbicides But it what's that stat with Iowa being the Center for Glycophyte basically with all the agriculture there and then that's like the hotbed for cancer Yeah, I mean yeah, you don't have to look very far to see that connection No, you don't know well. You know that was also back in the day when People when people talk about the polio epidemic you can't talk about the polio epidemic without also talking about spraying of DDT all over the fucking country because DDT poisoning has the exact same Reaction the body is the exact same reaction as polo as paralytic polo polio. Oh, hello polio. Yeah, you know the disease like there's this woman who wrote a great book on it Suzanne Humphries is a called dissolving illusions and it's all about that and all about like First of all they were spraying it behind cars in streets where children were playing and People were getting I remember seeing kids like running through it, but it wasn't just people that were getting polio This is part of the problem with the narrative that it's polio Animals were getting polio like animals were getting polio, but they don't get polio It doesn't spread to animals, but the horses and fucking cows were getting paralyzed They were getting the same symptoms because it's fucking DDT poison Yeah, yeah, and here's the craziest one what percentage of polio is asymptomatic mean you get it and you have no symptoms Mm-hmm. I don't know 95 to 99% really. Yeah, so it's people have it this it's DDT Yeah, yeah, DTT that I mean look it's not saying that some people that are very Sick and immune compromised get polio and get fucked up and die of course polio is bad A thousand people die every year from the flu. It's bad right? Yeah, okay But you know what else is bad DDT? Yeah, you know It's also going on when everybody was going through this whole polio epidemic fuckers spraying DDT everywhere and most people are ignorant to it Yeah, and you bring it up they call you conspiracy theorists, but it's fucking fact. Yeah, it's undeniable well, I I was like you know the Controlling the weather. I was like that's conspiracy, but then I start seeing the planes like laying in the fucking Clouds out. Have you seen have you seen it? Yes, and no, okay? So I actually did a show on this you did Yes, I did it not an episode of podcast. I did an episode of Joe Rogan questions everything no that show that I used to do it back Yeah we did a whole episode on chemtrails and one of the things we felt first of all The reason why it looks like that. This is just a fact The reason why it looks like that is there's condensation in the atmosphere You have a hot jet engine. It's passing through this cool air and the hot jet engine and the cool wet air creates clouds Yeah, those clouds are real. It's artificial crowds right also they spray shit in the air. Yeah, two things are happening Okay, yeah, because you see the normal planes you see the normal jet stream you're like, okay checks out Then you see the other ones and is a different jet stream Yeah, but it doesn't matter the cut the condensation in the atmosphere is inconsistent But they're making like clouds are inconsistent like you can we watch them the other day make laps Yeah, but it might not be the same plane. It might just be a route Right you're not watching the entire plane go all the way down land and come back no no, right But you're watching consistent right? Treadance yeah, but that's why it looks like that, but it's just days where there's a lot of condensation in the atmosphere Dude, I'm telling you listen those planes if you look at a Southwest flight and yeah, they're not spraying Okay, but some planes spray shit. Yeah, and there are some weather modification the experiments they do that are completely top secret They don't let anybody know about it. They do cloud-seeding. They cost floods What happened with fucking Dubai right there was here a Dubai shit where Lamborghinis are floating down the highway That is people fucking with the that's environment. That's where I thought was conspiracy before which I don't know No, it's real well Abu Dhabi does it every week Abu Dhabi makes it rain every week with cloud-seeding and because they're rich Yeah, like fucking make it a And so There's there's real weather modification now that's there's cloud-seeding and then there's experimental shit like some of the shit Like Bill Gates was talking about like spraying Reflective particles in the atmosphere to block out the sun like hey fuck face. Yeah, who are you to make a decision for the whole world To pull the world you didn't even graduate college shut the fuck up Yeah, this is crazy and also the unintended consequences of any action that has never been taken before like cooling off the fucking planet With this dipshit starts the next ice age never fucking dies right I know I mean Get the fuck out of the air leave us alone stop playing God You don't know what you're doing and also do you have any money invested in these projects or trash to this for sure this you know We talk about all this stuff, you know, oh, I I didn't want to say this so for public land I want to say this part of my notes call your senators say you want the roadless rule kept intact say we don't want to get rid of of the 45 million acres that That are gonna be protected with the roadless rule but to call your centers is 202 224 30121 say say you you want the roadless rules kept intact and We have to we have to let our voices hurt our voice were was hurt on the snot one acre We won that one we have to do it again You have to call your senators and say and just voice your concerns. It's a slippery slope. Yeah, you can't let them have any ground, but like what I Here's what this thing was really pissed me off because as I said the administration at first I thought okay, we got some we got some good pipe hitters in there. It feels like They do what Trump says if they don't they're gone. They're like they're the scapegoat for whatever failed. They're out of there You can see the right on the wall like I don't I was I Want to toll see to get in there and kick ass because I knew how she felt about the war and I ran and and like that would How detrimental that would be so I was like I? believed in her and now with her husband getting sick and now she's out of there, but it feels like people are It's like if you stand up for something you're gone and now they got this Mark Wayne Mullen in there who just two days ago for this road Roadless rule. He unwinded 31 laws that we're gonna protect The the public land right just 31 laws. He just said yeah Those aren't gonna apply anymore because we need to they awarded a 1.7 billion dollar contract to Build a wall in Texas that big bin national park 1.7 million Billion dollars has been awarded and it wasn't even bid to build this wall in big bin national park here It's like how the public doesn't want that we don't want to fucking the wall for They're saying for border protection And if you look at like where the border crossings are it's not in the middle of the fucking park So what do you think that walls really for? I don't know fucking up national national park one of the most pristine places in Texas I don't know what the goal is But have you read into it though? Is there any arguments pro and con that the walls? I'm sure there is I'm sure it's for border protection. I mean maybe Jamie can look it up Yeah, but see if there's is there like a there was no public input on it again Right, that's a problem and then the problem is again They can come up with reasons. Yeah, why you know they have to make some new laws because well We got to protect people. Yeah, and that's how this was pretty slow It was a COVID like you know safe and effective protect your communities is like gotta do this for safety Well, it's the same thing Trump administration will bypass environmental laws for border project in big bin national park So what does does it say with the argument for it is? According to preliminary federal notice latest regulatory waiver will apply to more than 100 miles of US Mexico border So it's a border. Yeah, yeah from near Near the closed Canyon Trail in Big Ben Ranch State Park through the entirety of Big Ben National Park into remote parts of South Eastern Brewster County and the notice Homeland Security Mark Wayne Mullen wrote the administration is bypassing a wide range of laws to ensure the expeditious Construction of barriers and roads along the southern border Well US Customs and Border Protection continues to insist it will not build a 30 foot tall Steel border wall in either the state or National Park the agencies current plans call for a mix of vehicle barriers surveillance technology and patrol road upgrades in the parks as a part of a project dubbed dubbed big Ben 4 So this is like not not listening to the experts again Six former superintendents of Big Ben National Park pinned a letter to molynergean I'm not take such a step so again not listening to the experts just like the ballot box biology Just doing whatever the fuck they want doesn't matter what the public or the expert things They're good. Thanks. They're gonna do it award these bids to the probably some construction after this Guys invested in for 1.7 billion dollars. It's no bid. It's like how is this? How is this okay? Yeah It's very I don't understand it is there a lot of crossings in there. No, there's not that's the thing They have where all the crossings happen. There's like this tiniest percentage in that park Because it seems like it's probably a very remote area of Mexico that it connects to as well right? So it'd be very difficult to get through that way and also if you're gonna get through that way like good lord Right you're going into Like tough country. Yeah, and you know that's that's good elk country down there. I know people who hunt. Oh, what's Texas? Good. Yeah, yeah, so it's like I just I don't know it's uh So if you look at the millions of Americans who treasure big band, you know, they don't want construction down there and especially if If we voted on it fine if there was a reason fine, but it was never voted on Yeah, it says the horrific plans are in front of the millions of Americans who treasure big band Lake and Jordan all an advocate with the Center for biological diversity set in a statement Politicians who've never set foot here are signing a death warrant for this wild and beautiful place Yep, yeah, and that's you know, I've heard somebody you know pretty close with Trump Tell me that he's never walked on dirt before Trump has to have walked on dirt grass, baby dirt So not on his course, but that's what the point is. It's like somebody who doesn't appreciate public land They don't give a fuck about this. No, they don't give a fuck and they don't they're not gonna see it and they never would see it But there as well same spot yeah Look They have to protect the border But if there's not a lot of crossings there and also do you want to spend all this money to build a steelboard like who's getting the Contra yeah, and just to award that with no bid. It's just not that's not I were I was a public buyer That's not how works. You're spending public money You can't just spend public money without a bid Right, I mean, but they bypass all this shit that has the checks and balance in place to ensure that we're making good decisions with public money They bypass it all and then you know who suffers here. It's a people who don't have like some people They go to the park for mental health. They want to go camp They want it's like they might not have two nickels to their name But they're in appreciating nature. That's why public land is so important because that gives purpose to people like me Who's less like I got to get out of this shit holes city and go recharge right? So for people who don't appreciate that or care about that that's That's wasted land. It's like we could have a shopping mall We could have investors doing this. We could have make this work because right now they they would say that well Not everybody can can Take advantage of this because you have to hike you have to do these things so we want to make it more accessible So more people can enjoy it. No. Yeah, that's that's not how work You're gonna fuck it up. Yeah, you can't just have helicopter landing plads all over the fucking woods There's there's your yeah, there's your contract spike in border wall spending Goes mostly to two firms with GOP White House ties Construction contracts including 2.6 billion dollars awarded this week are being awarded to at a historic scale Through a streamlined process that could put Trump on track to realize his vision for a border wall Yeah, see that streamlined process that was bypassing 31 laws and And so what's there now like what is the border now between Mexico and the United States in that area is it just land like you just walk right across? It's probably the river What is it? What is the border? Can we find that out Jamie? Does it say? Okay, let's just look go up the map. Okay. Yeah, let's see what the map looks like Okay, let's say So that's where it is So is that the river that blocks it? Well, the river blocks the whole bottom of the border technically right there certain parts of the river I mean, it's not that hard to get across that river that one well I mean people aren't gonna go there to cross that's crazy. Like a beautiful lettuce. It's amazing. God. That's so beautiful No, they're they're not going there to cross That's all mownness. I don't know. I mean, it's hardest here Where's the most border crossings? For a while it was like where they had that road where they just let them go through most border crossings are actually in Arizona Really? Yeah, I'm almost positive so For Jamie's gonna find it here. Well, I'm asking you how many happened through big Ben National Park. Yeah, yeah, find that out fucking one 30 gonna stop them $84 billion. Yeah, it's just like I Don't know just stuff like this. So what happens is like you get distracted with the Israel the bombing of the girls school The Epstein files and then they do shit like this Okay, the only official border crossing inside Big Ben National Park is the Bocchias Port of entry and it sees on the order of about 10,000 legal crossings by visitors per year Plus a relatively small number of unauthorized crossings compared with other parts of the US Mexico border What exists in Big Ben Big Ben National Park shares about 118 miles of border with Mexico along the Rio Grande The only legal port of entry actually inside the park is Bocchias crossing small pedestrian only crossing to the Bocchias Del Carmen Mexico National Park Service Information and Travel videos describe Bocchias as Handling roughly 10,000 visitor crossings per year. Yeah, those those are mostly all legal. So 734 Boquias as handling roughly 10,000 visitor crossings per year. Yeah, those are mostly all legal. So 734. Border Patrol sector seasonally a fraction of total south-west border crossings. One report cited 734 people documented crossing in that sector by more than 27,000 along the entire US Mexico border in a given period. And like, what year was that? Where it was 734. Was that before they shut down the border? It was really crazy how many people came in the country. Oh, I know. The fact that over four years, it's north of 10 million, and I've talked to people to think it's 20. Doesn't say. Oh, wow. And it just shows those out of the 27,000, but doesn't say they're illegal. So it's not a hotspot of crossing. The last slide there said a smallest fraction is illegal. Mm-hmm. Of that 734, those were like total crossings in that area. A smallest fraction was illegal. So it's no, it's not as BS. Right. It's BS. And they're just going to do it because they're got a nice contract. And they want to wall beautiful wall. Yeah, but why in the national park? No. Um, the Washington Post report last week, the skyrocketing border wall contracts now totally more than 19.4 billion in the last six months have mostly gone to Bernard and Fisher. That's prompted a lawsuit against the Trump administration from a would-be rival border wall builder who claims that the government doled out billions in contracts without genuine competitive opportunities. Yeah. All right. See, that's illegal. I mean, but that's what they're doing. Yeah. No. Bueno. No. And so, but, but as I was saying, they distract us with all this other stuff and push through shit like this, like who knows what is Senate, what the Senate or House is voting on on a fucking Tuesday? Well, it was this public land thing. You know, just added in in the middle of the night. We have no, no say on it. We're distracted with all this fights at the UFC, which is real doing whatever the fuck they're doing. And it's just like, oh, we just lost all this public land too. And it's like it's it's impossible to keep up on. That's what's frustrating. You know, it's not frustrating. This bear meat is perfect. Good. Yeah, that's that's a man. Absolutely. Chip. But what? Okay. So that's what can be done. This bill hasn't passed, right? No, now it's going to go to the Senate. So it was in the house. Then here's what here's a problem. So this was originally this, uh, roadless rule is bipartisan. Everybody agreed. Let's protect this now with Mike Lee adding this language in there. Now it's turned, um, now there's lines in the sand and nine, um, Republican senators voted with the Democrats on this toe to allow this, the roadless rule to get to be in there. So now it goes to the full Senate. Now they're going to need whatever the percentage is six, I think 60% of a full Senate vote, um, for it to pass. So we'll see. So now the scumbag lobbyists get involved. Yep. And they start pressuring people and help you do this and I'll do that and help me here. I'll be there when they get overwhelmed because of the switchboards. If people call that 202 number, like I said, then that makes it to everybody. And was that number again? 202-224-3421. Say you want to keep the road, roadless rule intact. You don't want to sell off public lands. You don't want to. This is all BS. Um, but they, they do this. And, um, yeah, the lobby is getting involved. And what happens is like what happened at the big beautiful bill is this part was in there and Trump wanted it in there, but it was causing such a friction. He was just like, I want my big beautiful bill passed. These guys are fucking it up with this public land stuff. Pull that out. Let's get this through. So they did. They pulled out this. We saved the public land. Who knows what we lost that that was also attached. But anyway, we saved public land at that time. They were going to for affordable housing. Same thing has to happen here. He's got this language added into the shit they're already working on. That changes, you know, we've had, we've had this in place for decades and, and it's worked, right? So we have to say no, we're not down with this and they have to pull it out again. Well, I hope we can get it through. We'll push it. You got it up on social media where people can, yeah, I will. Cameron Haynes. Yeah, I will for sure. But it's like, you know, it's, this is so important because it's so important to people without a voice. So it's like, I feel sometimes like, how did I get in this position? I know you do too. Like, where you're at the White House. You're just like, how the fuck could somebody like me earn this opportunity? Right. You've earned it through decades and decades of work of being curious, of being fair, of being positive, of caring. And now people want to come on and share their thoughts with you. That gives you a platform. You've created the most powerful voice probably in the world at, in, in some, sometimes. And so you get invited to the White House. And I know, like for me, I know they've used me there before. Like, yeah, I created value in myself. They invited me there for Veterans Day. And I said, no, I'm not going because I don't fucking agree with this war in Iran. I don't agree with all this shit. I don't want to go and have a picture in the fucking White House. So people could be like, see, see, you, you're fucking, you're part of this. You, you know, because we did, we, we thought that Trump was the best option at the last election. I did. I have 100% believed he was better. The things he might still have been the best option. He might be. But it, and that's fine. We don't know what would have happened. No, the, the Kamala Harris administration had been a continuation of the Biden administration. I don't want people coming in the border unchecked by the millions. I didn't want that. I didn't want, you know, the celebration of transgenderism. I have no problem with transgenders or cross dressers or, I have no problem or gay or anything like that. I just don't want it promoted just crazily to our youth. That's it. I don't want youth getting surgery that the parents don't know about because they can't have a say in a now. I don't, I don't want any of that. So of course I'm going to vote for Trump, right? Now I don't like any of this shit. So I have that my right is to say, no, I'm not down with this. Right. And I'm not going to the fuck, I'm not going to be in your picture at the fucking White House. So you can use it and all the people who listen to me would be like, Oh, fuck, he's so the one you need to go for was a different day and what was the, but the premise of having you there. I don't know. But you're not a veteran. So what was the premise? It's only because I have a big platform. So there you're going to celebrate veterans day at the White House and they just said, let's get some famous people? Probably. I mean, it's, you know, remember that Epstein files were all the influencers had the binder. Well, it was Pam Bondi. Yeah, but, and there was, but there's, there was a few other influencers. But they use, they, they, they can use people like us for their messaging. And then they invited me back again. After now I've been pretty critical of this administration just because I care and it's like, I don't have to agree with fucking lockstep with the person I voted for. That's our right as citizens to be like, I voted for that, but I don't agree with this. And I'm not happy about this. And I'm, and I want you to know that's, that's our right as voters. Was they invite you back again? This was back. It was for public, a public land thing. I'm like, yeah, I'm down for it. But I just know I had this, this kid on Benji backer. He's like, has this, this page is nonpartisan, something for outdoors. But I did this show with him. And I, there was, you know, bringing different people into debate, public land or like to share why we care about public land coming from different places, but it's still all important to us. And I did the show with him. Well, he went, I had him on the podcast. He talked about his, how he's working hard to protect public land. He went back and Trump signed an executive order, something about public land. And all it was was a pomp and circumstance, photo op to get executive order. Nothing has happened to it. Nothing has happened with it. No actions been taken. It was like all it was was just they can make a press clipping out of it. Theatre. A theater and nothing is going to change. Nothing changes. Nothing's protected. So that's what I feel like a lot of these times, if I get invited there, it's for that is to, is to make my base if I have a base. I don't have, I'm not a politician, but to make my people like feel a little better about whatever's going on. And I understand that's how it works. You want powerful people on your side, right? I'm not saying I'm powerful, but I have a pretty big following. I just, I just, I went back there because there's a huge honor of like the few times that have been back there and is amazing. It's like being in the White House. Somebody like me should never be there, but I've created value in my name in some ways that I get that opportunity, but that opportunity comes with a price. So now I have to think about, am I true to what I believe in by showing support for this? And now there's too much for me that I'm not happy with it. I can't ignore it personally. So that's, I feel like they use, they use opportunities like that for, you know, for press. It seems like there's so many different people that want a piece of the pie. And if there's these giant contracts for border walls and giant contracts for this, it's just such an incentive to do things that people don't want. Or what about the military drones? Those contracts when this war started, that's you can look into who made money on that one. Who made money on that one? Should we look it up, Jamie? Drone military contract. Let's see who made money. I don't want to say it. But you know, huh? Okay. Well, I don't know. So I'm going to be surprised. Yeah. So maybe maybe not. But like when you follow the money, it makes a lot of sense. Of course. When you follow it. When you follow a pack, you're like, why is this politician always pushing this shit? Where do they get their money? Oh, I know this guy back home. He's running for like this local politician thing. He's named Adam. He's like, he goes, I don't, Junior. What? What Jamie? What did you mean? I'm just going to be a mistake. What did Eric and Don Jr. invest in military drone company amid Iran war? Is it Jamie? Where'd you find that? That seems like propaganda from Iran or something. Is that a cartoon or Iran cartoon propaganda again? No, but so anyway, you start. I was talking about this local guy back home. And he said that he goes, I need to call Israel. He goes, it is so hard to get money for like to run as a in whatever is just a local election. But you go to a business. They say, yeah, here, I got $18. I can contribute, right? So you see these big politicians, you see how much money they're getting. It's like, wait, what's this a pack thing? Why did they get millions? Oh, then you start wondering how they're voting on things. like just making a lot more sense. It's like, where's the money coming from? Yeah, they have to take all that out of politics. Oh my God. I don't know how you could at this point. But when you can influence politicians and influence who gets promoted to be voted for, who gets put out into the public eye in a in a great light in a positive light. And then you realize that there's just all this money from corporations to get this person in or from other foreign countries to get this person in or from lobbyists to get this person in. You're like, wait, that's not serving us. No, it's like, what have you stopped that? When did, okay, here's a big question. When did money officially become a problem in politics? I know that's a very broad question, but put that in perplexity and see what it says. The citizens United thing was a big deal, but I think it was 2012. What thing is that? Citizens United. Citizens United. Yeah. That was 2012. That changed a lot, but it was always the problem before that. And there was always been like when did corporations become a real problem? Like when did APAC become a problem? When did APAC form and whether they start donating to American politicians? Yeah, it's a first of all, I don't think any foreign government, any one connected to foreign government should have any influence whatsoever. When did American politicians say their loyalty is to Israel? That is crazy. I've heard people say that too. 2022. 2022, they're not directly starting donating to US political candidates until 2022. Fuckin' Jesus. So if I don't, I mean, if I remember correctly, Trump didn't take any money from Israel his first election and now he just gave an award to somebody. You can see who he just gave an award to. We gave an award. What kind of one of them big ones? Well, nice ones. They put them around your neck and you stand there in the Oval Office. Yep. Who contributed to, I mean, he just won the Olympics who contributed 250 million to his last election. Oh. So do you want an award? That's how much you got to pay for an award, Chuck Good. I don't really want an award. I wouldn't know what to do with it anyway. So to me, that, so you said like if 2022, I would imagine a pack would have been around my phone. I would have thought I didn't know that actually. But when I look at like, if you look at Thomas Massey, he got on the crosshairs of the president for whatever reason, right? He got, they had a candidate they wanted him to lose to and he did, he did lose. Yeah. So here's the thing we'll get to that in a second. So this is a sense United decision is widely seen as having created serious problems in US politics by vastly increasing the role of big money and reducing transparency. And so this was what year, Jamie? Honestly, it was 2011, 2010, 2010. So 2010 Supreme Court decision further tilted. Yeah, tilted political influence towards wealthy donors and corporations. That's when we got fucked. Yeah. I think that's when it started treating corporations like a person and gave them rights in some way. That was a bomb. See that second bullet point. Supercharged packs, which can take a limited contribution from what they don'ters. It's been unlimited amounts and so that's how they control the elections right there. And that was the Obama administration. Dark money. Dark money from groups don't fully disclose donors have exploded. Voters often cannot see who's really funding major political campaigns. So we needed to just fucking tune the way back machine to 2009. But even then, like 2009 is after they bailed out the fucking banks. Yeah. Or 15 years later, citizens United define the 2024 election. Yeah, there it is. Yeah. It's a slippery slope. Yeah. So that's like Ruth Ginsburg right there called it the worst ruling of her time on the court. Overwhelming majorities of Americans have consistently expressed this approval of the ruling with at least 22 states and hundreds of cities voting to support a constitutional amendment to overturn it. Citizens United reshape political campaigns and profound ways, giving corporations and billionaire funded super packs, a central role in US elections and making untraceable dark money and major force and politics. And yet it may only be down in the aftermath of the 2024 election. We could be to understand the full impact of the decision. And it's perfect too, because citizens United. So this is like the language they use to do bus like, oh, citizens United. This is good. This is good, right? Just like the Patriot Act. Yeah. Or like an Oregon that the hunting thing, it's called the peace act. Oh, yeah. Talk about that because that one's bonkers. Yeah. So this is the same thing. It's just it's follow the money. If you want to know why we're so fucked up, follow the money. So the IP 28. This is a crazy thing they want to hear. Here's where I was just explain Oregon real quick. Oregon is like a petri dish for these crazy ideas for these political ideas. Like if you think of legalizing recreational drug use, you know, we did that in Oregon, like heroin, math, you can have that. It's fine. It's whatever. I think they turn that back, right? But they tried it to see how it would work in Oregon. Yeah, it didn't work out as well. Right. Well, this is another crazy one, but they tried in Oregon because it's very, we got a huge liberal population in Portland and Eugene and some of these Salem, but not just liberals. Re-tarn. Yeah, they're more than just because I'm friends with liberals for sure. Yeah, they're gone. They're at the far end of the political structure on the left. For sure. They're full on communists, yeah, socialists, no meat. Everyone should be a vegan. They want everybody to get bitten by that tick. Yeah, I mean, so much. We should talk about that too. Nice. We'll get to that in a minute. So the law, the new thing, the bill they're trying to pass between. Man. Man. First of all, was it was it the, who was it the governor of Washington, which, which governor was it Oregon or Washington that tried to make it so that you have to have a fucking license to paddle board? Oh, probably Washington. I would say we're fucking imagine telling someone that they have to have a lot of license to paddle a fucking canoe. Yeah. Well, you have to pay the state money to have a license to paddle a fucking canoe. They also made it like during COVID, like some guy was out fishing by himself in the lake. He got a ticket. Guy got arrested when he was surfing by himself in California. Right. So you're going to get sick out there in the middle of the ocean. Yeah, it's just silly. But this IP 28, they bill it as, you know, on that. So they'll, they'll do the saying, I go it to get these votes. They needed 117,000 votes to get this on the ballot. So to, to get 117,000 people to sign your petition, um, basically all it said was stop animal cruelty. All you have to do is go to Portland and visit one homeless shelter to say, Hey, you want to stop animal cruelty? Right. Okay. Yeah. I love animals. Oh, he's saying this. So they didn't tell you that it's making, you know, you can't fish. You can't hunt. You can't raise animals like like our chickens. You can't raise backyard chicken. Rantors. Just like even renting. You sell beef. You can't do it. They're making it like even the breeding of animals like we breed cows, breed horses, um, there's stud fees, there's different things that makes better race like like a race horses. But this also better product for, for beef, right? So we control like when, uh, when a cow goes in a heat, when he gets bread, things like that, that's part of like being a rancher. Well they want to make that like because a cow didn't agree to it. It's like rape. It's like sexual assault. Like you can't control when animals breed. So that takes away ranching. There is no ranching, right? So they want to make it to where they're not going to make eating meat illegal. But if people can't raise it, you're buying it from some other state at a higher price you get your eliminating ranches or an oracle. Yeah. So it's killing a whole industry. And they could say that like even if you, if you heard an animal, um, I don't know what, like you could get charged with assault. So this is, they want every animal treated like your family pet or dog. And the, but the thing is chicken for food, you go to jail. Yeah. Yeah. How you driving a car and like sometimes a bird flies in front of you. Right. You're going to get arrested for that. Yeah. Is that a bet? You're responsible for your vehicle. You killed that squirrel. So this guy who introduced this, this is the third attempt at doing this. He knows he's not going to get the vote because how it worked to get on the ballot, they take 6% of the votes cast in the last governor, governor election. So 6% of the last votes casted. So it's a small number, but it's 117,000. Um, they can get that many, but I just say stop animal cruelty. Now it goes to the ballot. Um, but he knows this is his third time. He knows this isn't going to pass, but it's like it just tells them what they need to work on what language they need to change. It's all part of this long term process to get hunting and fishing stopped, right? Because I think like in general, the government, they like consumers. They don't like people being too, uh, um, self sufficient. They like them relying on that. This is another step. Like if we can get rid of ranchers, hunting and fishing, don't need the guns, don't need to be killing stuff. Then you're just like, we'll provide the meat for you, Bill Gates owns all this land. You talked about Bill Gates before him making decisions on shit. He doesn't only think about it. He dropped out of college, but did you say he dropped out of college or yeah? So it's, uh, it's, they want to be able to control who's, who's providing the food, who's making the money. What type of food it is, um, you know, it's like, it goes back to the whole WEC things, like you will own nothing and be happy. It's like that's they want these smart cities working towards that to where, no, you don't need to be a badass hunter anymore. We got it. Right. And think they use these nutty progressive people as just useful idiots to push things through. That's all it is. And so we get a bunch of people that are pushing money, packs that are pushing money towards these people to fund them, to push these wacky ideas. Right. Why would they do that? Well, that's why they do that. They do that because they want you dependent on them. Right. And this is part of this process where it doesn't happen overnight. And this thing won't, won't make it into law for sure, but they'll see where they're at. This will be like, okay, here's where we're at. Here's what we need to change on our messaging. Here's where the biggest pushback was and they adjust. Where can we do that on the other side? It's like I know there's there's farming or ranching organizations, but like it's it's a money. It's like who's giving these people the money. It's usually coming from out of state. And they have more money and they're more organized than people who are working because when you're a rancher, you're fucking working all the time. You don't you can't go get signatures and shit. You got work to do. He's fucking these environmental people that are just crazy like extremists. They get paid for doing this. So it's like that's that's their job. You know, a rancher has a he has a job and it's very hard. He doesn't have time to go out and talk knock on doors. That's the really fucked up part of a lot of these people that are these protesters, these organizers. That is their job. And that's hard for people to really understand. Until you listen to people like Mike Benz, where he breaks down how NGOs work and yeah, they fund things. And the fact that like most of these things are a fucking scam. Most nonprofits are a fucking scam. Definitely. And it's hard for people to wrap their head around that because you think of nonprofit, look, oh, my son works for a nonprofit. Oh, he must be a good guy. Yeah. He's like trying to help. And maybe he is a good guy. Maybe he starts out a good guy. But then you're you're corrupted by this system that you realize. I go, no, the nonprofit is essentially about supporting the nonprofit. And most of the money goes to the supporting of this organization, the overhead, the structure, all the infrastructure, all the people working there, they all get paid very well. And then a little piece goes to whatever the fuck it is. The people starting the nonprofit will be like, okay, first, I'm going to need this much money. Exactly. Oh, you want to be my VP? I can count on you. I'm you're going to make this much money. So that's what happens. And then whatever's left is like, that's their, you know, that they can't write off. That's what they contribute. Yeah. What I see this, oh, this is another one that I saw about nonprofit hospitals. Do you know that nonprofit hospitals are the most profitable? Yeah. Yeah, for sure. They can just hide that money. They charge crazy amounts for. Oh, crazy. Is that, yeah. Non-profit are the most profitable. Yeah. So this whole idea, it's all just bullshit. Most of what you think of as like philanthropy is really like the Bill Gates stuff. Yeah. There's a great book called, what is the name of the book, a rather book of controller garks. And it's all about how a lot of these guys, they realize that they're having public image problems, like particularly Bill Gates, like during the antitrust lawsuits with Microsoft, yeah. Then he pivots to this bill in the Lindigates Foundation where it's all about philanthropy, but they're philanthropic capitalists. All the different philanthropy ventures are extremely profitable. Like he made $500 million allegedly off the COVID vaccine off of his investments. And this vaccine didn't even fucking work well. Yeah. I think Trump got paid, paid without two. But it's like, yeah, it's, you know, the money thing. I don't know. The citizens, the regular citizens are the ones that pay the price for this. Yeah, it's, it's dark. And so here it is. Put your heads on real quick. Listen, this guy talking about Congressman recently described some nonprofit hospitals as hedge funds with hospital beds. First and say that nonprofit hospitals were like hedge funds with hospital beds. And I was like, I bet they are. What's going on here? Because in the United States, more than half of our hospitals are nonprofits. But hospital world doesn't feel very non-profity. And then I read this article by Scott Hodge and then Washington Post that talked about how they need to be taxed. And it turns out that the total revenues of nonprofit hospitals in America in 2023. So three years ago was $1.3 trillion. And it turns out that they're getting a bunch of taxpayer money. In fact, three years ago, so this is probably a lot more now. Non-profit hospitals were making $45 billion worth of profit. And as I mentioned, we taxpayers give them a bunch of money. In fact, in 2021, we gave them $38 billion, $11.5 billion of it because they don't have to pay any taxes. And that was five years ago. So this is probably more like $60 billion now. And the reason that we hypothetically give them this money as taxpayers is because they're supposed to do charity. But there is a study that looked at almost 1,500 nonprofit hospitals. And found that 86% of them provided little or no charity. And that's because almost everybody that goes to hospitals has insurance is either private health insurance or insurance from the government. Only 3% of people don't have health insurance and it's not like the hospitals give them a deal. Turns out that the government was checking this out around 2009, the hospitals spun up a lobbying campaign and got any requirements that would basically define what kind of charity they would have to do squashed. So now it's kind of the honor system. So I was like, where are those billions of dollars going that the nonprofit hospitals make in profits turns out it goes to executives like these CEOs who are getting paid about $4.5 million a year meanwhile their nurses make about 70k. 4.5 million a year here apparently management consultants getting billions of dollars from nonprofit hospitals. And here's a guy Robert at a hospital in New York who paid himself $15.3 million a year nonprofit hospital. And there are really good nonprofit hospitals that are primarily funded by donations and serve low income families and people in need like St. Jude or like the Shriners. But it looks like about 86% of these nonprofit hospitals get 50 or 60 billion dollars from US taxpayers like you and me because they're supposed to do some form of charity. But they paid off the government so they don't have to really do charity. And some of their CEOs are making $15.3 million a year while we subsidize them with like $50 billion. Do you think this is right? I saw this conversation. Okay. So this is Pete Davis Jones on Instagram. Mother fuckers. So it's like it's again it's just like the UFO thing. It's there's distractions. There's so much to pay attention to. There's so much fucking fraud. There's so much. This is what Elon told me when he started looking into the doge stuff. He's like it's impossible to describe the amount of fraud. Yeah. He's like it's insane. That's what Nick Shirley found in Minnesota when he went to investigate the day cares and also found in California with hospice care centers. There's entire motels where every room was supposed to be in office for some fucking nonprofit and they're all just siphoning money. So it's madness. So that's like that's what it makes money. Regular people like me like what's the answer? It's like what's the point to all this. Alien. I'm paying out my ass and taxes for shit like this. Yeah. Or for war. It's like yeah, all of it's gross. Yeah. Every single yeah. I mean what we're going to have to have is some side. Like this. Yeah. And or for war. It's like, yeah, all of it's gross. Yeah, every single. Yeah. I mean, what we're going to have to have is some side of sort of like radical transparency. Where all this stuff gets exposed and gets exposed like probably with some AI program. And no one's going to want to turn that on. Right. Then they're never going to want everyone to know exactly how much fraud and how much fucking terrible management they've done with our money. Oh, like the Pentagon's never passing on at once. Not one zero. And you look at like passing on it. You're going to jail for sure. Yeah. Not that. Yeah. How much we're in debt. All the shenanigans they do with the public money. It's just like, that's over exaggerated. We're only in debt. $39. That's not a big deal. Isn't that crazy? The thing is they could just print $39 trillion and it's done. Yeah. Pay it off. The reason why they don't is because they have really good control. God. You have a great job. It's a one thing on this hunting thing. I do have to give credit to Dan Gates and how it's like they've done a good job on Colorado. Like fighting this is like been we've won a few things there. They tried the same thing with Oregon and Colorado. The same kind of thing. Well, no. What Dan is doing. He's he's got out there initiative 302 and it's going to make hunting and fishing in Colorado constitutional right. Okay. So hopefully that you know how these just like this this lobbyist and this IP 28 they're seeing what works and what they can get away with and kind of planning for the future. Well, if Dan is successful with this initiative 302 passing, that will be like how we can address this in the future to protect hunting and fishing. Because if you can go through there, this is like the litmus test for it. Then okay, maybe we can do this in other states. So this is a big one coming up there working on right now. But I mean, we have to we just have to get more savvy politically to when they're doing show like this, we have to be more in tune, you know, and educated on it. Such a bummer though, because like the people that I know like Mike Benz that do this all day, I do not envy him. I mean, Mike Benz makes these live streams where he's just exposing and they they last for hours. So who's going to go through them all? Well, and I know you're exposing all these different companies. Be nice, be positive. We didn't do any of that. How do you how do you talk about this? It's hard in a nice and positive way. It's very, very, very difficult, very, especially because these are real problems. I last on my lit. Well, I don't know. It's up on the list. But uh, oh, I do want to talk about I'm on a shout out Ryan Callahan from back country hunters and anglers. You know, oh, Cal sure sure great guy bus is asked for this shit. Martin Heinrich, which is he's a senator there in New Mexico. He's I think he's a Democrat. I don't give a shit about Democrat Republican. Whoever he just fights for public lands and he's a badass. And then also run white and they're in Oregon who normally I'd probably never agree with anything on because you know, it's just different. But he is he does get the I want to I want to give those guys credit for trying their best to protect and fight against his public lands sell off and Mike Lee and this energy resource committee, which is, you know, they're beholden to a different set of values. Usually it's money related and these guys are kind of fighting for the guys like us who just enjoy being out in the mountains. So do you be impostive? Yeah, I just wanted to tell those guys are doing great. But I was going to bring this up. This is like the whole scandal. I've been involved with recently, which is feels like a lot for me, which I don't like. But my point on it is I feel like, well, let's explain the scandal before you get into that. So you won the Oregon marathon in your age category. Yeah. And then someone started complaining because you had taken BPC 157, yep, which is a banned substance. Yeah. So you would take for people who don't know as ridiculous as the sounds. Cam broke his foot like two years ago, you broke your foot like two years ago. And you never got it fixed. So all these miles you've been running, you've been running with a broken foot. And you went to ways to well, they treated your foot foot with stem cells and they injected BPC 157 into your foot to help help your foot heal. Yeah. Is it healed now? Is the bone like fused up? Yeah. What did it do? Just grew back? Yeah. Finally, it was like it took a while because I didn't stop running. And it was like, now on an extra, it's like kind of the bone is it was a big break. I could pretty wide break, which is why the surgeon didn't know if it was going to be able to the bone is going to be able across there because I kept like moving it. And he told me he's like, you know, with this, this is I just had the same surgery done on my thumb where the ligament pulls a piece of the bone off and breaks it. Right? So your ligaments and tendons very strong. The bone fracture. So what happened here is I fell and I was doing a race and and basically shredded my ligament broke this so they had to hope that the bone was big enough to go attach it back to where it broke from because bone on bone healing is much better than ligament to bone. It's like quicker, right? So we need a piece of that bone. Well, in my foot, they said he didn't know how big that piece of broke off was. So there's a chance that it wouldn't reattach through surgery. So which means he'd have to take the ligament back to it. It's called a Jones fracture. It's on the outside of my and hope it it connected, but that would be like stretching that ligament beyond where it's supposed to by design. So it probably changed the function of your foot. It would it would change the dynamic of my foot and how my foot and I run. I have a good stride. I run well. And I'm and he said there's no guarantee that this will attach like it should or that you know, you need another surgery if this doesn't work. And then another one to get the hardware out. So I'm just like, I really don't want to do two or three surgeries. Let's see if we can try other treatments, less invasive. If I can just deal with this pain for long enough, would my foot heal and it has. So I was like very interested in not getting the surgery based on, you know, he's a renowned surgery. He does all the surgeries on the Oregon football team. He's a stud, trust, totally trust him. But I heard what you're saying about like, Hey, there's no guarantee this is going to work perfect. And I took that to heart. So I did you have the injury. How long ago it was June 16th of 2024? Okay. Yeah. Quite a long time ago. Right. So basically the solid two years. Yeah. So I went in and I dealt with it for I mean it hurt for a long time. I just didn't want to stop living. You know, and I'm like, okay, if it's just pain, I have a very high pain tolerance. I don't care. I'm going to block that out and just do what I do. So I did. I did, I did everything. I did all my hunts. I did races and it was terrible. And but I made it. I made it through in my foot's healed. But so broke it in June, went into ways to well. I think in July, went back in November, which is when I got that stem cell back in it. And when they put in the BPC there, that that one time in November. And so that was like, that was a thing. And all I said, you know, I had a very fast Eugene marathon time for me. I'm healthier than now that I've ever been. I've retired. I've done more specific training. All these people, you know, I've been labeled as like a doper, right? Like almost like Lance Armstrong. Well, you've been labeled by one very specific person that is a professional runner who's also a vegan and has been very vocal about you in an anti hunting way. So he's got that. And and you're also your time, your running time. He's 18 years younger than you. Yes. And your running time is very similar to his. His last marathon. Yeah. And your running time of this year's marathon, which you won your age class, is quicker than last year's by quite a bit. Yeah. What people don't understand is last year, your fucking foot was broken. I didn't run last year because I was hurt. So it was quicker than like the year before. Right. Was your foot broken then? No. No. Okay. So your time is quicker now than it's ever been before after recovering from your broken foot. Yeah. And that's amazing. It's but how much quicker 10 minutes? It was my best time was in my very best time was in 2006. Me and Lance Armstrong. We did the New York marathon. I didn't even see him during this one, but I ran 250 like 21 in New York. I ran 250 quite a few times like Boston. When I ran with Lance in 2008, I did run 250 again. And that's when we finished together. And you know, Truett and I were talking about this too just the other day, because true of my son, he's gone for the Olympic trials qualifier in the marathon, which means he needs to run quicker than in 2016. So we were talking about this. And it's just my training and even his training, because I'm not a coach and I don't know. I just run to get in shape for bow hunting. Okay. I don't I'm not a pro. But and I had him run and he's very talented, but I didn't know how to coach him either. So he hired a real coach. And when you start getting into this marathon training and specifics of it and why you do certain certain exercises and why there's certain stimulus from, I mean, I just had the winner of the gene marathon on my podcast. And we did a really fast run. We ran a 506 mile, which I had never done at mile seven of an eight mile run. And then he said, okay, my his name's Jacks Sidel. He's like an amazing athlete has 1400 followers, which is kind of crazy that this amazing talented people have a small amount of following, but their talent is incredible. So he wanted, I ran with him just the other day. And he said, Oh, I need to do eight 100 meter strides, which is simply essentially sprinting after we ran super hard eight miles, climb 3000 3000 or 2000 foot mountain and did this fast pace. But he still had to get the stimulus needed for what he's asking his body to do, which is qualified for the Olympics, right? So the stimulus is what I've never done before. I've never got on the track and did it. All I ever did was just go run. I just run. So what I do is like, how do I move this needle in the right direction and pause it away? I got to put in work. How I'd put in work was I'd go run my after a mile after mile some days 20 miles a day because I felt like that was a noble sacrifice for me and for achieving what goals I wanted, which was bow hunting related, not not racing related. Well, with Truett taking on this Olympic trials qualifier journey, he's he's been doing the stimulus hired to coach and like, Hey, dad, you need to do this type of stuff. You know, you get on the track. You wouldn't think you need to get on track to run 26 miles quick, but you do because you need the stimulus for your body. I had never done any of that. I had never got enough sleep. I would sleep. You know, if I was going to do a marathon a day and still be a work 10 hours a day, I'd have to get up and start at 2.45 am. And I did. And sometimes I wouldn't go to bed until midnight. I didn't care about sleep. You'd have Dr. Matthew Walker on here. I'd say, fuck that, Dork, I'm not listening to sleep. It's like, I don't need sleep. I can still perform. Look at it. I just ran 26 miles yesterday on two hours of sleep, but I wasn't performing at my best because I had to overcome my body fatigue. So for decades, I would work. Didn't miss a day of work in 26 years and never called and sick once. Always get my miles in, always get my work done. I was leading the crews. People relied on me to be a good leader. I had to be there. I'd still put in this work. I would not get any sleep. My body was so depleted. I still did everything I needed to do at the highest level I could. Turns out the highest level I could, given those circumstances, was a 250 marathon. All right? So I required three or I mean, I retired three years ago. Now I'm getting sleep. Now I'm doing sauna coldplants. I get, you know, I spend, let's see, spend 2000 bucks a month on massage and body work. And now with more specific training, like last year I ran with Truett, he ran 238 in Boston, 234 in Eugene. We want to run right before he said, Dad, I can't keep up with you. You, you should be going for the sub 230. He's right. He was trying to break 230. He goes, you should be going for the sub 230. You're, you're faster than me. So this was last year, but then I got hurt. So last year, I was going to break this same record. This year, I've been healthy. I knew I was going to get my fastest time ever. I put up a, a post and I said, PRER. I'm either getting a personal record. I'm going to the emergency room. I'm sending it. So I said, PRER and I got a PR. I got 239 11, one of the fastest ever for a 58 year old and it's like that caused people to pay attention, which I get. It's a very fast marathon for somebody almost 60 years old. But you have to look at the, that the full picture and say like, this wasn't some just guy who just started running. Been running. I had been running since I've five years old on 58. I was running pushing myself at five running further than any other kid in school, winning in awards that was 53 years ago. Okay. I've been doing this while. I haven't been training specifically because I didn't care. And so this guy said, Oh, have, you know, he's like mad that I was so fast. He's talked shit about true. I don't, I'm trying to be nice and positive. So I'm not going to say his name. I'm not going to, I understand people who want to protect clean sport. I applaud you Sada. I applaud water. I applaud clean sports. I love it. It's, it's, it's required for the Olympic athletes to get their just do. For me, he said, you know, he's talked shit about true, which he's already on my radar because I remember true. It said, Hey, others, is the elite guy who's saying that I'm dishonoring the marathon because I have no chance of getting the standard. And, you know, I said, who? Why is that dishonoring the marathon? Because he was saying like true so far away from his time that it was unrealistic to even put that as a goal. My point was he's a runner, just like you, he has a big dream just like you had. Why shit on his dream? Somebody says that, that's this dream. They want to do it. You're right. I would have be dishonorable to have a lofty ambition. That doesn't even make sense. It, that was just words. The words are associated because he's my son. So that's all the amount of two. Um, but I, he was on my radar for that because true, it told me. And I said, who and I hadn't didn't even really know who it was, looked him up. I'm just like, yeah, fuck whatever. So anyway, I knew the name. Well, he comes on my page after this. And he says, something like he dug up this old post from like 2011, which is still up there. And it talked about the shit I was taking from is like complete nutrition, which is like GNC. And it was, you know, if you go to GNC, like, you know, mask gainer 2000, like everything seems like it's a steroid. It's over the counter. It's not fucking steroids. You can't buy steroids or the counter. Everything that on that thing that I was doing, I was sponsored by a complete nutrition all over the counter supplements. It's like, there's no fucking EPO on here. It's like what these people try to make it sound like. It was just shit that I was lifting weights. As from 15 years ago, 2011. It's a blog post. He still has it. Yeah. It's like, like I said, pray to you around like a trophy. It's like fucking it's over the counter, whatever. So he said, I said, are you still talking about that? This is like late at night. I was kind of irritated. Didn't, doesn't got irritates me anyway. So he said, could you pass a, you saw it a drug test? And I said, I have no idea. I has nothing to do with me. I don't give a fuck, probably not though, because I didn't, actually, I didn't even know, but I know it's very restrictive. And I've had a lot of Olympians and things on my show. We don't talk about the drug test stuff. We're just like, we just go running. Well, what, what stuff would you take? How did you take in that wouldn't allow you to pass a drug test? The stuff you're taking now, like what supplements can you not take? Because there's a lot of stuff that people just take normally that you can't take. Well, peptides are one of them, right? I certain peptides, certain peptides. I think you can take certain ones, but I don't even know because I had never looked at the list. I tried to with this when this came up. Well, the other thing is a lot of people fail just by taking supplements because there's third party, there's contamination of supplements. That's what happened to Sugar Shauna Mallory, the Austrian, it's happened to, you know, a lot of athletes. With this most of stuff that you would buy, like a GNC, probably an Olympian couldn't take or they'd have to check it out. A lot of us couldn't. Right. Because it's like how clean is a lab, how, you know, susceptible is to contamination. So a lot of them, like they're thinking about this shit every day, like it's their whole life. If they get, if they pop hot, their careers over. Yeah. So it's a huge deal. I had a Jordan Burrows in here and he wouldn't even try Kill Cliff CBD drink. Right. He's like, I don't think I need to take this. Well, I had Chido on my show and I said, Hey, you want to try a ketone. He's like, I don't know. So he called Jeff Nivinsky. And he said, could I take this ketone IQ? And Jeff said, well, depends on what batch is approved. So the batch of the ketone IQ that was made has to be approved. The other batch might not be approved. So you could fail from that other batch. I didn't know any of that shit, but he called him right before we did it. So he didn't take it. It's just like, so there's things like that where it's just, it's non-stop. I don't know if I can take this. There's that. I've never been in that position because I'm, I just run to bow hunt. I've never looked at these lists and never done anything, but a lot of stuff that, you know, Sudafed is on there. ADHD medicine is on there. You can't take or you have to get what they call a therapeutic use exemption. So say if you were a regular guy and you had low testosterone and you wanted to do TRT, you could get that approved through a therapeutic use exemption. That's very interesting through doctor. You can run in the marathon with a therapeutic use exemption of testosterone, which is a legitimate performance enhancement. Yeah. Theoretically, I don't know if they'd have to look at your numbers and where you're at and like if this was real. Well, you're supposed to take a very specific amount. Like this was the issue with the UFC when the UFC had TUEs. Yeah. And they had TRT, Vtor, those days when guys were taken like large amounts of shit. And that's actually what stopped the program. I said people started testing like off the fucking chart. Yeah. testosterone. Right. They realize like, okay, these guys are straight up juicing. Yeah, for sure. So, but if you're a 60 year old person and you want to run the marathon and you're on testosterone, it's legal. Yeah. Yeah. And it should be. It's like, the TUE thing is still probably abused in some ways because we know these doctor patient relationships. Right. You can say, hey, I want to do this. Can you make it sound like this? Right. Of course. And that's that's gonna be the case. I'm not even I'm not even talking. All I'm saying is like for and I talk to Olympians about the situation because I want to make sure I understand it. Right. It's like, if I'm as a regular citizen, so there's 9,000 runners in the gene marathon, are we all going to be held to the standard of Olympic athletes? That's right. Are they testing everybody in the U.G. Marathon? They didn't test anybody. Anybody. So there's there's prize money that that's paid out. There's Olympic trials qualifying standards, which are met. So now you're in the Olympic trials. And I don't want to shit on the U.G. Marathon because these small, smaller marathons, they don't have the money to be testing 9,000 people. Of course, probably these tests are expensive. So there's something to like if it's a USATF, so United States of America, track and field association. If it's one of those events and it's for like a world championship or it's for like a team position, I get it. And it does need to be for the U.G. Marathon with 9,000 people. It's not realistic to say we're going to drug test everybody or if you're taking whatever you need a therapeutic use exemption because you think you saw it could review, say if people are taking three or four different medications times 9,000, they don't have the resource to to go through all those TUEs, right? It's not realistic. So there should be in my opinion two categories. You got your regular runners, which I'm in and you got your elites, which are susceptible to this drug testing and these requirements. And that's totally fair. And I get that. And it's kind of why I've waited into this and said, I'll be the poster boy for this. I'll admit that I took BPC 157 to try to avoid search for I'm a foot and whatever the fall right. Whatever the fall it is is what it is because this needs to be discussed because I talk to all these regular people who are doing all this stuff just to be healthy to enjoy something that they love, which is running or competing in races. And everybody on the other side on, you know, say the clean sport side, which I am on that side too. Trust me, I want I want clean sport. But they're like saying that like my time was so fast. It's almost into this, they talk about this age-graded like this guy who brought it up said age grade. So what that I think is what that looks at is like in my prime, if I ran a 239 at age 58, what was my potential when I was in my prime, right? And it would it is super fast like, you know, like world like 210 or 212, which would have won the Olympics back when I was 25. You know what I mean? So I understand why my time is just like I'm almost too fast as a regular citizen to kind of like this gray area like, should he be tested or whatever. But all I'm saying like if the rule is to test or if I know the rules, I'm down dude, I'm I'm all for it. That's why I've been so transparent about what I've taken, what I've done and what I was trying to avoid with the surgery. But it's also an important point. There's an important point about the sign up thing for the Eugene Marathon. If you're supposed to not take certain supplements, it's supposed to be stated in the marathon sign up, right? Yeah, and it's not. Yeah, and I don't, I've never, I hardly look at that. But there's now after all this, I looked at the waivers because you know, you saw it has been, they sent me two really nice emails, just lovely emails that I haven't responded to. And they, they're trying to do the best they can. But if these waivers say, I looked at the waiver for I did two races this year, Eugene Marathon, I co-coded on a 250. And the waivers mentioned liability and insurance things. Doesn't mention anything about USATF or drug testing or any of these requirements. There's no mention of it. But it's also what the thing that doesn't make any sense is first of all, BPC 157 is not a performance enhancing something. Yeah, what it helps heal soft tissue injuries is very good for recovery from injuries. That was what that's one issue. The other issue is it was two fucking years ago. There's no way that's affecting you in this year's Eugene Marathon. That is no, it's a long out of your system. It's a smoke screen, you know, we've talked about smoke screens here. What he's doing is this basically, he's accusing you because he took BPC 157 and saying you're lying about doing all these other things. I've been called a liar, a cheater, a doper, a stealing. It's like, yeah, but it's all fine. But this is essentially what we were talking about earlier. Yeah. What we were talking about earlier about people that are outliers that are like super successful and they've been fucked up guy, that guy cheats that guy, this guy, that same fucking thing. Yeah. This guy can appreciate that here's a guy who was running a fucking marathon a day while working a day to our job. I was your friend then. This is real. I know you did this. I was always telling you to quit your job. Yeah. That was the first guy telling you quit that fucking job. You're killing yourself. I was worried about you because I know that your mind is so strong that you are willing to push your body to the point where it could actually fail and willpower is really important. Having a strong will will get you through so much in life that other people will not be able to pass. They will not be able to break through. But will could also get killed. And it could also ruin your life. You could hurt yourself to the point. You hurt your back or something to the point where you'd never recover. It never comes back. There's like a fine line between mental toughness and just be able to see the big picture and go that's actually smart to not be tough here. And it's not to deny my toughness. I got to know that I am tough and have confidence in my toughness enough to give my body a break and rest myself. That's why I was always worried about you because you were doing things with no fucking sleep. And I saw it. I know you did it. I watched. That guy's not doing this. And you have to understand that the kind of willpower that a guy like you has or a guy like Goggins has where they can do things to people who have no one could do that. The fuck they can't. Like how many UFC fighters you've seen go and train with Goggins and they're like Israel, Al-Hosania. World champion, world class guy rolling up at a fucking garbage can can't keep up with him. Tony Ferguson like who is known in the MMA world for fucking superhuman endurance. Tony Ferguson would just walk people down in his private. He was El-Kakoui. He was the fucking bogeyman. He never got tired. And even if you heard him, it didn't matter. He was going to recover and come back after you. He was coming. He was coming for your fucking soul. That guy was breaking down. Everybody breaks down. And it's he's doing it in silence. No one even knows. He's doing it with no music. He's doing it by himself. No one's pushing him. He's a fucking full on psychopath. They are real. There's real people out there that are really living like that. This guy should look at that and take inspiration from it. But he's got these ideological differences with you because he's a vegan and because he thinks hunting is cruel and you're an asshole and you're killing animals and Mimo, he needs to eat one of them in bare sticks. Barped to listen. Give me another one. I want another one. Fuck it awesome. They're great. But it's just it's just what we're talking about. It's if you and that guy actually had a conversation. Thank you. If you and that guy actually had a conversation and you were civil and there was no cameras and it was just two human beings having a conversation. I guarantee you probably have way more in common than you do not. You know outside of the ideological differences about hunting and veganism and maybe a lack of understanding about what even veganism entails. Because most of it entails large scale monocrop agriculture. If you're just buying plants, you are responsible for the death of a fucking countless number of creatures. In fact, end up especially if you start talking about bees and avocados and almonds. Oh, I'm eating almonds. I'm healthy. You fucking killed 100 billion bees. Stop. Outside of that, what are you both doing? You're both pushing yourself to the limits of your ability. And maybe of that guy had a bare sticker to me. He'd have a better time. Well, I mean, yeah, I need some real fucking protein. I am friends with a lot of people just like him and belief in like on the political spectrum or even the diet spectrum. And it hasn't affected our friendship at all because what I focus on is what do we have in common? We love the mounds. We love to run. We love to push ourselves. I don't need to align with everybody 100%. So I'm friends with tons of liberal people and love them. It's like has nothing to do with anything. It's for him. I was on the radar for a few different reasons. This gave him like the reason why BPC 157 is banned for Olympians, not for a regular person. Regular people can take it. So I'm just like, he's like, do you know what the rules are? And I'm like, I don't give a fuck about the rules. So then he turned that into like, he doesn't care about the rules. He's going to do everything anything he wants. I'm like, you know, I don't care about rules that don't apply to me. I'm just like, whatever. So the rules that apply to me are this rule. And it's that if you want to talk about rules, I follow the rules. Like I talked about purchasing, you know, when I was the the buyer at my old job for 20 years, I had to go buy laws and rules every day. And so I I respect that if it has to do with. the buyer at my old job for 20 years, I had to go buy laws and rules every day. And so I respect that if it has to do with me, if it like affects me, I'm like, okay, I understand it. Well, this one, you start bringing up these USATF sanctions and what I need to know when I sign a waiver for race, and I look at the waiver and the waiver doesn't mention anything about this. This says if the USATF sanctions event is, you know, if we're talking drug testing, it says, related published materials must contain the following language. So when I see that it says that must contain the following language in my contract days, I'm like, well, that didn't say, should or didn't say may because should and may means it doesn't have to. When it says must, it must. So it says a must say this, athlete who participate in this competition may be subjected to formal drug testing and corners of the USATF blah, blah, blah. So basically it has to have this language and it has to spell out exactly what it is. Their rules, their own rules say, it must be included. I've never seen this language. It was never included in anything that I've agreed to in regard to these races. So there's no responsibility to go to the website and find out what the standards are. If they had the waiver, even if they had a link, like, okay, right. And so if they said, if you are going to race, you must be held to the standards of this race, you can go visit them on this website. That's fine. I would be like, Oh, that was my bad. I didn't do that. Right. They never mentioned it. So if somebody said, like, I didn't know BPC was banned for Olympians at all before this. I just thought that it was another, maybe you could get a TUE for, or I didn't know what TUE was, but because I just, it's not my world. My world is bow hunting. I just try to get in as good shape as I can. You're not trying to do it for money. You're doing it. I've never won money. I've never been on a national team. If I wanted to be, if that was what I was going to do, I would know everything about the rules, everything about what I could take or what I couldn't take. I mean, you can't take THC. You know, I mean, they say you can take it, but not on the day of competition. So you know how long THC is in your system. Yeah. So you took it a day before, but you didn't, but you're still going to test. Yeah. But, but as long as that lasts in your system, how are they going to prove if you took it that morning? Well, they would have to be able to test your levels right after you race and they could determine whether or not you actually intoxicated during the race. That's how Nick Diaz got popped. Oh, really? Takinori gummy. He said his is fucking levels. We're off the charts. And that was, I don't believe it was. I believe that was, I think that was pride. And I think it was the first time that pride had an event in the United States. And they had it in Vegas. I believe. See, that's, that's right. It was a long time ago. I want to say this is God, I want to say like 2005, it was a big win. When Nick beat Takinori gummy, Takinori gummy was one of the big stars over in pride and Nick, he got him with a go-go plot, which is a crazy submission off your back. We use the shin against the guys neck and you're grabbing your foot from behind his head and God nasty. But they said he was off the charts. Same size of kite when he was fighting. Which I fucking love. Yeah. You're not allowed to do that. And I think for good reasons, I don't think you should be allowed. But look, the reality of these drug tests are is that if you're saying to a person that you can't take it the day of the competition and they're a regular user, they're going to have a lot of THC in their system. Right. They just are. And also you could, you could take a very high dose of edibles the day before a race and you would still be in toxic day of the race. Now, so that's, so what year was this? Apparently the commission felt the level which DS tested at 175 was a considering factor in his performance during the fight. Dr. Tony Alamo, the commission's chair said that so it was Nevada a result of 15 is considered positive. But in the Nevada State Athletic Commission has a threshold of 50 test positive for THC. They feel very comfortable that everybody that test positive in Nevada is truly positive. Mr. Diaz was 175. This creates a unique situation. I was there at the fight. I believe you were intoxicated and that it made you numb to the pain. Did it help you win? I think it did. I don't, you know, listen, Diaz is going to be numb to the pain anyway. He's one of the toughest fucking dudes that's ever lived. Yeah. I don't know if you can make that argument that it helped you win. I think it probably relaxed him. He likes it. He, you know, he probably could go out there high and fight more in his element. But he could fight in his element. Anyways, he was one of the best fighters on earth at the time. He's a world class fighter. The idea that that helped him win. It's like, yeah, prove it. It's a true, but he was beaten everybody anyway. It's a stretch. It's like, I just don't think that we need to be opening the Pandora's box to testing 9,000 people or having them, you know, like, well, it's also be realistic about what you're saying. Because what you're saying is if all you did was take that drug, this is not even drug, take that peptide in 2024 for a broken foot. There's no fucking chance that helped you win a marathon two years later. It does not help other than the fact that it helped to heal your broken foot. That's not performance enhancing. It's just not. But this guy's kind of a hater, not a piece of a hater. It was which I understand. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I admitted that I took it and it's like, at that, and actually that night, I remember I didn't even know when that was. I fucking can't remember when I go went to waste well. I was like, I thought it was like six months ago. I couldn't even fucking remember. So then I got a hold of them. I said, no, I need, you know, the details of my treatment. And it, you know, it was in November of 2024 and I'm like, okay, well, but anyway, that night I said, yeah, I've done stem cell. I've done TRT before and mentioned BPC 157. And it's like, I didn't know when that was, but I just kind of, because he was like coming at me, I'm just like, no fuck off. It's like, I do all this. I don't know whether it's approved or not. It doesn't has nothing to do with me. I'm not any lead athlete. I'm fucking bow hunter. So I was like, kind of want to just let's shit on him at that time. Well, he got what he needed because admitting to take in BPC for like a limpy and his huge deal because it's banned just for them, not for me. And that then he could go to you saw it and say, oh, this guy took a a ban and they're, you know, now they're like, it sucks. It's like they're in a position where I don't know. It's just like so much the public knows about it so much. It's like, you know, I got articles about me and talking about all this crazy shit. I'm just like, I was just trying to not have two or three surgeries. It's just like, I'm not trying to win a fucking that my age category of marathon. And then they'll turn it into like, well, that's not fair to the other people who are performing. I was like, it's not, we don't even know who's what people are taking. I was like, I'm not even in this field of the C. Lead field where this is all I did was admit I was truthful. Everybody else just lies. Yeah. Well, maybe maybe lies, maybe doesn't. But the, the point is a giant percentage of people right now are taking peptides because they're very beneficial to appeal injuries. And if you're going to run marathons like the way you run them with very fast times, you're probably training really hard. If you're training really hard, you're probably going to get injured. Yeah. Yeah. It's just, but it's a hater thing is what it is or he's accusing you of lying, which I know you're not a lie. But so this is the thing he's, he's attacking your character, but it's also the fact that, you know, that quote that I love all criticism is the tragic result of unmet needs. Skye's an elite athlete. No one knows who he is. Yeah. You know, that's part of the problem. Yeah. And then with someone who's very popular is creeping in on his times, like that's like how, how's that possible? 18 years older than me? Fuck this guy. No one ever wants to think that someone actually works harder than them. No, no. Or yeah, I mean, and I get that. I mean, I, I'm a human too. I understand how that can happen. But like to call me like a dope or ton of discredit, everything I've, I've done. It's just like, it's so not even real. The approach to use is to just be honest, lay it all out and leave it alone. Yeah. I don't think like going after this guy and talking last shit is in any way beneficial. I don't want, I want, I want everyone to succeed. I don't have anything personal against this guy. I didn't like you was talking shit about true. I didn't even that. It's just, it's just hater aid. You just, he's true at running with those fucking perfect jeans on and looking all handsome. He's also a little too buff to be a marathon runner, which drives people nuts too. Yeah. And then he also won the world pull up challenge. Like look, when someone breaks the world record and pull ups, that isn't a fucking extraordinary human being period. And for you to discredit that person in marathon running after they've done that, well, you're a fool. Yeah. This isn't just a regular person. Right? This is a person who broke the world fucking record for chin ups pull ups. That's a crazy thing to do. Yeah. To do thousands of pull ups in 24 hours rip your fucking hands to shreds. Yeah. That's an extraordinary person for him to not recognize that. He's being a bitch. Yeah. Which is fine. It's a natural characteristic that a lot of human beings have. Yeah. And especially ones that are not getting their needs met in terms of the attention they feel they deserve and who are ideologically opposed to you because you're a hunter. What the traction he's got is because it's almost like if you say, you know how some people would say, oh, you're interested in border security, like protecting the border racist, right? Right. Right. You're not. Right. You're a cheater. So to say that I'm a cheater or a Doper, you don't have to say anything else because you're just like, oh, that guy. So now I'm kind of tainted by with that language when the fact of the matter this is years ago, I don't take any, I mean, I take plenty like fish oil, magnesium, all this other bullshit trace gives me. But like the level of doping I know about, I don't know shit. I don't mean, I don't know. I know we talked about this before, but I don't even know really what a EPO does other than make like more red blood cells or something. So there's more oxygen. But I'm so like illiterate on performance and like PEDs. I'm just like, I don't, I don't even take testosterone anymore because I run better low, which is weird. And I didn't know if this happened because they say when you run like long distances, like stream long distances, your testosterone drops, I almost think that's by design because I look at like how these women have been performing at these huge with low testosterone and higher estrogen, they perform better. And so I'm just like, man, maybe I don't need the TRT. Maybe. And so I haven't like I had, I had, I got a prescription filled like last September and I still have four of the things out of 10. And anybody who's a doper, they don't got dope sitting around. Like if you had, you know, if I don't care if it's meth or fucking testosterone, if you have it, you take it if you're a doper, right? So I haven't done it because I'm, I operate better with a low heart rate, low testosterone, and I can run. But low body weight too, that's a big factor. Yeah. I'm like 148 is what I got down to when I do right now, like 52. Wow. When I met you, you were in the 80s. Yeah, I was just lifting. I just, I always ran, but I was running like five miles a day. And I wanted to be like, I thought like for hunting, I needed more muscle to perform because I need to carry heavy loads and things like that. Now I've realized that I'm better with extreme endurance and I'm still strong for, for like 148, still very strong compared to like a normal 148. So I, I'm still able to do the task I need to do carry heavy loads when I kill. Optimized. Yeah. So well, this is the big factors, the weight, because I'm pretty heavy. Yeah. And I, I noticed the difference, you know, like I've lost, I've won, I hunted a few years back, I got down to the 190s early one, like 192 or 193. And I felt way lighter. Yeah. Like you would think 10 pounds, because right now I weighed way 202 this morning, you would think 10 pounds is not that big of a deal. It's a big deal. Yeah, it's a big deal. When I work out, and I put a 25 pound weight vest on, it's amazing how much harder it is to do chin ups and push ups and dips. It's amazing. Yeah. And it's only 25 pounds. Yeah. No, it's. You think about how many people just normally carry 25 extra pounds. You're walking around all day with a weight vest on, you know. Well, and I've told true at this too. It's like he's heavier, but every guy lining up to run them the Olympic trials qualifier or like when they run the Olympic trials for the marathon, there won't be anybody over like 140. So I said, which totally makes sense. You're fighting gravity. Yeah. I mean, you got to be light. Yeah. So I said, you can't be 160 and compete. What is he at now? He's like 58. And what is he trying to get down to? He's got to be in the 40s. Got to be like 140. Oh, my God. He's going to look like a skeleton. The guy, the guy who I just ran with, he ran Eugene and set the course record and all that, he was 135. Probably like 6-1. Whoa. That's just the name of the game. Right. Like the East African super light, the guy who just broke the world record of the marathon. He's like one 35 or no, no 115. Jeez. Tiny little guy. So it's like makes sense. That's just, that's just performance. This is what it takes. A huge engine, a light body. Right. And so like to pay me this way when I was turning a void of surgery, haven't taken BPC since then, um, it's just, it's kind of just I think all you could do is state your case. And I think you just did and you just did it really well. And I know you and I can speak for you. You are, as honest as human beings I've ever met my life. You don't lie about anything. And you are, it's also why you work so hard. You work so hard so you don't have to lie. You're, you're an insanely hard worker. I didn't lie about this either. I mean, that's what I just said. Yeah, I did. I didn't remember when, but looked it up. Here's what it was, whatever. Yeah. This guy's got to get over it. Maybe you should have a conversation with him on keep hammering collective. Yeah. I mean, I don't, I would talk to, talk to anybody. I don't, you know, I talk to people who feel differently than me all the time. People there's a, there's also a problem where people don't know someone and they don't communicate with them. And so you kind of form a narrative and then you fight that narrative. You know, you attack that narrative. You attack a creation of who the person is, rather than the actual person. And people like to do that because they like to turn someone into a demon. Yeah, they like to turn someone to an, not even a person. That's how people have to do that with war. They love to do that with religion. It's easy to garner support with keywords using keywords that nobody could defend would be like, okay, we got that, that'll work right there. And so that's where, you know, the knots here, the dope or the racist. That's why those words are always out there. Yep. It's like because they're powerful. Exactly. That's exactly. And when you, you know, when you get boxed in a corner, you can use those words and it buys you some time. Yeah, there's that. And then it's also, you know, there's a lot of people that don't have a good personal insight. They don't understand what they're doing. Really, they think they're justified in what they're doing. Really, it's just a bunch of bitchy bullshit. One thing that I did, I think part of this, I don't want to be demonized about like with the peptides because it shouldn't be demonized. But one thing I think a lot of people, because as you said, a lot of people are taking these peptides, a lot of people are doing the TRT stuff, I think that there was a big shift when COVID happened as far as distrust in the health. I mean, basically our health and wellness category like it started maybe with Obamacare. People are having trouble getting in their doctor, doctors quit because it's too frustrating. So people, we've had a hard time getting medical treatment like to be healthy. And then COVID happened and then they were shoving down, you know, the vaccine down our throats and turned out like it wasn't as safe as effective as they said. So I think people like they see that the writing was on the wall. They couldn't get in their doctor. The doctor was like just writing prescriptions. So then the wellness clinics popped up, right? And it feels like it was after COVID for now, like you got a ways to well and there's other places like it where you can go in and they care about how you feel. They want you to, they want to help you feel better. Like live like an optimized life, like your old, but you don't have to feel old. And so they're like, they can do the blood panel where getting a blood plan on your regular doctor was like pulling teeth for a while. It's like, no, we don't need to do that. But you go to a wellness clinic, they'll do it. And I'll tell you, yeah, you're deficient here. This, this, that we could add this, we could try this. And then also you start to feel better. And you're like, well, these people care about my health. The doctor, what do you care about writing prescriptions? And then the doctors are playing a totally different game as we could see from that hospital video that we just watched. Right. So it's no wonder that waste wells and like these, these other treatments, maybe bypassing surgery and let's try this peptide. I see that it's kind of evolving and it's changing. And the sport of ultra needs to also and running needs to be on board with that because most your field aren't elites and aren't Olympians. Right. They're regular people who just are trying to do what they enjoy. And that's me while they're working a full time job. Most of them. Yeah. Well, I think you laid your case out and I got a pee. So let's wrap this bad boy up and bring it home. Congratulations on your bear hunt. Those, you got two giant monsters. Oh, yeah. We got John and Jen. Yeah, shout out to John and Jen. Rivet. Yeah. I'm going to try to come next year. So I love those guys. Love those guys. Um, I love that place they have up there too. It's crazy. And for people who don't know, um, those, these, these bear have no natural predators other than grizzlies. They have to be controlled. They are devastating. The moose and deer and elk population up there because they kill all the calves. They, they, they, they're ruthless predators, opportunistic hunters, they eat each other. Just to put it that in perspective, in Alaska, they're flying out of helicopters shooting bear. Yeah. Because there's so many, not enough for getting killed. So they wipe out all the ungulates. Yeah. So it's like, it's an issue. You just don't know about it. You know, people don't know that Alaska is flying a helicopter's leaving bear after they kill them. I know. And everybody thinks of bears as yogi, yogi and booboo and, you know, comfort trip. Take a trip to Alberta. I'll show you some real shit. Yeah. Yeah. I know it's a, I remember when, uh, you know, I've told this story, you know, Jen and I ran into a grizzly once when we're out there just briefly, we only saw it briefly. We're like, let's get the fuck out of there. Yeah, they, they don't even hunt over there anymore because too many grizzlies. So that's like, that's quite a waste from where we hunt now just because in that crazy, like, grizzly starts coming in the bait. Yeah. That's what gotta get out of there. Especially, I like to sit on the ground and they need to start hunting them up there too. I know, you know, this is the, when they changed that law in BC, they made it to fucking disaster up there. There's so many grizzly now. Yeah. And it's just the people that live in these high population areas that don't have any encounters with them. And it's ballot box biology. Yeah. They're trying to be good people. Do you want to outlaw trophy hunting? Yeah, these cruel assholes. They just want to shoot this animal for its skin. Yeah, fuck them. They just want to show what a big man they are by killing an animal. Like that guy calls me a trophy hunter. Like, he's he's like, oh, I understand deer and elk hunting, but not bear. It's just like, well, you don't know what you're talking about. How is that bear? How is that? How is that any different than deer and elk? My daughter went to school one day and they were asking what your favorite food was and she said bear candy because Steve Renella taught me a recipe called bear candy. How to make this, like it's like a, you make it with brown sugar and you cook this bear. And it's like a sweet and sour pork kind of deal. But with bear, it was fucking delicious. And I served it for my kids and my daughter, I think she was just trying to like jostle people up a little bit. I ate there. Well, Jen makes some badass bear stir fry. Oh, it's fantastic. I mean, I was like, her bear meat is fantastic. I was just thinking to myself, mountain hops has those new freeze dried meals. Maybe I need to get some right dehydrated get some bear meat in there. Yeah, because those things are good. So in food, he does it all in a dehydrator, then rehydrates it in camp. He's vacuum seals his own stuff. Some of those meals do. Yeah. What's the best way to do it? If you want to clean, if you want to eat clean in the mountains, you get a dehydrator for that energy because just like in ultra is in performing, what you're using for calories matters. 100%. So especially on a long hunt, if you can, like we had, I had some mountain hops freeze dried in there, like chicken alfredo. That's just fucking good, good calories. 100%. And also electrolytes. Boy, it changed for me when I started using element, when I started throwing element in my water when I was out there, giant difference. Get those electrolytes. That's the first thing I drink in the morning. It's an element. Yeah. Because I know because I run every day, I know I think I've been also like low on sodium for a long time just because of how much I run. For sure. Like I run so much like I get sores here because my shirt gets soaked with sweat. Uh huh. And wet clothes sitting on my skin has makes all these sores from running for hours in a wet shirt. That's crazy. And so guys, where they're nipples out, they have to put like that. Yeah, that have I wear like AIDS. I wear like a bra. It's like a little running pack, but it holds my shirt right there on my tits. But this here bounces and it's like just being wet, but that's crazy. It's big sores on your skin. It's from a t-shirt. It does. Just from being, it's just not running itself. Just from being warm. But I think that I was sweating so much that when I do that element first thing in the morning, it sets me up for the whole day to be able to perform at a higher level. Yeah. Even just some sea salt in your water. Like you need minerals. Everybody does need electrolytes. It's, uh, let's wrap it up. Yeah. All right. Brother, I love you to death. Love you, Ross. I'm glad you had an opportunity to come on here and this is all very important stuff to talk about. And one more time that number for everybody. I want to call that number. I know. Call your call your centers. 202-234-3121. Say, Rolis Rolines. Stay intact. Mike Lee can suck a big fat one. America. Fuck yeah. Bye everybody.