Well, not to be depressing, but here's the truth and something you should keep in mind over the next few years. The United States, two things to keep in mind. The United States is moving, not inexorably, but still moving toward Civil War. Number one, and number two, Civil Wars are the very worst kind of wars, worse than any kind of war fought against a foreign adversary. So, to number one, why is American moving towards Civil War for the same reason all countries that wind up in Civil War get there? Because the differences between their population, between people within their borders, becomes too great to bear. People decide, I have nothing in common with people who live near me, and I don't want to live near them anymore. In other words, diversity, difference is actually intolerable to most people. Not necessarily racial diversity, though sometimes that too, but diversity of all kinds. It is not our strength. In fact, it is without question or weakness and it has always been. If you have nothing in common with your wife, do you have a stronger marriage? No, of course your marriage falls apart, and the same is true for countries. And the truth about the United States is that on every level beginning with a demographic level, the American population is less in common with itself, with one another than ever before. When I was born, which wasn't that long ago, it was the modern era, it was air travel and air conditioning. Electricity. When I was born, the United States was about 90% white Christian. It's now less than 40% white Christian. Now you may think that's a good thing or a bad thing, but it's a massive change and unprecedented change really in a very short period of time. And of course it's not accidental or organic. That was the result of policies put in place to achieve that result and they did. There are people who didn't want a majority white Christian country. Okay, think out what they wanted. But what do they have? They have a country with no majority demographically at all. There is no American majority, which is to say 51% of people have something very basic and common. And so what you have is an inherently fractured country. Languages, religions, ethnicities, backgrounds, beliefs, to innumerable to catalog. And so a country like that, unless unified by something, will split apart, particularly when that country is the size of a continent and is held together by a pretty fragile web of infrastructure, air roots and highways. And so unless you are very self conscious about keeping it together physically, but also spiritually, explain to people why they should have any regard at all, much less any obligation to people and say the next town, much less the next state. And unless you do that self consciously, unless you inculcate a sense of national identity, it will by nature fall apart. That is a physics principle entropy. It will blow up unless you hold it together. And this has been an untended garden for decades. Decades, nobody in charge of the United States over the past say 40 years has really tried to articulate why all of us should live together on the same continent. There's kind of been an unspoken ethos of America, a kind of gay rights technocracy, global homo. We're all kind of cool with, you know, lifestyles. But that's thin gruel in the end. It's also repulsive, but even if you like it, it's not enough to hold people together who don't have common beliefs, backgrounds, languages, religions. It's just not. It's pathetic. It's rich people politics. It doesn't actually mean anything. It's just an adornment. It's political jewelry. It's a bumper sticker. It's not a national identity. It's not enough to hold your country together. And that's why ours is coming apart because people don't have enough in common. So what would happen if it came apart? What would happen if there were a civil war? Well, the first thing to know is it would be incredibly violent because wars are by nature violent and civil wars, especially so violent and crazy. And you do hear from time to time people on both sides, particularly on the left, but not only on the left say, well, I'm just sick of it. I'm just sick of it. And I'm ready. I'm ready for the fight. People who say that I've never seen what that looks like. Anyone who has seen what that looks like approaches the entire topic with care and respect because it's incredibly ugly and it's a fixer generational. And if you don't believe it, consider our own civil war, which ended 160 years ago in 1865 and we're still fighting it. We're still arguing over the names of Confederate generals tearing down their statues, renaming military bases, stereo typing people in the South, that war is still ongoing on some levels. On a hot war, but it's very much a cold war and has been for 160 years. Go to Spain. Their civil war ended in what 1939, they're still arguing about they're still passing legislation about it. The wounds left by civil wars do not heal quickly. They last for, I don't know, hundreds of years and they completely remake the country, usually for the worse. So disunity is easy rebuilding into a single country after a civil war is very, very hard in some times it never even works. There are civil wars in effect on going on this planet right now for hundreds of years and they probably will never be resolved because the people fighting each other within national borders don't have anything in common. That's the truth. So if you want to prevent a civil war, figure out what everybody or at least the bulk of the people in your nation have in common and emphasize that. And so what would that be in our case? Hard to know. In fact, at this stage, really the only realistic hope for national unity is spiritual revival is a place where most Americans wake up to realize that God exists and created every single person in the United States of America. And that's what we have in common, our humanity, not because our common humanity is meaningful by itself, but because our common humanity comes from God and we're created in His image. And only when people truly realize that will to hesitate before killing each other. But in the meantime, and we hope that comes soon, but in the meantime, there is a step that the government at all levels, federal, state, and local can take to restore at least a sense of calm in the midst of rising chaos. And if you can't smell that right now, then you obviously have long COVID because it is redola. This country is on the brink. And in fact, you saw that the normal dummies today on social media taking pictures from Portland, Oregon, everything is fine here in Portland. They're liars where they're intentionally blind to the reality right in front of them, which is the country is degrading and you can tell by its cities they are falling apart. There's no country in the world with as many ugly, dangerous, dysfunctional, dirty cities as we have. It's painful to say that as someone who was born and has always lived here and plans to always live here. But that's a fact. And if someone travels a lot, I can affirm what you already know. Our cities are dying. And when your cities die, your country dies. And a lot of people don't want to believe this because they move to rural areas and are hoping to sort of ignore it. I'd be in that category. But it's nevertheless true. When your cities die, your country dies. And our cities are dying the kind of death that can't be permanent. They're dying the death born of chaos where things just get so crazy. And people literally die on the street, also have sex and defecate on the street, but die on the street. And that's intolerable. Chaos isn't horrible. People can't handle it. So out of chaos comes what? Democracy? Spontaneous order? No. Imposed order dictatorship. Of course, each and every time that's what happens out of chaos. People beg for a strong man. There's always someone willing to oblige and that's exactly what they get. And that's exactly what we're going to get unless some kind of order is restored, which is another way of saying restoring order is not a step toward totalitarianism. It may be the only way to prevent it, but we need to do it now. Walk through any American city and be honest with yourself. Is this working? It's clearly getting worse. What it looked like in 10 years, the differences between states are getting more profound. You wouldn't expect that, actually. After the advent of radio and then television, the internet mass media, the idea was we'll regional differences are going away because all of us are united by the media we consume. And that's no longer true. And in fact, our media are exacerbating the differences or highlighting them anyway. And so a place like South Florida is more different from South California than it's ever been. And extrapolate forward five years, eight years, 10 years. Will it be possible to drive from South Florida to Southern California? Well, of course it will. It's America really. Is it possible to drive from Sao Paulo, Brazil to Rio? Not really because it's too dangerous because it's too chaotic. And Brazil, by the way, is not a third world country. Brazil is a real country about the size of the United States with a highly educated, impressive population, amazing natural resources, a lot going for it. And yet that country through successive governments has been unable to restore order to its highways. So that's the rule globally. That's the state of nature globally. And that could very easily happen here. And we've been moving in that direction for decades. We sit those of us on the east coast and look over at the west coast, my home state of of California and watch its politicians declare boycotts against this or that American state or say in public, I'm not going to follow this federal law. The federal government has no dominion here. Mail sort of laugh, oh, they're so crazy. Each one of those actions is a form of insurrection. In fact, every bit is profound as anything that happened in Fort Sumter in 1861, the battle that kicked off the Civil War, the deadliest war in American history, the one from which we're still recovering. Those are acts of insurrection. Either you have a federal government with power over the states or you don't either federalize apply to all 50 states or they don't. And for decades, some states have opted out of federal law and the rest of states have just sort of laughed at them or tried to ignore it. Oh, marijuana is illegal. Or can I marijuana anyway? Oregon decriminalized fentanyl and meth five years ago. If ever there was a time to send federal troops into Oregon, it was when Oregon did that. They're by killing thousands and thousands and thousands of citizens and also ignoring federal law. Those are illegal narcotics. We blow up boats full of those things. But the state of Oregon decided unilaterally what we're just going to effectively legalize them and lots of states have done that and the feds have done nothing. But now because the issue is immigration, which is a core issue, the federal government is doing something. President Trump has announced that he is sending federal troops to the state of Oregon and to the city of Chicago. He's not yet sent federal troops to Oregon. There's court fight that's way too complex and not that interesting to explain at the moment. Look it up that has prevented that. But National Guardsmen have arrived mostly from Texas in the state of Illinois in Chicago to force the president and says that city to allow ICE, the immigration service, federal immigration officers to do their job to deport people who are breaking federal law, illegal aliens. And the mayor of Chicago and the governor of Illinois have said multiple times we do not follow federal immigration law in the state of Illinois and the city of Chicago. So the president is forcing this issue there. In violation of the law, he says he's working to uphold the law. here is the response of JB Pritzker, who is the long time six years now, I think, Governor of Chicago to the president's deployment of National Guards troops to Illinois. Watch. What I know is in the early days of the Nazi regime, they started slowly but surely taking away people's rights. And what we're seeing now is the very same thing. They've gone into cities now with the military. Think about that. lifetime. Have you ever seen anything like that where the president of the United States is sending military or troops dressed as military ICE and CBP in camouflage with automatic weapons into our major cities? It's wrong. It's such a buffoon. So demented is the Democratic Party. That guy thinks he's going to be president. Have you ever seen this before? I said, in American history has there ever been a single instance of some Nazi in the White House sending troops into a state to uphold federalists never happened before. It's never happened before except it's happened like a million times. And it's been celebrated almost every single time beginning at least in September of 1957, three years after the Brown versus Board of Education decision can come from the Supreme Court banning segregation in public schools in the United States. And in the state of Arkansas, in the capital city Little Rock, Central High School, a high school was not following this Supreme Court decision. And so Dwight David Eisenhower, General Eisenhower, Commander of American troops in Europe during World War II, the president of the United States sent the 101st Airborne to Central High School. The 101st Airborne not like 300 fat guardsmen from San Antonio, but the 101st Airborne were them ones to a high school. And then he left his vacation and he went on television to explain why he did it. And remarkably, thanks the internet, we have the tape. Here's part of it. In that city, under the leadership of demagogic extremists, disorderly mobs have deliberately prevented the carrying out of proper orders from a federal court. Local authorities have not eliminated that violent opposition. And under the law, I yesterday issued a proclamation calling upon the mob to disperse. Yep, that was General then President Eisenhower, September 1957, sending the 101st Airborne to Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas because the racist governor, Erbil Fobbis wouldn't let black students attend a white high school. And every liberal in America applauded, shoot them. There was one girl in the crowd that day who smirked or scowled at one of the young black ladies being escorted into the school. And she shouldn't have done that. It was cruel, obviously. But it wrecked her life. That picture which ran the Arkansas Democrat, September of 1957, wrecked her life. Actually, she never got out from under that. And that's a measure of how strongly the media, the American establishment and some of the public were behind the president. Look, it's a Supreme Court order. It's the law of the land. You can't disobey it or else we have mob rules. Someone's going to rule, okay? It'll either be a dispassionate law that treats everybody equally or it will be an individual who plays favorites. So your choice really is not between no law and law. That's not a choice. Your choice is between the rule of law or anarchy, which leads to dictatorship. That's your choice. And Eisenhower in an interesting speech, 13-minute-long speech laid this all out, which is on YouTube. You should check it out. He explained why he did it. He wasn't about simply desegregating a high school in Little Rock. It was about upholding the basis of the American judicial system, which is to say the basis of America itself, which is equal application of law, fairness under the law. It's a nature of laws, not men. And he did that and it was randomly applauded and it worked in some ways. Public education was totally destroyed nationally. But whatever the rule of law was upheld five years later, noting what a popular move this was apparently his successor John F. Kennedy faced a pretty similar situation at the University of Mississippi and Oxford, Mississippi. It was again September 1962. And there was a lone black student attempting to enroll. His name was James Meredith. He's still alive. He's 92 years old. He's a total right winger, by the way, which is interesting. But he was trying to enroll and the school would not accept his application because he was black. And so President Kennedy also sent the military to old miss. How many did he send? President Trump has sent three to 500 guardsmen to Chicago to a city of millions. President Kennedy sent 31,000 U.S. soldiers, U.S. Army soldiers to a campus of 6,000. Yeah. That's more than five armed soldiers per student. 31,000 American troops descended on the campus of old miss in Oxford, Mississippi at the very end of September, early October 1962. And they shut it down and they camped on the quad intense and they put tanks on the football field and they put machine gun emplacements on the quad. Couple of people were shot to death. And President Kennedy made a bit overkill. In fact, disgusting overkill. In fact, fascist overkill. But the point is he was applauded for it because there was a federal law emanating from Supreme Court decision and he was upholding it in the same way that President Trump is currently attempting to in a much less vigorous way, uphold federal immigration law passed by the United States Congress, which is courts of the country who lives here is the main question in any country who lives there. What is the country? The people who live there in immigration law is the way that you regulate that. So if you don't control that, you're literally not a country. So that's not an optional law. That is a core law. And in the case of Chicago and Portland, but particularly Chicago, shameful thousands, thousands of people are shot in Chicago every year. Whole parts of Chicago, you can't go to. Not a few like me, you can't. It's so racist and violent. You literally can't walk through parts of a city that you pay for as a federal taxpayer. As an American, you can't walk through it several years ago. You'll remember there was a huge debate in Europe. Are there no go zones in Paris? Are there parts where native born Parisians can't go? Whether or not welcome. Oh, that's not true. They said it's not true. But of course, whether or not, of course, it was true. But what's even more true is that that's the state of play in the United States and has been for generations. Huge parts of us say huge, but you could walk all day through parts of a city that you actually can't walk through because they're too dangerous for you. And Chicago is particularly particularly disgraceful in its decline. Now you have to guess about that. I'm going to show you video in just a second, but you don't have to guess. Look at the number. Look at the outflow from Chicago are people who are born in Chicago staying in Chicago. No, they're fleeing. Go to Southwest Florida. Go to dinner in Naples some night and ask anyone here from Illinois, it's half the room. And they're grateful to be gone. That's how dystopian it is. On every level, economically, primarily, but even on a more basic level, it's just too dangerous. Oh, the freedoms we're losing really. What about my freedom to walk to the liquor store at midnight without getting killed? How about to, my freedom to stop at a red light without getting shot? That's totally real. It's not fake. It's not racist to say that. The mayor of Chicago is an open racist. So irony of irony is here you have a president sending troops facing down a recalous. Al citrant racist local official. That does sound like 1962 doesn't it except this time the president in question is not getting accolades from the New York Times. He's being called a dictator. Detective dinner. But just to set the table here to give it laid down the framework for what we're talking about Chicago, the city. What does Chicago look like? This question is very much like everything else you talk about. Transsurgeries, abortion. Whatever the topic is, the people promoting it never want you to see what it actually looks like. Just an idea. It's a theoretical concept. No one's to see what it looks like to cut someone's penis off and create a vagina with a knife. That's what it actually is. Our rights in Chicago, what does Chicago actually look like? Well, here's what it looks like. So what's interesting about those videos is who's participating in the rioting and the violence there. There's the normal assortment of unhappy white young people, make up the bulk of Antifa, make up the bulk of the Democratic Party's act as weighing all the little DSA kids, you know, the children of orthodontist from Great Deck who are reliving the glories of the sixties or whatever, the weird little polyamorous nihilist freaks who don't see any future for themselves economically. So just run it down. I mean, very, very familiar to anyone who's watched this stuff over the years. A repulsive group, a dangerous group, a sad group, by the way, you shouldn't have a lot of young people like that in a functioning country. They should be looking forward to a brighter future getting married, having kids doing something useful, building something not just destroying, but they're not. So that is recognizable. We've seen a lot of that over the past 10 years and we're going to see a lot more going forward. Unfortunately, unless someone gets a hold of this now. But what was new in that video were what looked like immigrants, Latin American immigrants. And if we're going to be totally honest about Latin American immigration, most of our immigration up until pretty recently now it seems all South Asian, but up until very recently, most of our immigration, overwhelming majority of our immigration to this country was from Mexico and the Central American country, some South America. But mostly Mexico, Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, the usual Latin America, close by countries in our hemisphere, people taking trains and walking to get here. And the truth is, all illegal immigration is bad. Rapid mass migration is always bad because it makes countries crazy and chaotic. But it's also true that our Latin American immigrants are probably met a million of them. Good people, super hard workers. And it's true that they're doing jobs that you probably did as a kid and your kids probably aren't doing those jobs because Latin Americans are doing them. I'm saying this if you're white. So I think most people who are very opposed to illegal immigration and very opposed to mass migration at this point, very opposed to any immigration, which would include meat definitely, are not mad at Latin American immigrants because they're most seen nice people, they're Christian people and they work hard. And there's some drunk driving, but in general, they kind of play by the rules, most of them. The idea that people would get here is immigrants and immediately join a violent street protest. You know, we haven't seen that since about 1905. We haven't. That's shocking. That's scary if that's true. And it's scary for the following reason, the volume, the scale. How many immigrants do we get during the Biden years? Well, no one knows, of course. People pretend they know, but they don't know. Millions and millions and millions and millions. And they're entering a job market that is being destroyed by technology, by AI, quantum computing. So there was no labor market need for these immigrants. It's not like America was just dying for more people to do jobs because we have fewer jobs. And if you don't bleed, if you got college age kids, ask them if any of their friends are employed in October after graduating. No, they're not because there are no jobs. So unemployment is going up. Everyone lies about it, but it is. And we just imported, I don't know, maybe 10 million new people. What are they doing here? What was the purpose of that? How are they living? Of course, on the government. Why? Why did they get here? Why did Biden bring them in? That's a question that no one's answered. And all of a sudden you look at these videos and you see people who are clearly just off the boat or the train and you start to wonder like maybe we were actually invaded. Maybe a ruling class imported army and pretended they were migrants looking for a better life and maybe we're about to find out what that means. This is really scary because we don't know who lives in this country. We don't know the total population of the country. And again, like the inflation rate, like the unemployment rate is something that our leaders lie about constantly, but they don't know. They don't know how many people live here and they don't know who they are. Of course, they have biometrics they could find out, but they haven't. Why is that? So if all of a sudden these migrants are participating in street protests where they're throwing bricks through the windows of passing cars, picking up orange cones and throwing them at minivans, you could see this getting completely out of control. And it's a reminder of something that is very often true, which is civil wars become race wars. That is the truth. It's true globally. Civil was true in Latin America. Lots of the wars in Latin America were really between the Europeans and the indigenous between the Indians and the Spanish descendants. That's true. It's true in El Salvador. It's true across Latin America. That could happen here. Somebody needs to get this under control before it does because chaos breeds chaos. It metastasizes. That's true in your home and it's true in your nation. So getting this stuff under control now before it becomes uncontrollable before it becomes impossible to drive to San Diego from Miami is absolutely essential. The second thing that would be nice along the way is to stop the degradation of the United States, the true degradation. Now Portland, Oregon is one of the prettiest cities in the world, by the way. Now it's a by word for sadness and death, drug use, homeless. But for a very long time, Portland was considered one of the prettiest places ever, a kind of northern San Francisco, really a really pretty place, charming place, nice place, nice people. In the past 20 years, it's become thanks again to the influence of a very specific class, professional class, decadent whites. It has become a hellscape. It's true under the influence of secular whites, NPR listening liberals who do not get the credit they deserve for their sinister behavior, their death worship. It has become the kind of place where no normal person would want to go. in it's sad because it is fundamentally so great. Here's a montage to what Portland looks like. I am smack dab in the middle of a Portland green space. Everywhere you look, trash, paraphernalia, rotting food, and even dead animals. This is the reality of the streets. It's a symptomatic, homeless teenager on the streets on map. For what? I call Miss Teenager on the streets on Matt. For what? I didn't know I'm clear. No, I don't have clear. This is a symptomatic homeless man who's been talking to himself for about two hours downtown Portland. Almost from behind me has been flashing people to last half hour. Behind me is a senior citizen smoking meth. He's about seventy-two years old. Almost from behind me without a shirt. Just tried to break that window. So nobody has dine in this exact moment, but this right here is the deadliest block in Portland. And where I've seen about twenty people die in the last year. Behind me is a homeless woman injecting heroin into her foot. Not it out in front of the business. Impossible to get into the front door. It was a good fifteen people in this block. About twelve are actively smoking fentanyl. People live indoors but come here for the fentanyl. One person didn't appear to be using just kind of hanging out. But overall, good ninety-five percent are actively using drugs on this block in Portland. All native born whites, of course. A seventy-two year old smoking meth. A seventy-two year old smoking meth on the street. Who would tolerate that? A cruel person, a truly cruel and evil person would tolerate that. That's not freedom. That's bondage. That's murder. No normal country would tolerate that for one moment. And in real countries they don't tolerate that. In a downtown, they don't do that. Only in the west do they do that. If we keep this up, we will get Mussolini at least because it's so unnatural. It is so contrary to the laws of nature. It is so prima facia repulsive and mean to allow this. That it cannot continue. And the fact that it has been allowed to continue tells you everything about the people in charge. They're the worst. And what about the citizens? It's not just the leaders. It's the people who live there. A normal person would say, absolutely not. I live as my city. I work here, my kids go to school here. I was born here. You may not do that. We're not going to allow seventy-two year old to smoke meth on the street. What is wrong with you? They wouldn't have seen the moral high ground as some creep from another city. All the leaders of these cities are not from those cities. They just show up because they feel a power vacuum. They graduate from Wesleyan or Bowdoin. After running for student body president, just like Mumdani. And they're like, okay, I think there's opportunity for me. That's exactly the profile. And all the little NGO workers who are passing out the world. And all the workers who are passing out crack pipes and needles and tents to the homeless. All of which exacerbates the problems and kills people. Now those people are from any of these cities either. They're all from away. They're all poverty pimps who've shown up to take advantage of human suffering. They're the lowest posing as the most decent. They're not clear of Barton. They'll hit Caligula. They're cruel, heartless people who would allow this. And the cruelest and most heartless of all are the generation whose children are on the street. Smoking meth. They're called the Boomers. They're not all bad. Not every Boomer is terrible. But if you had to identify one generation responsible for the decline in possible destruction of the United States of America, it would be that one. Their fathers return from liberating Europe and Asia. And they bequeathed us this. I can't even play the Mendelinn. Mediocre, in addition to everything else, will you crane flag? Cliche after cliche after cliche. Not a deep thought. No self-reflection at all. Just self-involvement. That's that generation. And if you were there, you would ask them. You wouldn't ask them about ICE or immigrants. You would ask them about the state of their city before the immigrants even got there. Like, why did you allow elderly men to smoke meth on the street? People to die on your sidewalks. They had a dysentery outbreak in Portland, Oregon last year. Because the sanitation in the so-called homeless camps was so bad. How could you allow that? Did you notice it? You said you were compassionate. You care about the people of Kiev. Did you just, the people in downtown Portland were dying on the street? You monster. They're monsters. That level of neglect is monstrous. And the key mistake that normal people make is sitting the moral high ground to people like that, who disguise their hate and indifference to their fellow human beings with the language of compassion, it's a lie. And you know it's a lie because look at the city they made. That needs to be cleaned up immediately. People living on the street, shitting on the street, causing dysentery outbreak, smoking meth on the sidewalk, having sex and AT and vestibules. These are not manifestations of freedom. These are signs of terminal decline. And they are very serious. They're most serious. This is stage four. You have to fix that. It's not complicated. You cannot allow that. Because if you do, you send a very clear message to your own citizens, which is, I don't care about you. I don't care whether you live or die or whether you degrade yourself. Whether you live like an animal. If you let your Germans Shepherd live like that, you would be arrested. But in Portland, Oregon, it's totally fine to let your fellow citizen live like that. If there was ever a reason to send federal troops into a city, it's 72 year old smoking meth on the sidewalk. We're shutting this down. We won't have this. Because that person, smoking meth, is a child of God created by God. And you're killing him and we're not going to allow it. Someone's going to do that. That will happen. And the opportunity we have right now is to do it in a way that is not totalitarian. But if we don't do it now, we're going to get totalitarianism. Trust me. Most coffee companies sell weakness, watered down drinks from faceless corporations that don't care about you or your family. Black rifle, which not to brag, is in this cup right here, is very different. It's roasted and brewed in this country without apology by patriotic men and women. The coffee is built by people who love the US and know what it means to fight for it. We know them. We know the guys who run it. We know them for a long time. And we know this is true. They are special forces, veterans, ranchers, just decent people. They're the best of us. And the coffee is strong. The energy drinks, even stronger. It's not sugar water, not empty marketing. Fuel people get up early, work late, keep this nation running. Every purchase helps support veterans, first responders law enforcement. From bold rows to ready to drink cans, mugs, t-shirts, gear, black rifle makes products with pride. Can a lot of companies say that? No, they can't. Visit blackrifle.com. Use code tucker for 30% off your first order. That's blackriflecoffee.com. Code tucker or pick it up your convenience or grocery store. You will love it. Nick Sorter has been important when we're getting a lot recently. He just got assaulted. There he's an independent journalist. He has spent the day in Washington, D.C. at the White House at a conference about in Tifa. And I think he's joining us now. Nick Sorter, are you there? I'm your talker. Thank you for having me, sir. Thanks so much for doing this. So you just came from Portland. How would you assess it? What's it like? It doesn't feel that the manager talked about this. It feels like a third world country. I mean, you have a police that have been totally infiltrated by a leftist militant. And right now you can see police cars behind me. These police cars would protect me if somebody were to come up and assault me. That's not how it works in Portland. The Portland police arrested me instead when I got assaulted. It's a different world out there. And not even just around the ice facility. Your monologue was spot on here, talker. You go downtown and it looks like it's post-apocalyptic almost. They're graffiti everywhere. The vandalism, the boarded up windows. There are no people in downtown Portland. It is quiet as hell. There's nobody walking around. People don't go there for leisure anymore or for vacation. It's because they're afraid and they should be afraid. The chance of you getting beat up or stuck with a needle or robbed in the street is through the roof. Because police there aren't actually allowed to be police. So what happened to you if you don't mind explaining you were arrested for big police? Is that a crime in Portland to be assaulted? It's a crime in Portland to be a conservative. Talker. And as weird as that sounds, the video evidence and even the DA has come out and said because the DA refused to go through with the case. So they ended up dismissing all of the charges. The video very clearly shows me telling the person to back away as I'm walking down the sidewalk. And then the Antifa thugs, you know, the stuff is coordinated. Right? They come up with an umbrella to try to block other cameras. And as soon as when they do that, they're going to commit some sort of active violence. And that's exactly what they did this time. One of their thugs decided to swing on me and hit me in the face before breaking my camera and then throwing me in a hole. Was that person arrested? Absolutely not. Was I? We know the story now. What do they charge you with? What do they charge you with disorderly conduct too? Which is really weird considering the amount of screaming and vandalism and assaults on officers and explosions of fireworks and such that happened in the middle of the night. In the streets out there, you know, they, they, but break in the cars. If you're not a member of Antifa and you tried to drive down that street, they're going to hit your car. They're going to break your windows. There's so many videos of that happening. And none of that is apparently disorderly. They call what I did disorderly because it's a, what I'm doing is a threat to the order in their city, which is a, basically left disauthoritarianism. So you got your face in the way of an Antifa fist. And so you're the criminal. What did that do? The correct apologizes he was arresting you. Like what, I mean, it's hard even to imagine the senior describing. Yeah. And so, I actually went to this group of police. There were about 12 of them. They're way down the road. They don't, they don't do anything ever. And obviously that situation changed a little bit as time went on, but I went over there to seek refuge with them to hopefully. Like I wasn't even reporting anybody. I was just standing back. Hope, like, hoping that the situation would, you know, get like ease up a little bit. And I, I'm standing there joking with a bunch of them for seven to eight minutes or so. And then the sergeant rolls up on a bike and says, come from. And that's exactly like that guy. This guy right here, come from him. And he's like, yeah, come from. He's under arrest. And they had no idea why. They couldn't explain to me for over 45 minutes talking what my charges actually were. They, they started driving to the jail very slowly, hoping that somebody would fill them in on why I was actually being arrested. And so they had to pull over on the side of the road near the jail and just sort of twiddle their thumbs, waiting on a call from a lieutenant. And as soon as they got that call from the lieutenant, that lieutenant instructed the officer to get out of the vehicle. Presumably so I couldn't hear what they were talking about on the phone. Something stinks over there. I mean, there were three people all night long in Portland that came through that jail. It's the only jail in Portland and three people including myself ended up coming through there that night. It's wild. And there were riots underway. Oh, yeah. Yeah, that same night. My car was vandalized. There were fires in the street. They do that every single night. And that nobody has ever arrested for that. It's it's so far from the America that you imagine when you think of America. I mean, this is kind of my point. So for example, like a place Palm Beach or Miami or Jacksonville, even Tampa, you know, big cities in Florida, that's the opposite of what would happen. And so you wonder like how can Portland Oregon share a flag with Miami, Florida? Yeah, it's a great question. And as you, as you very well said, this stuff doesn't happen in Florida. It never does people aren't going to block the roads in Florida because what happens? You're going to get run over because you know, these people will take residents that live right near the ice facility and they'll talk to their cars in with people that surround them and terrorize them. But there's nothing that the driver can do about it if they defend themselves. They go to jail. If they try to drive through the crowd to save their family from these thugs, these violent, mentally ill thugs, they are the ones that get arrested, not the thugs that held them hostage. So what does that tell you? It tells you that if the rioters don't get arrested, but anyone who resists the rioters get arrested, that tells you that the rioters are in effect working for the state, they're the militia then, right? I mean, what else would that tell you? Yeah, essentially. Yeah, of course. And then people ask me all the time. It's like, okay, well, are these, what are these antifa folks thoughts on the Portland police? And it's, there's no ill will between the two groups at all because they're practically working together at this point. Just the other day, there was a business owner or manager of a restaurant. That's at the end of the street where the ice facility is on. There's only one street to get to that, to that business. And he walks up and begging and pleading with the officers there to open the road, not because of the police that closed the road, but because the Portland police had relegated traffic control duties to these antifa militants that were not letting through employees of the restaurant or patrons of the restaurant, only letting through their own people and Portland police were letting it happen. Portland police ended up, I have it all in video. I posted it all in my ex. Portland police walk up to these militants that are controlling traffic and say, hey, we need you to open up the road. Would you mind opening the road so that people can get to the spaghetti factory? And they said no. And so the road just never opened and police just walked away. I mean, that's how deep this rot runs. So what was giving these officers orders to stand down and defer to antifa? So you've just changed my mind in this completely. So I went into this thinking, well, the problem is these groups and Tifa and others, whatever antifa is, no one's even really ever defined it that I can tell. But these, you know, these groups of radicals angry about something committing violence against people, but it sounds like the DOJ needs to commit and take control of the Portland police department on civil rights grounds. I know they're very busy policing antisemitism on Ivy League campuses. Kind of critical problem in America. But if a police department is indistinguishable from antifa, that might even be a bigger problem. And maybe they should take it over tomorrow. Why wouldn't they? Yeah. That's something that I should probably, I'd like to talk to to attorney general Pam Bondy about you. It's been very responsive to this entire situation. You should put Harmeet Dolan on it. They've launched an investigation into the practices of the Portland police department. And Tucker, we actually put in this demand for discovery after my arrest. And we were demanding all communications between Rose City and Tifa, which is an organized group that isn't an entity that exists. And the Portland police department. And literally within an hour of us doing that, my attorney got a call, an angry call from the DA's office. And then eventually said, okay, well, you know what? We're just, we're not going to move forward with this case. They were clearly bothered by the fact that we were demanding discovery relating to the discussions between Rose City and Tifa and the Portland police department. So there's something there. There's something there. If we didn't make that demand, I don't think they would have dropped this case. That's an incredible story. It's not the story I expected to hear from you at all. That's an amazing story. And it's a horrifying story because where does it leave the citizens of Portland? I mean, if the police department is in here, then where do you go? Yeah, I spoke with a resident, there's an apartment building that is directly, it's adjacent to the ice facility. And they are, these residents are terrified to speak publicly. They've only got one to speak to me on camera, at least they get. But he wanted his face poured because they're terrified of what happens when they walk out of their apartment building. When they're complaining about what's going on in the straight in the lack of action on the part of police officers and the city of Portland. The city of Portland, there is a noise ordinance in the city of Portland. You know, people have the right to the quiet enjoyment of their home, right? And the Portland police and the city have selectively decided they're not going to enforce it there. To the detriment of the multiple veterans that live there with PTSD that are hearing them, the antifa folks in the street shooting off fireworks in the middle of the night, scaring the crap out of them, they're talking about children in elevators that are crying because it's like a war zone out in front of their house every single day. And the police are just letting it happen. For what reason? I don't know, is it political? Is it because they're totally infiltrated by these leftists? I mean, there's a lot of reasons that it could be, but it's something that we need to find out because there are, this is not a victimless situation here. The victims are the people of Portland that are just trying to live their lives and go about their daily business without fear of being beaten in the street for complaining that he's not going to be in the street. Complaining that people want to scream in front of their house at three o'clock in the morning. That's how bad it is. I think a lot of Americans are under the impression that nothing has changed in the last 40 years and the law enforcement and intelligence agencies are fundamentally pro-American and committed to the rule of law that would include the US military, CIA, NSA, and police departments, the National Guard units. You think they're sort of on your side. And I think you're hitting at something that most people don't understand, which is a lot of these organizations, these institutions have been completely taken over by people who sympathize with Antifa. And I would include the US military in that. Many members of the US military cheered the assassination of Charlie Kirk, many online. And that seems like a problem that needs to, that seems like the problem because if things go south, the people with the guns have to be loyal to the Constitution. They can't be loyal to Antifa, right? Right. And I mean, you're absolutely spot on there. It's chilling the amount of those are just the people that we have that are have the weirdly enough have the balls to say that stuff publicly, like condoning the assassination, Charlie Kirk and stuff. I mean, it's terrifying to think how many of these people were in the background working for these police agencies. Actually, we were able to get a secret service agent fired one that works on protective details fired for saying that Charlie Kirk had it coming. He said that publicly on Facebook, that's somebody that works on protective detail. That should terrify everybody because then it leads back to think, okay, well, did they did people within the secret service just let what happened to Trump and Butler, did they just let that slide? You know, we know these people exist. We know they're on these protective details. We know that they've infiltrated the military that that's that's terrifying. And we really need systematic reviews of all of this stuff. And I know down there in Portland, I'm actually so well here in DC anyway here in DC. I will be meeting tomorrow with Harmeet Dillon and the Department of Justice. And they'll be doing a full interview from start to finish on from what happened and what their next steps are going to be. I spoke with President Trump about it today personally. They are not going to let this go. They want to expose all of the rot within this police department out there because ideally that will that model will be able to spread to other police agencies across the country like what they find in Portland may help them in Chicago, for example. So a can of worms has been opened here. The police chief out there in Oregon and Portland has been on TV every day, slandering me saying that it is provocative to film in public with a light on your camera, even though it's dark. And so you need a light. I mean, any reasonable human being can figure that part out. But they're terrified. They know that that we're not letting this go that we're that I know they got a DOJ on their backs. I'm just hoping that the political pressure keeps up and people don't just forget about the story. I hope not. I know that Hart mean Dylan who I know very well my former lawyer is a really serious and smart person and a very tough person. So I have full confidence in her, but I hope that we don't devolve into like an endless conversation with Antifa and like some angry 19 year old. Yeah, I'm against all that. But cops with guns and handcuffs and the power to arrest citizens. If they're corrupt boy, there is nothing scarier than that. U.S. military officer, many of whom are like lunatics like left wing lunatics. And of course the foreign policy establishment doesn't care because all they want is another profitable war or they want to extend their wars and you know Ukraine, etc. They don't want to wear their own. So they don't really care about whether the people run the U.S. military are loyal to the Constitution of the United States. They don't care at all because they're not loyal to the United States. So, but we should care. And I just really hope when you're up there. We are up there. You will encourage a forensic look at law enforcement number one. Absolutely. And I think you brought up a really good point that needs to be talked about more where if there is a way. And I'll definitely ask about this. If there is a way to put more federal power within the Portland police department, I don't think it's able to be saved as is. I think it would need to be totally just turned on its head or maybe scrapped and started over. You know, I that that would be. So I feel like that might be the only way to save it unless you can take federal control over that stuff. I think that was a really good point that you made now definitely definitely ask about that. Look, I mean, this is just what we've seen in one city so far. How many more of these cities are having the same issues that we're not talking about. I know Chicago's a hot topic and stuff right now. You know, I'm sure is the stuff happening in Seattle like how many other cities are you having the same issue with corrupt political hacks that are have a rest powers. I mean, that's very concerning. It's a concern everybody. Well, that you really changed my mind, Nick. And I appreciate your reporting. Thank you for doing this. And I hope you'll come back. Thank you for shining the light on this. Hey, it's your brag, but we're pretty confident. This show is the most vehemently pro dog podcast you're ever going to see. We can take or leave some people, but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best. They really are best friends. And so for that reason we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch Pet. It's the fastest growing pet telehealth service. Dutch dot com is on a mission to create what you need, but you actually need affordable quality veterinary care anytime no matter where you are. They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately. It's offering an exclusive discount dutches for our listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code Tucker for $50 off. That is an unlimited vet visits. $82 a year. We actually use this. Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance in a 10 minute call. It's pretty amazing. Actually, you never have to leave your house. You don't have to throw the dog in the truck no wasted time waiting for appointments to wasted money on clinics or visit fees unlimited visits and follow-ups for no extra cost plus free shipping on all products for up to five pets. It sounds amazing. It couldn't be real, but it actually is real. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code Tucker for 50 bucks off your veterinary care per year. Your dogs, your cats and your wallet will thank you. So a few minutes ago we showed you tape from the governor of Illinois, JB Pritzker who's been governor since 2019, I think. I'm running for president and he compared Donald Trump to Hitler for sending 500 heavy set National Guardsmen into a city of many millions to restore order in the face of very violent anti ice protests. I thought it might be worth getting the perspective of a former Illinois governor. Someone who knows a lot about the state and the city of Chicago is from the city of Chicago. Former governor, Robert Guevitz joins us now. Governor, thanks so much for coming on. What do you think of Pritzker's position here that 500 National Guardsmen are like the lift off. This is not the America, the fourth Reich. What do you think of that? I don't want to malign Governor Pritzker personally, but anybody resembles a Nazi. It's Pritzker. He resembles Hermann Gary. I'm JP Pritzker. I was just thinking I was looking at his hair gel. The way he comes his bro cream in this way. Who do you remind me of and you remind me? It's so funny. Excuse me. I agree with you. Right. Right. Look, if anybody's a Nazi from bringing in the National Guard and JP Pritzker should look in the mirror because only a year ago he actually brought in the National Guard to protect what? Wealthy white, limousine liberal democratic donors and democratic delegates at the Democratic Convention in Chicago. He was more than happy to do that, but he won't do it when President Trump wants to send the National Guard to help and work with the Chicago police to fight crime and in our city and in a city where every single day at least one person is murdered in a city where nearly 600 crimes are reported every single day in a city where 80% of those murders, you see the crime is Chicago is segregated. You know, the car jackers and the retail thieves and the armed robbers, they go all over the city. But the murders are taking place in the black neighborhoods and in the brown neighborhoods. 80% of the murders in Chicago are in the black neighborhoods, black people. And the other 15, 95% altogether are black people and Latinos. And so the Democrats like Pritzker who claim to be on the side of black people in Latinos are basically saying we're going to use the National Guard to protect donors, democratic donors and delegates. But no, no, we don't want you help, Mr. President, to actually say black lies because for those Democrats, not we're saying they're red or black lives matter only to them. For their votes. And what Pritzker is doing now is he's hyper politicizing a very serious issue. He's standing in front of the schoolhouse door like George Wallace did back in 63 when Kennedy federalized the National Guard correctly to allow two black students again at the University of Alabama. Now, Pritzker is sort of a modern day version of George Wallace in some respects and that he's blocking trying to block President Trump, working to block President Trump. And federal law enforcement from coming to Chicago to carry out the mandate the American people gave President Trump in the last election. And that is to secure our borders and to fix the illegal migrant problems. And it's undeniable that there are tens of thousands of criminals who join the nearly 14 million illegal immigrants that come to America according to Pew Research. And estimates are that are that are conservatively 10% of those are criminals. So that means we're talking about over a million criminals that come to America and what kind of criminals. America according to Pew Research and estimates that are that are conservatively 10% of those are criminals That means we're talking about over a million criminals that are come to America. What kind of criminals are there? What are they? They are Gangsters and they're drug dealers. They're child sex traffickers They're sex offenders and they're cold-blooded killers And it's amazing and it's mind boggling to me that JB Pritzker would choose this issue Because this this motivation is politics. He's playing to the crazy left-wing crowd in the Democrat party But it's really offensive and immoral that he would do something like this it stand in the way of Actually following the law because the supremacy clause in our Constitution is very clear the federal law Supreme over state law and he should not be resisting or working to resist federal law. So look I have a confession to make talk to when I was governor early on I knew him because he'd contributed to democratic politicians because he was very wealthy And he asked me to make them the director of the Illinois Human Rights Commission So if I'm gonna confess to any crime because I didn't commit any crimes But the near-crumbled thing I did was actually hiring that guy. It was a big mistake Did he improve human rights in the state of Illinois? No, and you know what you know, I don't know I work with him to on the Holocaust Museum in Illinois in Scoke, Illinois and at that time he seemed to be a very reasonable guy, but he's he's changed a lot I think and I don't know if it I don't know what the what the cause is other than he's got the Desire to run for president be president and notwithstanding President Taft and his success to be elected president JB is never gonna be president. I know the guy He's got no chance Tafs was in a three-man race as you'll recall 12 no that's yeah, no, I don't I don't think he has much of a chance It's it's in I mean you've been a governor not many people who've been governor of anything and to be governor of Illinois You know one of your concerns is population the state's population because of course federal dollars house seats they're dependent on how many people live in your state and Chicago land that area has depopulated people born in Chicago have left in amazing numbers very similar to what's happening California, but the population aggregate number hasn't changed that much because of the inflow From the third world so if you're it's a little bit like the Catholic church is always promoting immigration because they They need the the seats people in the seats I'm I wonder if that's part of his motivation Like Chicago, it's what percentage of Chicago wasn't born in the United States huge Well, no, well, that's right and the activists in the Democratic Party There's so many different activists groups in the Democratic Party that push immigration rights and those sorts of issues and look I think you would agree I heard your your monologue and which was profoundly interesting I mean most of the people that have come to America illegally these 14 million that have crashed to our borders because Biden Basically said we don't have borders. Those are good people and they're doing the work that you talked about But see their victims you know and you know who victimize them? It's these hypocritical Democrats when they started opening up these sanctuary cities basically say and Come on in we'll get put a sign up come on into America Don't worry about our immigration laws. Nobody cares and you come into our city and will protect you forget about what the federal law might be Which you don't even know anyway, but it's no big deal to us come on in and so these are what well in tension Kindhearted probably innocent people who wanted to chase the American dream like my immigrant Immigrant father did when he came over here legally after Congress passed the displaced persons act after World War II They came here looking for an opportunity because they're committed to their families They want to build a better life. Yeah, and that's the great story of America in immigration The thing that's missing is but you got to come legally and they were invited to come here illegally by the Democrats Biden Didn't secure the borders and the Democrats opened up sanctuary cities and with all their rhetoric basically We're saying we're saying all these people come up here and the reality is no country can sustain 14 million people Who are here on law? Hopefully and what president Trump is doing is absolutely necessary to save our country and hopefully down the road Maybe there can be a way where the two parties can come together and and address issues like the dreamers These other issues that are very legitimate But in the meantime what you have now is a tremendous divide because the Democrats simply refuse to do anything That's good for our country because they're not ever gonna get Trump any kind of victory and they are simply determined to never work with him But at the expense of our country, but people live in our country So the first amendment is the one truly distinctive thing that makes America America it makes this country great. You are a citizen That means you can speak openly and honestly without fear about what you actually believe The government doesn't own you you own the government That's the premise and for 250 years we've lived it. We hope to keep living it Our sponsor of pure talk understands how important this has so central it is So if you want to support brands that defend freedom and American values We recommend switching your wireless service to pure talk which is way cheaper and uses the same towers the other guys use It's the best. We know you're thinking Of course giving business to companies that share your values sounds nice, but at the end of the day You don't want to spend more for the privilege of Buying products from a company that loves America. Well, you don't have to pure talks plan started just $25 About 25 bucks for the same 5G Coverage the other companies provide literally the same self-towers And you support a business that believes in this country and creates jobs here in this country If you're interested visit puretalk.com slash talker to switch to our wireless company When we use pure talk right now. You save an additional 50% off your first month again pure talk.com slash tucker Well, I agree with that completely, but Trump didn't write the immigration laws. I mean they were Written by Congress passed by Congress. I don't he doesn't even signed any immigration. Well, they don't think to do with them They pre-exist his presidency so he's trying to enforce existing law and they are abetting breaking that law so it does seem like Insurrection to me. I mean if if if a state won't obey like a poor federal law like immigration law then where does that? Where does that leave us honestly like how can we share a union? No, your questions. Well You probably raised you know you talked about civil war and you know you think back To the days leading up to our civil war and I like to think we're not even close to the end But you're right to raise it because you could see how there's a slippery slope that we're going down and you know It was the defiance of federal law Lincoln getting elected and different states decided we don't want to be under that election And with that president so we're leaving and before that they were defying federal law and We saw what happened now you have a situation where Not only has president Trump had given him and it by the American people to do what he's doing But y'all's have a situation where we know that it works when there's cooperation So the success that president trump is have with the National Guard in Washington DC Was in part because the mayor there bowser Was willing to accept that and work with him and you know they can get into nuances Oh, well, that's a federal city of versus a you know a city like Chicago But if you're the governor of the state of Illinois or the mayor of Chicago you have an obligation to your citizens to keep them safe and The National Guard coming into Chicago with all the crime we have and the need to support ice in its efforts to follow the law and Do what's necessary to follow the law? You would think that a governor irrespective of party would welcome that support and thank the president and then take credit for the success of Protecting American citizens and American taxpayers But our politics has gotten so crazy in the Democratic Party is such a crazy party now with the lunatic fringe of becoming The mainstream and guys who were somewhat reasonable like jb pritsker being transformed He's what he's trying to become his basically a oc and drag Okay, he's trying to like get into her politics as opposed to sort of being The bill Clinton type Democrat that supposedly he used to be and the Democrat party doesn't seem to have room for the bill Clinton Democrats anymore the JFK Democrats anymore This is a party that's been been taken over by that left wing radical fringe There is no longer the radical fringes now the radical mainstream and it's a socialist communist kind of party And it's a party and our governor again that you know is basically siding with mob violence and anarchy and chaos over You know the law the rule of law law enforcement and those who have to enforce the rule of law And that's what this conflict is now and that's why it's a seminal moment in our history And it's why I think President Trump is going to go down Probably 150 years from now because historians can't be objective It's one of our great presidents because I do believe he's going to be successful in this That solved this problem because he has the law on his side I mean if if he doesn't solve it then we're in for disunion ahead I mean I don't I don't see how you can have in a state with no in turn in a country with no internal passports How you can have some states following immigration law and others ignoring it It doesn't work. I mean it just practically doesn't work. So I really hope it can be solved Do you think in the Democratic Party, which obviously you know a lot about? There are any candidates on the horizon who Are reform candidates like Bill Clinton in 92 like okay We went too crazy. We need to pull back a little bit and reorient around America's interests Who even say words like that? Did you see any of those? You know I think that here's think that that would be Senator Federman in Pennsylvania the guy that was hoodie Yeah, he seems to be sensible and willing to find common ground to work and and support traditional things that You know that you know that all Americans have historically been for what they all Democratic Party used to be for so I think there is at least one long voice in that party Um You know I've been completely written myself opposite Democrat believe it or not I mean I can't begin to tell you You know I'm a Trump a crad. I say that openly and also proud to be that and grateful to president from personally But frankly put that aside I think he's being he's a great president and necessary president And he's and he's doing things that must be done to save our country and then make it great again First we have to save our country But no, I you know the hatred and the vitriol and the on the on the far left Democrat side is palpable I live in a neighborhood, you know that that used to vote for me a lot and I was out of the street the other day talk right came back from downtown Chicago and Some guy Clew, it was a man who was muscular and I think he was a man muscular and Then he had long hair, but he had a beard a full beard but with through me was he was wearing a dress and combat boots And he walked by and he took you know took a double-tech recognize it was me then he gives me the finger and My first reaction was okay, you know guy like that gives me the finger I'm like, you know probably give him an F you or give him the finger back But then I wasn't sure whether it was a man or a woman and I'm trying not to swear a women So I had to hold my tongue, but that's sort of the element that's now a large loud voice within the Democratic Party and Thank you for the work that you're doing is because I love our country Now I was saying what my government's done to me. I love my country. I believe the American dream myself There's no place like America and this is the last Beth Hope best hope on earth as Lincoln said a true and a great Illinoisan But thank you for the work that you're doing because I still I believe and I know you do too That that forgotten American the great vast silent majority that Nixon talked about and and changed American politics It still exists. It's what elected Trump last November people with common sense believe in God Love our country don't burn the flag don't like people to burn the flag You know believe in the traditional values of our country They still make up most of the Americans and I still believe actually most of rank and file democratic voters If those Democrat voters can get over the fact that they've been lifelong Democrats because it's harder to you know Change of love for your team they get over that and they are they're increasingly going to leave the Democratic Party as they're doing and that Democrat Party is going to increasingly become a party of crazy left wingers and whoever gets the nomination whoever the Republican that it is against them in two years I think he's gonna have a long hard chance hard time to be able to win I think our country is waking up and I think President Trump has been at the fan guard of that and I'm not the only Trump a great out there Democrat for Trump You're definitely most articulate Robert Glovetz. Thank you so much for joining us. I really appreciate it Good to talk to you. Thank you. Thank you Thanks for joining us tonight. It's the fourth installment of our live experiment continues. We'll be back Next Wednesday at six Eastern Thanks a lot. We've got a new website. We hope you will visit. It's called new commission now.com and it refers to a new 911 Commission So we spent months putting together our 911 documentary series and if there's one thing we learned it's that in fact There was foreknowledge of the attacks People knew the American public deserves to know we're shocked actually to learn that to have that confirmed But it's true the evidence is overwhelming to see I for example knew the hijackers were here in the United States They knew they were planning an act of terror in his passport is a visa to go to the United States Romero a foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell and later said he was in New York Quote to document the event How to know there would be an event to document in the first place because he had foreknowledge and maybe most Amazingly somebody an unknown investor shorted American Airlines and United Airlines the companies whose planes the attackers used a 911 as well As the banks that were inside the twin towers just before the attacks They made money on the 911 attacks because they knew they were coming Who did that we have to look at the evidence the US government learned the name of that investor It never released it maybe there's an instant explanation for all this but there isn't actually and by the way It doesn't matter whether there is or not the public deserve to know what the hell that was How did people know ahead of time? Oh, I was no one ever punished for it 911 Commission the original one was a fraud. It was fake its conclusions were written before the investigation That's true and it's outrageous This country needs a new 911 Commission one that actually tells the truth to tries to get to the bottom of the story We can't just move on like nothing happened 9 over commission Something did happen We need to force a new investigation into 9 11 almost 25 years later Sorry justice demands it and if you want that go to new commission now Dot-com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this or do this because we really mean it new commission now dot com