This episode of the Joe Rogan Experience podcast was one of the episodes that we made while we were filming the sci-fi show Joe Rogan questions everything. So what we did when we did the show, if you've never seen or heard of it, we had a podcast on the show and a lot of people thought it was a fake podcast, but it was actually a real podcast and thanks to the generosity of the sci-fi channel, we are now able to release it as a podcast. So thank you to Tim and Wayne from sci-fi and to Michael and Frank from Arthur Smith that produced the show. Thanks also to Todd who was the director of the show. We had a great time doing it and I appreciate it very much and appreciate you guys. Letting me do this like that, like the way we did it. I think it was really fun to do it this way. We did it exactly like a regular podcast, just me and Duncan. And in this episode we went over what's called biohacking or what I call dorks with knives, sticking things under their skin, fascinating subject and I think you'll enjoy the shit out of it. So this episode is brought to you by LegalZoom. LegalZoom is one of the sponsors that we have where we have actually many people that are connected to the show have used it on it was formulated through LegalZoom, Brian made his company in LLC through LegalZoom. It's a way you can do things online where you can get legal papers filed and do things without actually having to go to an attorney and sit down and pay for an office visit and pick Zorbit in amounts money to an attorney and also you have to schedule shit and drive and all that jazz. You can use LegalZoom naked. You can be naked. Nobody could stop you. You could make it a point to only use LegalZoom when you're naked. They won't have any benefit or any detriment to the actual legality of the papers that you make. Like what kind of stuff can you do? Well here's one. You can incorporate or form an LLC at LegalZoom.com starting at just $99. That's really easy. They can help out with trademarks, copyrights, patents, if you got a great idea and you want to protect it. If you have a family you can make a will. You can make a legal will for just 69 bucks. You can also get living trust, power of attorney and more in the past 12 years over 2 million Americans have used LegalZoom and they've saved a shitload of money. Now you get a special discount from listening to this podcast. Make sure you enter Rogan in the referral box at checkout for more savings. LegalZoom is not a law firm. They provide self-help services at your specific direction. And if everything spirals out of control and you're in a panic, they actually can connect you with an independent attorney if you need additional guidance. So check out LegalZoom.com and see how they can help you today. Use the code Rogan in the referral box. And now without any further ado, the podcast that we did on biohacking with Duncan Trussle and me. Alright, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day. You know what's really crazy that your mom after that, one of your stepdad's been scared. Isn't that like an interesting sort of snap back from that? You know like she's probably around this crazy guy with guns is like get the fuck, give me a guy. Yeah, I'll take it. Yeah, so my mom did. My dad was like really violent cop and she married a hippie. Like when she broke up with him, my stepfather had long hair until it was like 15 years old. He had like a ponytail. He was totally completely hippie. Crazy. Stoner architect, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Well he's not back. You don't want to date Hunter's Thompson. You don't want to be around there. Was that your dad Hunter's Thompson shooting shit? Yeah, I still is. He is. He's still traveled around in a RV just seeing the world. Yeah, well now he's just now he's like local in Alabama, but he like goes hunting deer still and he like, I told you the fistfight thing. No. This is the weirdest thing. I was getting a ride. This is a quick story. I was getting a ride back from college with my friend Sean. You recording all this? Yeah. My friend Sean is driving back to, was driving to a mobile where is dad live? And on the way back, I'm riding with this guy and he's like, oh dude, I forgot to ask. I want to ask you this. Is your dad's name Julian? And I'm like, yeah, Julian trust me. He's like, your dad assaulted my dad in a bar. My dad, my dad beat up my friend's dad in college. What did this happen? This was I don't wait. The assault happened. Yeah, I think before me and this guy were in college together. But if you look at the probability of getting a ride back from college with a guy who was a mobile, the probability of your dad having beaten his dad up. It's so slim. It's so slim that like my, what are the odds that we both go to this liberal arts college of 500 students and the one other guy from OBLA BAMA. His father had been assaulted by my father in a bar. Those are pretty small odds. Minuscule odds. It's pretty funny too that it would be your dad too. Because you're like the opposite. Like I could never imagine you just assaulting someone. Even if somebody got really mad at you, you'd be like, all right, well, fuck you man. You just like get out of there. Like the idea of you assaulting someone is beyond comprehension. So the idea of your dad being this fucking hollow tooth bullet, carry in, savage beating the fuck out of your friends dad. Getting arrested. Jesus Christ. He got arrested in the parking lot. Two cops took him down and he got. My dad came home from high school once with a black eye. him and his, his co-worker. They were doing a business together and the business started going bad. They got a fucking fist fight. And he came home and I remember looking at him. I was like 16 or 17 or something like that. And a black eye was like, what the fuck man. Are you done with this? Like you're still duking it out at, you know, 40 whatever the hell he'll, old he was back then? Well, it's a classic. It's a classic. It's a classic man. It's weird. Classic man. Fuck. Like it was like, like think a Hemingway. That's what's just part of being a man is like you would get in at some inevitable fist fight. And in those days, it seems like you don't get in a fist fight. And there's lawsuits and legal stuff. It's just like the other guy. Except getting his ass kicked. You're the victor. And that's it. Or you get your ass kicked and you forget about it. That seems like the old way it is. Now if you get in a fist fight, you end up in, you know, serious legal trouble. You get all instant lawsuit. But it was it used to just be like when you see elk smashing into each other in a wilderness. That's what it used to be being a man. You just run into a guy and just start punching each other. And that was it. That was what the day is. Back in the good old days before writing shit down. What was the people who had a few mistakes started writing shit down? They were like, oh yeah. Okay. Yeah, blame it on Haberabi. It's all Haberabi's fault. And that gentleman is his name is Sherrid. Sherrid. Sherrid. Sherrid. Sherrid and Lucas. And they're from Grind House, Wetware. And Grind House, Wetware, first of all, greatest name for a company. Never. What does that mean? So it comes from the name Grinders. That's what we are. Get real close to that. That's what we are. We're grinders. Kind of like what happens when you mix open source hackers and body modification with a dash of front humanism and Wetware's this, you know, your body. So we're literally grinding our biology. Well, there's all these interesting little names that you guys have for us. So, what place will grinders? We're grinders. We're transhumanists. We're a lot of self-defining going on there. Well, it's not exactly that we're self-defining. We're just guys who we really like technology, and we all grew up with, like you talk about growing up with Hemingway and classic men. And we were all about fighting. We grew up, we were protected and sheltered and grew up with Star Wars and grew up with. These stories about robots that could think and people that couldn't live any longer and had to augment themselves and cyborgs. And while cyborgs were really cool, we thought they were really cool. And, you know, I was in my 20s when we hit the year 2000. First thing that happened. New Year's Eve. 2000. And after I got over the shock of nothing hitting the wall, nothing falling out of the sky. I turned to my brother and went, where is my fucking jetpack? And that kind of summed it up. I felt that way. My buddies felt that way. I didn't realize it, but there were a lot of people who felt that way. And we were all broke, and we didn't know much about science. And somewhere along the line, like I guess in 2006, there was a kid in Arizona who realized that he could start stimulating his nerves with magnets with magnetic implants. He went to a body mob guy and got an implant done in his fingers. It started going from him to a guy in Europe. And then, like 2008, there was a lady Quinn Norton who wrote for Wired and wrote for some other places. And she did it. She went out and said it was a bad idea. No, do it. Other people started doing it. Okay, so let's back up. First of all, explain what you're talking about. You're talking about biohacking, talking about doing something to your body that enhances it, integrating and incorporating technology into your body. And the first guy was the guy in Phoenix that did the Arizona weather. Was it Arizona? Was it Phoenix Arizona? Yeah. Yeah. They did the magnets in his fingers? Yeah. As far as we know, that's the first person. He's the pioneer. First person. First person. And what benefit is there of having magnets in your fingers? Like what did I accomplish for him? So, I was making it easier to put your hand on a refrigerator. Yeah. Easier. I think it's annoying. It's like it would be an annoying moment. Like you're always getting stuck to things. It doesn't exactly work like that. These are really tiny magnets. So, you have magnets in your fingers. Yeah. Yeah. I got like, got one around there. One around there. Wow. So, you implanted magnets in your fingers? Yeah. Why did you do that? I was drunk. No kidding. I found out about this. I was really interested in everything we've been talking about. I ran into a childhood friend of mine who got it done last year. And when he showed me what he was doing with it, I had to do it. What was he doing with it? What was he doing with it? It gives you the ability when you implant the magnet in a nerve-dancery of your hand when you were around an electromagnetic field that magnet vibrates. And so, you can feel that. Now, there's a property of our brains called neuroplasticity. When you provide a stimulus over a course of time, like about six months, your brain starts adapting to it. It starts building something new. And I was always fascinated even as a child of the idea of having an extra sense. Not necessarily like ESP, but just an extra sense. Or be able to hear a sound that no one's ever heard before. See a color. No one ever seen before. Although stories from don't do drug pamphlets, I were like, I can see the music. I can taste sound. That sounded amazing to me. So, when I heard about this extra sense, I jumped out this chance to incorporate that in my body. What extra sense? The extra sense of using these magnets to detect an electrical field or to vibrate during an electrical field? Is that what you're saying? Yeah. How are you to find an electrical field? It's an electro magnetic field. So, in the electron travels in a straight line, you have a magnetic field that's coming out kind of in the circle around it. Okay. It radiates around it. If you have a coil, a coil of wire, and the electron's going through a coil, there'll be kind of like a donut-shaped magnetic field around it. So, it sort of fields that have property of volume and property of frequency. They vibrate at a certain, certain frequency and they're loud or soft. Like a transformer, like an electrical transformer? Yeah. Or a building that hums. Absolutely. So, if you were near that with your fingers having the magnets in them, what would happen to you? I can feel those. Sometimes when people would ask me at the beginning what it was like to feel this stuff, I would describe it like an effervescent feeling like bubbles. It felt like bubbles. And it was really interesting today. It felt like bubbles? Yeah. Like how does that work? That's the weirdest explanation for some of that or description. Oh, it felt like bubbles. It felt like bubbles. Yeah. It felt like fizz. Yeah. Kind of like fizz. Like pups? Like pop rocks, rather? C-foam, I think is what it means. I don't know. I'm broth. Like dog fro. Every person that has the implant uses completely different language. Yeah. Right. It's been really fascinating to run into other people with implants and talk about this stuff because we are describing the same phenomena. And it's like you're asking me to describe a color that you've never seen before. How am I going to describe squat? It's squat. Was that blue? No. It's squat. Is it purple? No. It's like tasting an orange. Oh, so it's orange. No. Is there any negative repercussions to having these magnets installed in your body? Well, the first time that someone actually said something that made sense as far as a negative thing, I saw a speech by Quinn Norton where she said, hey, don't do this. This is a bad idea. Her's shattered. What shattered? Her magnetic implant shattered. Shattered. Okay. So when a magnet receives either a lot of heat or a very strong force, it loses its magnetic pull. But more importantly, these magnets are made out of the same way. The magnets are made out of rare earth elements. Mine's like a cobalt alloy. Those things aren't really healthy to take inside your body. If it's shatters. So this is perilene coated. Some people use silicone. Crazier people use hot glue. So it's essentially, it's poison. You're dealing with the toxic yellowing in your body. When if it's not covered? When a burst in her, she actually consulted a doctor. And the doctor was like, well, here's the thing. We could go through all the trouble pulling it out. But it's so tiny. And it's so little that's really not going to bother you. And so they left it in. And over the course of time, that magnet pulled itself back together. She never got the sense back, but it pulled itself back together. Yeah, it's a lot of armor. Creepy little creature. If you guys are interested. Moving around inside of her fingers. How'd she break it? What's she's slap a cop car or something? How'd you, how'd she shatter? She didn't say furious masturbation. I have no idea. I have no idea. Furious. Yeah. Possessed eyes rolled back one shoe on screening. Like a tiger caught in a barbed wire fence. Hopefully it wasn't. Clank. Yeah, it could be. Clank very well made. If I had a guess. But that usually doesn't happen with the magnet's this size. I don't have a vagina, so I wouldn't know. How could you know what would happen when a woman's in the middle of a furious masturbation session completely on a thick fucking half a pound of meth. Just slam it at home. You never know. Are you asking how can we imagine what happens? Well, it's a magnet gets shattered. That's just a good guess as any. Yeah, like maybe her orgasm was so strong, it admitted a magnetic field. A messed up, horny as fuck, maybe on top of an old truck. I'm just coming up with a scenario. How do you, these are under your fingers? No, that's a lot larger. But if you guys are curious about it. Yeah. Yeah, there you go. Something for your cock. That's a neat, you know, just in a cleaner way of expressing this question. Are there any gentlemen perhaps that have these magnets put in their nether regions? I have no idea. I don't know. I think so. It's been spoken about it. It's been spoken about it. It's been spoken about it. It's been spoken about it. It's been written on our website somewhere. It's been spoken about it. And you're pushing it. The closer you can get that to your face, the better. Usually, you pull it right up to your face. Usually, or move your chair. Yeah, when it comes to stuff like that, people talk about it. And then don't do it. Oh, so they're saying, hey man, I've been thinking about putting magnets in my cock. Just so you start thinking about their cock. Is that what they're doing? That's what they're doing. And then your forest, hey, you know Mike, it's going to put magnets in his cock. Why are we sitting around talking about Mike's cock? A lot of shit talking about the world. Mike tricked us. Mike brought up putting magnets in his cock. He knows how to reach you guys. Okay, if you can't just talk about sex, that's too easy. No, he has to talk about what do you guys like. You guys like putting magnets in your body. So he starts talking about magnets in his cock. But people are ready to get that with like... Absolutely. Absolutely. I'm saying it's totally serious. This is, I figured it out. I'm like, co-jacks, I'm sure. But people already do that with body modification. Yeah, they do, right? Stuff appears. I've seen allegedly, seeing some stuff online of just horrible ideas, that someone followed through with horrible jokes. The guy splits his cock. The guy is only one guy. That's like saying bigfoot's only one thing. There's a lot of bigfoot. You're saying more than one guy's flailing cock. Oh yeah, why do you do that? Why do you do that? Why do you do that? It's supposed to feel phenomenal. It's supposed to. Doesn't it fall apart when you're having a sock that's been sliced and thrown out of a group? You hear that? It's kind of like shooting like a shotgun. Oh, Daniel says that. Wow. Jesus Christ. Yeah. I think you caught your dick and then you just tell everybody it's awesome. You know what I meant? You're an idiot. Is this like when they told me like we're going to have a bunch of yourself in the face contest? And I had to start first. Exactly. Exactly. But you guys are in a way. What you're doing is you are turning yourself into a lab rat with the intention of gaining a kind of low-level superpower. Like a really, really low on the scale of superpowers, the ability to feel EMF fields. Is that what they're called? Yeah. To feel that that's a really low power. But it's still you have more superpowers than me. I can't feel that. You're still ahead of the majority of your species. But there's a risk to this. You're risking your life so that you can feel what it's like to be a refrigerator magnet. Anything that you put in your body risk getting sepsis from. There's a risk of sepsis. So yeah, there is a risk. What exactly is sepsis? That sounds like septic. Yeah. Does that really mean some sort of infection? Yeah. And there's a way back to your own infections of any sort. So I've had a body who's a surgeon who's told me, hey, don't do this. This is a bad idea. Right. Good for you. You got that done. You can put anything else in your body because any implant can go bad. Yeah. I got my nose pierced and venice beech when I was 15 and you should have seen that, man. You swell up. Oh my God. It was just so nasty, man. My nose got swollen. I pushed, I remember pushing against it in front of the mirror and just like the amount of pus. Like where you get proud of the amount of pus coming out. You know that? Can kill people. That's like that. And the ones of eating your whole nose off. Oh, yeah, man. I got lucky. You should never get your nose pierced. That's a ridiculous thing. And there's no superpower in that. You just look like a dumb hat. What he said. With them. So this is a tangible, extra sense though. This is a built-in detective magnetic field. I mean, you really can do something that Duncan or I can't with your body because of these additions. It's profound. It's something I didn't understand when I got it done. What started out like feeling bubbles. Now I'll go to Home Depot. And I'll be feeling stuff because it's oh my God. So fun to feel stuff. You're the next person. Mainly magnetic stuff. Free Kangaro Home Depot, touching all the stuff. Oh my gosh. It's a drill. Oh my God. Oh, no. But I was just hand-stalled by the long hours. It's a magnetic field. Oh. Oh. Hey, what's your favorite? This means you probably have like people have favorite flavors. Do you have a favorite machine you like to put your fingers in? I've had situations like I've been around really strong magnets. And when I first was around a really strong magnet, I felt a feeling in the pit of my stomach like dread. And it made me want to pull away and run away from it. Because your word is going to be clamped. No, it wasn't a logical thing. It wasn't never getting them on my logic. Well, you know, the funny thing about that is I'm working out what our sensitivities are. There's been a lot of debate among the people who've had these things on how close we can get to an MRI. There's some people who talk about it being dangerous because it can move around. Since this is subdermal, it's not anchored in any way. Like other subdermal body mods are. It could move your magnet a bit one way or another. Someone's got to test it. But there are people who've claimed through the network of people who installed these. other people who've claimed that they've had MRIs done and felt their magnet dance around. And that's it. But the MRIs are super powerful magnet that they're talking about. The tiny ones are like 1.5, 1.5 Teslas. But people go into those things with sweater sweatshirts with zippers on them. They do? Yeah. I talked to a guy who operates one in research facility. And that's why I'm like, funny, you should mention this because... But that's not standard operational procedure. It's one point we're not supposed to. You're supposed to get down to a row. I just had one on a couple of days ago. He'd take your clothes off. You don't go to the... Are you sure they weren't just fucking with you? Are you sure you don't have any of the MRIs? You've got magnets installed in your hand. That's crazy, man. You don't go in there with zippers on. What kind of a fucking doctor are these people going to? It's a research facility. It's not a doctor. You said someone died from an MRI, what is that? Well, what's trying to say is if you have metal in the room and they turn the MRI on, a child died recently accidentally because they had an oxygen tank in the room and they weren't aware they had it in there. So when you turn on the MRI, the fucking oxygen tank comes flying into the machine. It's a giant super powerful magnet. Right. And it killed them. By the time they could shut it off, he was already dead. It's insane amount of pressure you're dealing with. And it's just because someone's dumb enough to have metal in the room. It's really hard to believe that any doctor would allow someone to go through an MRI with a zipper on. That's preposterous. That's just not what they do. So a question who you're talking to. You're talking to crazy people lying about putting magnets in their dicks and wearing zippers into MRIs. You've got to hang out with a higher quality group of humans. A higher quality group of humans. But there is magnetic shielding because people that have pacemakers or other implants. Oh, they put something over you to stop that suit or something like that? Yeah. That's interesting. But you're not doing that with your fingers. You just let them tangle if you get in there, allegedly. Don't know. That's something that we should be careful about. But I think it's something that should be tested. I think even if you're not advocating that someone with this in their finger go in and test it. But even if you can replicate the consistency of human and put a human flesh, and then expose it to something in like 1.5 Tesla, just to see what happens. Now, you have this, which you've already done with the magnets. What's the next level thing? Obviously, everything progresses. So what are people considering doing now? So there's a... Well, a lot of people are building devices that interact with the magnets. So you can think of it as, because it interacts with electricity and magnetism. It's kind of like a really low-level input. You can input anything. So if you've got an external device that's measuring, say, the amount of CO2 in the room, you could hook that up through a coil around your finger, around your magnet finger, and have that information transferred into like pulses or how much it vibrates or whatever. So you're literally using an external sensor to give you data, any data. Any data you want, and have it transfer that to the magnet. And after some training, it becomes intuitive. So some people have done it with mainly sonar and thermal, like a thermal laser. Now, I know the people have talked about the ultimate future of incorporating technology and human body as the ability to take the mind and download its consciousness somewhere into an artificial creation. But somewhere along one is probably going to be some steps, right? And you guys are kind of taking one of these steps, like by putting magnets in your body. When do you think you're going to see someone who puts a cell phone in their body? Is that coming? Is it going to be like a neural interface that allows you to get on long with Wi-Fi? Well, we're somewhere towards that. That's something else we're working on. So our CTO, his dream, the thing that brought us all together, wasn't magnets. That was, that was ancillary. He was love, right? Yeah, well, of course it was love. Because we all kind of knew each other. We all had this love of the future, and we all kind of were told to sit back and let Motorola take care of it. And none of us wanted to deal with that. But he wanted to build something that he believed that we have the ability to do the stuff ourselves. We don't have to wait for some big company to do it. We can do it cheap, we can do it ourselves, design ourselves. And since we know people who can install magnets under a skin, why not implant? Why not? Why not implant? Well, the goal was to have something. So basically what it does is it's a rose compass that electrically stimulates it. It's probably here on your calf, and it's always pointing north so that you always have an intuitive sense of where north is. Now, if you've got the chip talking to some external thing, you could hook it up to a map system like Google Maps and be like, yo, take me home, and then you have an intuitive sense of where home is always. What? Wait a minute. What? Hold on. Wait, back that up. You have a compass installed in your body, and the, how does it run? It just runs on the magnetism that's in the compass. It's all mechanical electronics involved, right? It can be powered wirelessly. So it's got like a wireless coil in it. So it's powered somehow. Yeah, an external. Yeah. And so you can like hover it over. That's what the, the, the dream is. What is the method of communication to the mind that explains where north is or how to get home? So it's in the same way that you're using a really simple system in terms of the magnet. You're not using any magic. It's just vibrating for this. It's just applying a very, very small amount of electricity. Enough that you can, there's, there's a sensation. So it's not like blaring and it's not shocking you, but there is a sensation. Is this completely theoretical? The idea of being able to find your way home or is it really? We, we have parts of it, parts of it built. And actually when we came together and we had that idea, we said, okay, this thing has way too many features. So what we're going to do is we're going to build, we're going to build an implant. That's a kind of a halfway step to there. So that we build the ground towards it. And that's actually, it's actually this thing here. Wow. And so what this thing does is it actually around towards it. And that's actually, it's actually this thing here. And so what this thing does is it actually it's a quantified self health metric. And this is, this is just going to take data. You can check this out. This takes medical data and sends it to your phone. So if you can imagine having maybe six months worth of your medical data and it's your data. It's not anyone else's data. Your data. And you can do whatever with it. And so we wanted to kind of do a halfway project so that we get familiar with implant technology and then move towards really cool shit. The idea, I understand the idea of a compass. I understand that you could power it somehow. But what I don't understand is how the compass is communicating with your mind. So in the in the same way that the nervous system is is communicating with your mind. It's not it's not sending it wirelessly to your brain. Right. There are things in your body that's communicating to your nervous system that then goes to your mind. Right. And so you're literally you're literally making a new mini organ that or another part of your body that interfaces with your nervous system through electricity. And then you're just saying it's like a vibration or something. It's like a low level pulse or something. Yeah. It's a low level pulse. Yeah. I understand that. I understand that you would get a sensation. But I don't understand how it could be directional. I don't see the mechanism. Well, it's a it's a rose compass. Right. So what does a rose compass mean? It's a so it's got a clock. Yeah. It's got a north, south, east, west, and then like north, west. Oh, that's called a rose compass. Yeah. Okay. So it's a compass. Yeah. And yeah, it's a compass. Okay. And so let's say, let's say I'm facing north. The stimulation will be going this way. Right. But if I if I turn, it's going to start, so it's stimulating. It's directional. It's direct that wherever the north is, it gives a signal pointing where the arrow goes. Yeah. So the arrow it not just doesn't just act as a beacon. It's somehow another, like sends a charge off in that direction. Yeah. And then it becomes intuitive. Once you start determining what that signal means, like it becomes a new thing sort of like sound like you hear sound over here and you know, it's coming in that direction. Yeah. So that's crazy. It's intuitive in the sense that like I would be working with with some of the guys in the lab and you know, they've got two or three implants and they would say leave the sardinger and on and they'd go to reach to grab something and just them feeling the the intensity of the sardinger and would make them pull back. Right. And so it's not like they're like, oh shit, that that might kill me. Let me pull back. It's more like it's more like every time you reach over here, something screams at you or something like poaks you. It's like people who are allergic to cats. If you're around the cat, you know, like that's a kind of superpower. A person who's allergic to cats can walk into a house and be like, you have cats, right? You have cats. They can sense the cat because they start sneezing and closhing. Yeah. Well, generally people have cats. That's really gross little creatures. Pretty. Filled that when you walk into a house and you get that first waft of the cat litter box, you're mixing your old bananas. So nice. You have a box of shit in your house. Yeah. Nice dirty box of shit and a filthy witch animal. Well, appearing at it. You're from the wall. Ready to smother your baby while sleeping. It sucked the breath right out. Are you still going to be strong? That's awesome. Um, I think this people like you make me love existing today because the idea that there are human beings at this very moment and I picture you in a basement in in basements with straight razors shaking, cutting themselves open and just putting chips inside of their mouth. They're not all the doctors and have all this done, man. Come on. fantasy. Leather strap in their mouth. By download a twig. Now, well, guys are both right. You're both kind of right. See, yeah, you don't all go to a dog. What doctor do you go to? What doctor do you guys go to? I don't know. I doctor evil doctor evil. And I imagine that when before you guys put the magnets in, you're snorting, oxy cotton or like you're definitely on painkillers, right? When I went on, I got it done with no pain meds and oh my gosh. Um, it was a rush. I never had that much. That's a new dude to stay in there with a razor blade in the photo says I got it done with painkillers and oh my gosh. What a rush. I don't it was it was something else. The amount of the door fence you got it's it's trauma. It's trauma. Your body's going through trauma and your body releases all that endorphins all at once. You you you definitely you don't remember the fact that you just got her going to shock. I don't worry. I don't advocate people doing this. I don't advocate in the opening themselves up at all. Uh, that's not going to stop anybody. It's too late right now. There's already 700 teens with exacto knives putting their dads writ swatch. Bandana in mouth. Well, but kids if you're watching this, seriously don't don't kill it never ends well. Someone already tried it and they're kind of fucked up because of it. Who tried what? Um, uh, so one of the people that pioneered this, uh, this, uh, lady out in Scotland called Let's and in him. She did this talk called cybernetics for the masses. Um, where she advocating, you know, implants and uh, she did it herself. She she sterilized, uh, what is she? She used she used vodka. She used vodka and hot glue to coat the magnets. She uh, in her speech, she told everyone, Hey, I don't care how hardcore you think you are. Get a spotter. Yeah. And as you will pass And that that to me that to me also used a vegetable peeler. Yeah. That to me is not that to me is not is not DIY cybernetics. That's irresponsible. That's really I'm going to tell you that when you told me your name. That's why you don't leave it home with your keys. I've seen that speech weapon and I'm yeah, and I emailed her directly after the speech because I wanted to get her on my podcast, but she first of all didn't know it was she was a she because she's then draw gymnast. You can't really tell, but she looks like she fell out of a phillipk dick novel. Like she is uh, you uh, really fascinating being like it's a really curious being and she seems kind of nonchalant about what she's doing. And that reminds me of you guys a little bit because you guys seem to be brushing off the fact that what you're doing can make it so that in 20 years you are just basically a trembling drink machine. Somebody could put a cocktail in your hand and mix it up because you have some kind of severe neurological damage from the weird chemicals in your magnets going into your brains. It could be true. You're right. You're right. Totally right. We probably would be dealing with something worse than a Parkinson's like state. Can you get up on the mic? I'm sorry. That's okay. Um, you're right. Um, there are risks. Um, when left gave that speech, she gave it with the intent that people out there would see her process and go, oh my God, you could do it so much better. You could do it so much safer. And when people are talking about what grinding is about and why it's called grinding, that's part of part of the spirit of being a grinder is being opened about your processes because you're hoping that someone will look at your processes and go, oh yeah, I see what you did. I see how you made it better. I can make it even better and even more. Why grinder? Um, you know, it originates from a comic book called Dr. sleepless. And there's good guys at dorks. No, they're not dorks. It's awesome. I want to be a grinder. Yeah, bad thing. But you guys is dorks. And so there's there's not dorks. Not a bad thing. I'm a door to these are pioneer. You're a dork too. How dare you? You're a dork. I guess I am a dork. Is that right? You read walking dead comic books. You're a dork. Oh man, that's intense. Tell me I have to read them. Do you got to read them? He's a dork. That does not belong with it, man. This I'm wrong with being a dork. Don't be scared of being a dork. Okay, well fine. I'm a dork too. I'd rather be a dork with magnets under my fingers. I'm not going to be a dork. I'd like to be a dork with a low. A bad to be a dork. But the fact that you guys call yourself grinders out of a comic book. That's clear. Yeah. Yeah, it is. But it's not bad. See, you embrace being a dork. I think the term dork is a dorky term. No, it's an awesome term. And that's what we were when we were out there looking for Bigfoot. We were two dorks. Here. You're a dork. So you're a big put by the way, having a time of our lives with fellow dorks. It's never all being a dork. Yeah, there's no disrespect intended. No disrespect. It's, you know, you're not taking yourself that seriously. And you're your whole group after comic books. Sure. It's not wrong with that. Yeah. A part of a part of what we do is using, we're still using the scientific method. We're not just like sure. Yeah. Well, what we're doing is we're putting our method out there for it to be criticized so that it's safe in our community. Right. And where it's not, you know, cut yourself open with vegetable peelers. And it's not, it's not have, it's not have the method be held up by the FDA for 50 years. It's about knowing what the risk are as an individual and deciding whether to take it or not. Now, that piece of plastic silicone, whatever it is, what does that exactly mean out of it? You showed me earlier, the chip. Oh, that's, that's what I mean out of regular circuit board. There's all sorts of bad shit in there. Yeah. What it was it made out of? You know, fiberglass, copper metal plastics. Where would you put that? Inside a silicone, silicone shape. There's a bioproofing process. Like a sheath. Like a condom, silicone condom sort of thing. More like a something take you take a CNC, you make a CNC mold reverse. So this is an unpopulated board because all of our regular prototypes are being tested on on for function of functionality. Yeah, like functionality. A bunch of eating it, heating it, crushing it. So once we're confident that we have like something that can handle the stresses that we think someone who would have something in it for a year, which is our goal, like get it inside someone for a year and take it out, then we're testing bioproofing. Bioproofing is doing a pressure injected silicone mold. Oh, wow. That just sounds like it hurt. Do you guys have in your, that's not inside you. What I want to know though is like what part of the body would you install this thing? Well, it's been talking about the forum. Why the forum? Because it would be cool to look down at your arm and see LEDs lighten up under your skin. So that's part of it. You guys aren't just pioneers trying to redefine humanity. You just want to have shining lights under your skin. And you want to capture some dark pussy. Let's be honest. We did. I think that we did one or any different types of this is your. I bet. Man, if you're, you're a super baller in the grinder community, if you walk around with a glowing implant in your arm. Yeah. Do you guys have a, uh, in your community, somebody who you know will put anything under their skin like somebody walks around, jangling with metal pieces and lights. Is there, is there a person who's got the most implants? I don't know. I don't think we've reached there yet. What's the most incredible, like the most extreme implant that you're aware of? Maybe rich. Probably fucking rich. So rich. So he's got, uh, he's got, uh, two magnet implants in his finger. And he actually has, um, he has a coil, like a huge coil that he uses to, uh, to be able to like hear radio stations and all sorts of craziness. They're basically implanted earphones. Wait a minute. He has, uh, magnet saucer. Is ears in his ears? Is ears? Yes. Yeah. So he's magnet says fingers in his ears. Zocha said. Yeah. He's got, um, he's got like two in his ears. Yeah. He's like, yeah. That's scary. Yeah. Yeah. So you let his dude operate on your ears. He's intense. It's a magnet. And so what's the coil? The coil is, uh, like, uh, any coil, it's stimulating these magnets and makes of magnet vibrate. So he hooked up this coil to, uh, a long amplifier and that amplifier is sending sound through it. Like, uh, your standard speaker, right? He's, uh, sound through a speaker coil, makes a magnet jump back or makes a magnet, uh, force a coil back and forth. Yeah. He makes sound. So he's using this, uh, sending an electromagnetic waves to, uh, the magnets in his ears is magnet stands around and they give them sound. So he was able to, uh, use a Bluetooth, uh, connection to his phone to hear his phone through his invisible, uh, your phones. That's insane. Yeah. So yeah. It, it sounds really crazy and dangerous, but I think I think there's, we're also trying to, uh, establish a precedent that we want. Like we, no matter what organization pops up, there's going to be cyborgs in the future. And I, I think that that's what we're, that's what we're moving towards. And I think that we want to move to a future where people are openly experimenting with themselves instead of having to to go to one source, uh, you know, like company X to get their implants. And I think there's, there's, uh, sort of liberation that you have by either making your own implant or knowing, knowing what it was made of, who coded it, what the code is and, and all sorts of stuff. So in our community, we share all of the information. There's, there is no weird outside control because everyone knows how it was built. And if you don't like how it was built, you can change it. I'm sure it's already a cyborg if you wear glasses. Is there an already incorporation of technology into the human body? I try to avoid like the word cyborg because the moment that people start saying cyborg, everyone's like, you're not a cyborg cyborg. Cyborgs are this. That mean the look, you someone, someone made with the machine, these things you have sitting on your face. And that's that, that's how you see better. And without those, you wouldn't see so good. I think I, I thought a cyborg, it means that it's part of you now. You can't take it off. Like it's permanently in you. Yeah, you've heard for the machine hearing implants. Those are first steps. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Hearing aids. But you know what else is crazy and dangerous? Learning to build an airplane. Like think of the right brothers way back when when they were telling people, we're going to try to make a device that makes us fly like birds, frightened, terrified people. Like are you out of your mind? You're going to fall. You're just going to fall to your death. And it's true. There's an implicit risk whenever you're trying to create some new invention. And if you wait for the FDA, if we sit around and wait for Apple or for Microsoft to get this stuff passed, it is going to be 50 years, 100 years because we need you guys to turn it a few of you are going to have to turn into the toxic Avenger. If you have you, it's true, man, you need it because they've made themselves guinea pigs for the sake of our species. It's what I think they did because they're enjoying it. Well, it's worse than a 50 year wait. What's what's bad about it? Microphone. What's bad about it? Thank you. No problem. What's bad about it is the fact that there are people who can't afford what an implant would cost. And like with cell phones, I saw cell phones be a tool of people who had tons of money. And I saw that with every other technology. And when you're talking about modifying your body in the ways that we're talking about it, and it seems like it has so much potential to be a useful tool for people to make that something that's only available to people with large amounts of capital, seems like wrong. Well, then I don't want to live in that. Chris, I don't want to live in that. Chris, while I was already addressed this and quite accurately, when he talks about technology being applied in the cell phone world, he's like initially it was just a privileged few. He goes now like 70 plus percent of the population on the planet has cell phones. He can go to the jungles of Africa. You find people who have cell phones. People have cell phones everywhere you look, which starts off like it's really expensive. But if it proves to be effective, it becomes accessible to almost everyone, which is true. But if you look at waves of technology, right, in the evolution of technology, the people that get it first get to dictate how the technology is used and they get to dictate the political landscape. Right. So my my myself. So for example, you look at the young users don't get to dictate the political landscape of who who that's the one example that we do. But it's not cell phone producers. You're talking about people who buy them. You're talking about people who can afford to use them. Now they're saying that they're saying that when you a cell phone is invented, when Verizon builds a cell phone, they get into an agreement with the NSA and there's code inside yourself on the makes it so it's tracking you. Imagine imagine imagine that technology applied to some kind of implant. Imagine if they came up with some neural prosthetic where, you know, the neural prosthetic that you can attach to your hippocampus that allows you to record your memories. Imagine if the government invents that and has some secret code in it, they can shut off your brain. Okay, but that's not anyone they were talking about. They were talking about privileged people who were talking about this priority. But even owning ownership. So like with cell phones, you have chips that that are really good at decoding video, really, really good at it. And they're really tiny. And you know, they're also kind of cheap, but they're not open for everyone to you. So when you have something like the Raspberry Pi come along, they have to beg. What's around? It's a handheld computer. It's 35 bucks. Does everything regular? Yeah, it's crazy. Like they're like on Reddit, it always pops up with super cheap computer. It's about the size of a credit card. It does everything that computers should do. So you can get on the net, you can use it to do credit card. It's credit card palm size. It's palm size. It's a screen as well. No, you need screen, keyboard, whatever interfaces. It's like the box. It's a few, they'll deal the box itself. Wow. It's credit card size. They had to make deals with non disclosure agreements and make all sorts of deals to attain the technology for their cell phone parts that they're using in there. That's not open to everyone. So you know, in that same way, we believe that people create better when they get the keys to the candy store and they can actually experiment with all the parts that are being used and being developed as much as possible. We want to encourage that playing. That's interesting. But what I was concerned with more was not the people that are going to profit or not profit from creating these things. I was talking about people getting access to the technology and it seems like that's inevitable. It seems like if it's effective for rich people, it will eventually trickle down to the rest of the population no matter what. As long as it's really worthwhile. But I think that when you've got a particular group of people always getting first access, they can always determine how it's used. And by the time the technology is democratized to a point where it, you know, first advantage doesn't matter, then there's something else because they're sitting on the Capitol from the last thing that came along. So you've got this perpetual cycle of well. We're making it first. So we always get to dictate the terms of which this thing, the legal and technical terms, by which this thing or this type of thing. But isn't that what ingenuity is all about? Isn't that why people spend so much money on companies to try to develop products? Isn't that like sort of the motivation? The motivation is to capture the marketplace and to be able to sell this incredible thing that they've created. I think it should be locked down. No, no, I'm saying it shouldn't be locked down. But I am saying you, I meant locked down as in once something is created. Basically it's available to everyone. It shouldn't be available just to this one person that created it. Yeah, I think so. And I think that's the most ethical way to do it in this case because when you're talking about augmenting humans, you're talking about giving them additional information about the world. And this is our most powerful tool, ever. And so when you're talking about supercharging this, you're giving individuals a great advantage over others. And with any other technology, you know, there's abuses. If you look at nuclear technology, right? The Soviet Union and the United States got to dictate foreign policy for how many years because they had that and other countries didn't. And I personally think that that's the scale of power we're talking about when you're saying like neural implants and all of these really powerful devices. I think that the first people that get it get to dictate how everyone else plays. So you're essentially what you're saying is that these new technologies are going to be so powerful that once people get control of them, they'll literally be able to enslave great groups of people who don't have them. They'll have power over them. They'll have advantage over them over them. And they'll decide or could decide to use that advantage to control the monopolize the use of these technologies, monopolize the use of these human improvements, these technological human improvements, and they'll just hoard them all of themselves. And yeah, I mean, not in any way. Has anybody ever done anything with anything? Technologies, anybody hoarded technology ever for themselves? It seems like if you could sell it, people sell it. Well, it never, it never lasts long but what I'm talking about are the the social ramifications of people trying to hold on to that for whatever. Because for example, everyone, every army today uses guns, but we're still reeling from the cultural effects of one group of people having guns and another group of people not having guns. Right? We're still reeling from, you know, countries hating each other and ethnic tension and whatever. So it's not, it's not so much about the technology. It's about this is what happens when you when you try to lock it down. Eventually it's going to spread, but you're causing damage by trying to lock it down. Right. That seems to be, I don't know, it's a funny argument. It's an interesting argument. It gets into a social engineering or socialism point of view where you got to go, well, how do you decide to distribute technology then? There are companies that like like eight of fruit, eight of fruit spark fun. They're open source and they still make money. Well, there certainly is. I mean, I mean, I mean, that's if any place embraces open sources, the internet and technology and, you know, of course, Linux and you know, there's always been a whole open source community online, but to dictate that that's mandatory. That's where things get sketchy. I, you know what I'm saying? I want, I want, I'm not saying that I don't want a future where corporations don't sell this. I want people to have options. I totally understand what you're saying, but it goes against every other way we manage innovation. And we, the way we manage innovations, people get copyright, trade marks and you create something and that becomes you and then you own that and then you can sell it or license it out to other people. What you're essentially saying is that when it becomes to a human benefit, now no longer do you have the option. Now you're going to distribute it freely to everybody. And I say like you're, you're regulating like in a way that has never been regulated before. And that's a socialist idea. And it's interesting. It's interesting. It's interesting. It's interesting and it's debatable, but what you're, what you're talking about is sort of a mandatory type of a thing. Well, I don't want to, I don't want to say, hey, Google, you have to make this, this implant open source. What I'm saying is I want a future where you can either get corporation X or you can go to the open source community B. But isn't that inevitable? I mean, that's what you have with cell phones. You can buy an Android phone or you can buy an Apple phone or you can buy some no name phone. I mean, eventually if something is worth something, people sell it to the point where you're going to have leaders in the marketplace. But once it has, once the public has access, those leaders are based on the market itself. They're based on what people buy, what they like, what they enjoy. He can't monopolize if someone, if everyone's selling a similar product and one person's better, that's the one that succeeds. And that's that's sort of where we're at because of the fact that we don't just say when something comes along like, hey, everybody has access to this fuck patents, fuck trademarks. You know, that that's literally against the way innovation has spawned human beings to this point in the first place. But it, but there's other, there's, I think there's other motivation thing capital. I think that the motivation in this kind of technology is so much bigger than money. What you're talking about is achieving the ability with technology to produce emotions or to create psychic states. That is an amazing thing. And that's an amazingly powerful thing. So, so's calling people. Yeah, but I, you know what, I'd rather have an orgasm helmet than a cell phone. But let's look at it's not either or, what's not either or, what I'm saying is cell phones didn't get socialized and this technology shouldn't either. Well, I don't think they're saying it should or shouldn't be socialized. I'm just, they're, they're trying to make an open source version of this. I don't think that's a motor all the same thing. I don't think they're going to do that for us. I don't think they're going to do that for us. What they're doing. What I'm saying is if you make it, you shouldn't be entitled to distribute it to everybody. If you want to, you, but you shouldn't be, you shouldn't be forced to dishing it. I want, I want a future of options. And, and in terms of the technology coming out, I want the open source and the closed source to come out at the same time because any, any lag time between the closed source and the open source, again, it starts to produce, produce problems. So I want a future where people have options as to what they're going to get. And I think that we've already seen problems with, with technologies being pigeonholed so that, you know, we can't, we can't not have a smartphone, but we know the fuckery that's going on with smartphones. Right. And so there's what, what do you, what do you do? Well, there's a lot of problems with smartphones. If you really want to get to the bottom of it, the real problem is they're all based on conflict minerals. The real problem with smartphones is that you follow every smartphone down to its source and you got a little kid in Africa with a stick knocking rocks out of the dirt. And that's real. And that, they can't fix that yet. They really can't. They don't know what to do yet. So they, they need these conflict minerals and they're not available in very, very many spots of the world. And the, the places where they can get in the cheapest, that's where they get them. And that's why you have civil war in the Congo. That's why you have people fighting over these resources. So you got a real problem besides the innovation, you got a real problem in the morality of actually owning a cell phone because everyone who owns a cell phones piece of shit, if you really get down to the core of it. I mean, that's just, there's no way around it. I think this is, this is an unbelievably fascinating subject. And I think it's inevitable that we have this sort of discussion in this argument. And I think what we really need is the idea of capitalism or competition merged with morality and ethics and humanity. And instead, what we usually have is he who gets the top of the mountain, kicks everybody in the face that's trying to get up. And instead of like pulling people up with them and humanity benefiting and, and sharing something like that in an open source manner because you think it's the right thing to do, instead of bandating it, I think it almost should be a part of success itself. That success itself sort of generates altruism. It generates happiness, it generates generosity. It should. It's like once you have some and you care about others, you should give, you should help, you should boost them up. And we don't have that attitude this country, unfortunately. We have this ultra competitive attitude which has spawned so much innovation because of it. But along the way, it's also made a bunch of fucking assholes. You know, a bunch of heartless assholes just caught up in the hunt. Don't you guys think that it's eventually going to be impossible to keep anything private? Yes. It's like to even, so we're entering into a future where there's really not going to be such a thing as secrets. We're entering into a future where everything will eventually be leaked in some way. Everything will, you know, you want better. I don't think money's going to be real anymore. I think we're going to get to a point where there's not going to be one of those zeros or not going to cut it as far as you have this and he doesn't have that. And I really believe that we're going to get to some weird place where just by nature of the just the progression of You have this and he doesn't have that and I really believe that we're going to get to some weird place where just by nature of the just the progression of technology itself, the dissolving of boundaries, the access to information. You're going to have to decide what the fuck to do with all the different shaped houses, who are going to have to decide who gets the food, but it's not going to be real anymore. It's going to merge into some next level shit and that's the future of humanity. I hope so too, but then I hope people don't get lazy as fuck because of that. One of the reasons why people have done so well, which is it's also arguable whether or not doing so well is a good thing. But one of the reasons is that we've needed to succeed in order to survive. I don't know. I think how do you think we got out of kitty as well? How do you think we didn't get killed off like Neanderthal? How do you think we didn't become food for the prey? We're weak and slow. We just because we we innovated and we pushed forth and we got the fuck away from all the things that are dangerous. We locked up cities. We invented guns. We did a lot of shit in order to make innovation possible because if you go to places on the earth like the Amazon or like Africa, there's no fucking innovation. You're wearing a piece of skin over your dick and you look over something neat. That's what you do every day. You get up in the morning early and you go look for something neat because if you don't you die. My favorite example is when we started growing crops. Before most of our most of humans time was spent looking for food. You don't have time to ask, you know, Mom what is that? Because you were fucking either hunting something or running away from something. That was just about your entire life. When you are now growing food, you now have a wide space in your day where you're not doing anything. Even entire seasons where you've got food stored up. So what do you do? You start asking questions. You start making art. You start writing things down because you've got time now. I think that when I think technology should be about liberating people to do what they want. It's about... I'm sorry to cut you off but what you're saying this to me is one of the great naive ideas of transhumanism which is the notion that if you remove from human beings, the need for something. In other words, because the ultimate goal of transhumanism I think is to shrink down the moment between what you can think you want and the moment of having it to nothing. So that you instantaneously have something. Whether it's by neurologically stimulating your brain in a way that's exactly identical to reality. So you can experience any feeling state that you want or whether it's using matter of simulators to build something that you've contemplated. All of humanity has been based on overcoming the obstacle between those two things. But in overcoming the obstacle, you gain wisdom. When you're learning how to like play piano, you don't just get to learn how to play piano. You get to learn the discipline of years and years of working to play piano. Suddenly we can download into someone's mind how to play piano. If we remove that discipline, then what Joe's saying is you end up with slugs. I think that no matter how hard a dog tries, it can never learn calculus. There's just an upper limit. No matter it can study forever and it just won't happen. So I think that there are things that we just as humans, we just, no matter how hard we try, there's an upper limit. So when you begin downloading information, there are some things you'll get easy. But there are other things that no one's ever discovered that you now have to discover. New ways to play that have never been even thought about ever. So I think that when you augment, when you make yourself more intelligent and more capable, now you don't have to do hard work to do what humans can do, but you still have to do hard work to do whatever. If I can explain it in layman's terms, this is a technological version of more money, more problems. You don't make your problems far more complex. Like people thought, you know what, once human beings have supermarket, you just go with a credit card, you don't even have to bring around a bag of gold, then no one's going to be depressed. It turns out people more depressed. They're sad, they're looking for meaning,They're not hunting and gathering their food, their food, they're missing all those, those, those rewards that are built into the human genome. They don't get them anymore. So what do they do? They take prosack and they drive fast and they watch stupid movies. Yeah. Well, can I put it in? Oh, money, money problem. Let me put it in non-Lamens burning man terms. If you take the Tibetan book of the dead, one of the barros or one of the hell's in the Tibetan book of the dead is called the hell of hungry ghosts. And what this hell is, is these beings living in this weird place have this infinite appetite and anything they can think of to eat, immediately appears in front of them. So they have the combination of always being hungry, mixed in with being able to instantaneously create any food that they want. And that creates a hell state where all they're doing is feeding and eating to try to quench this endless human appetite. Now, obviously we're really far away from that. That's probably coming though. I mean, if you wanted to think of something that someone would invent, that's without doubt inside the realm of possibility. We already have boner pills for old dudes on a death pill on their death bed. They chomped on a couple of pills. They got a zombie car. We already have that. You're telling me they're not going to have something where you just keep your hunger going. You never get satisfied. You're hungry all the time. What's your favorite thing to do? Isn't it eat mine too? Wouldn't it be great if you're hungry always? And you could just be a professional eater all day. Something that we designed fast food. Think about what people have done to their lips. People would do that. People have blown up their lips, put in magnets and their fingers. No offense. They would definitely do that. I think that that's if that's something negative about the human condition. If we have that technology at some point, then we would also have the technology to change it. And that's another discussion whether we should get rid of the Hidana treadmill. Well I'm not even sure that it's a negative. It's almost like a pattern. I mean I think whatever it took to get humans to this point in history, whatever it took to get us to what we are now, is an incredible process. I mean from whatever we were from multi-celled organisms onto this thing with laptops, that process is insane. And the idea that that process just changes because we add a chip and you know we it's not going to be there's going to be like a growing phase and then it's going to become something new. Just like it became this. If this is unrecognizable to some crazy Neanderthal 50,000 years ago and it's what we will be 50,000 years from now, it's probably unrecognizable to us. And whether it happens slowly or quickly, what has happened in our lifetime and the idea of the internet crept up on us so down quick that we all just accepted as a fact whereas if you brought any other time in history, it's the most insane piece of sorcery and magic the world has ever used. Just 20 years ago, it would have been insane. Conuring, conjuring a dragon. The idea that you could have a little glass box in your pocket that answers all your questions. Amazing. You could send messages including video from people, the people all around the world that's insane. Everything about it's incredible. And it's just a part of our accepted everyday life. Slowly happen, slowly or quickly, there's a big, slowly, we think of it slowly in the course of human history. It's a massive burst of innovation but in our lifetimes it's been 10, 20 years and then boom, it's all here. But the idea that you're going to stop at that or that we should even resist the next level, it seems pretty silly. You can't resist, you can't stop it. It's interesting to sit around and go, what the hell is it going to be? That's where it gets weird. Yeah, and we don't know. I don't think that primitive man could have put a person on the moon if they were still worrying about catching that pig. No, you absolutely don't be saying. Whatever aspirations we will have in 10,000 years, we won't get to that if we don't do certain things. And I think that a part of humanity that I think we should keep is our need to explore and understand. And I think that if we're still worrying about getting cancer at 60, we're not going to get there. Right. I think it's inevitable that we still keep exploring. I really don't. That's why we are here. It's a whole part of the whole thing. There's no getting around that. Now, you've got a video to show us? Well, we've got something to keep queued up with Tim when our body RCTO got his magnets installed. He could got our own video. Would you like to check out that? Okay, yeah, I won't definitely see that. Stop that up. Oh, Jesus. Just Tim. This is Tim. This is Tim. Oh my God. What's with the sound? Don't know. What's that sound? Hold on. Pause that. Pause that. Why does it sound like that? What kind of soundtrack is on that? That's so stupid. Kill the sound. Just play that because obviously there's something going on behind it. It might even be a movie. Wow. You think I were doing the surgery? Some asshole to find him at Home Depot. They were wondering how touch of lawnmowers. He's like, hey, I could do that for you. He's someone who does tattoo work and he specializes in doing sub-durmal stuff. Wow. Yes, shitty tattoos. Never trust a tattoo artist with shitty tattoos. There's a thing called a laser tattoo removal sun looking into it. Never trust a surgeon with shitty tattoos. Especially on his face. Surgeons with tattoos on their face, boy. You're going to go under in 10, 9. What? Okay, so this guy is cutting and he's inserting this magnet into this dude's finger tip. It's a very, very, very tiny magnet. How would you describe it? It looks like a baby that's been split into like sixes. Right? That's how small it looks. It's about two millimeters wide. It's a little bit. Oh, that's bigger than I thought. Maybe a little less than two millimeters. Because that looks really tiny. Maybe it's just a perspective of this video, but that looks like well under a millimeter. What's the charge for this procedure? Three. That's crazy. Absolutely. 100% free. Fuck you up. Stick shit in your fingertips. That's all you get. Who you get that stuff done from. But if you're pretty reasonable, it would be bargain price anywhere between 75 and 150, just like most sub-dermal body mods. What is when you're talking about the future? When you guys sit around and you bring up what's on the horizon, what's like the big theoretical on the horizon? Does there have anything to do with like the kind of technology that we see in Google Glass being incorporated in like maybe a neural sort of thing? So there was a paper put out a few months ago about connecting two minds of rodents. There was one rodent, if I'm not mistaken, in Virginia, and there was another rodent somewhere in Brazil. They put this chip into the brains of these two mice and put them through an obstacle course. With roughly 60 to 70% cross-over rate, the other mouse actually learned the obstacle course of the other mouse it was connected to. So that's been done without chips though. The Rupert Cheldrick wrote a whole book about it. It's called the Morphic Field and Morphic Residents. He wrote a book about dogs knowing when their owners are coming home and people being able to tell when people look at the back of their heads and it's a fascinating sort of a theory. But he showed that, I don't know if it's been verified 100% so. But I know he wrote that he's showed that if you teach a rat in one place a maze that rats somewhere else, another part of the world, will learn that similar maze or that same maze quicker. Statistically quicker. They've also shown the chimpanzees once they started venting things to do with tools. Chimpanzees, they've demonstrated like a rangutan in Africa learned how to spearfish by watching people do it. There's a picture of this thing doing it. It's a motherfucker. It's the craziest thing ever. Well other rangutanks started doing it too. Once they start learning things, it's almost like it's in the ether. It's very strange. Yeah, this is a rangutan separated geographically. It's not like they could observe each other. Well I don't know about the rangutanks but the mice definitely separated geographically. Yeah, that's what's odd about it. You know what? I think man, I don't think it's that they're learning. They learn it and then it travels somehow through space. I think the evolution sort of grows through us. Do you know what I mean? Like it's something that's growing through humanity or these new innovations. So it's not as though one or anything figured it out and sent out a signal. It's as though this was just a new phase that was coming through this form of time. That's very possible. But the orangutan initially, I've confused these two stories pretty badly. But the mice learned in separate parts of the world, separate parts of, they weren't connected. Whether it's a thousand miles or a hundred miles, whatever it was. But the rangutan we're watching people. The rangutanks started imitating people. So they did directly imitate human beings. But have you really stopped and think about when human beings used to be essentially very similar to rangutanks? It was probably only like a couple of million years ago. That seems like a long time to us. But in the span of the universe, that ain't shit. So the idea that a champ could eventually, if they kept moving along and slowly innovating and changing and finding magic mushrooms and learning how to make fires with rocks, they could eventually become some kind of a human thing. I mean, we didn't used to be people. That's the fact. I mean, pretty much established. It's not like all of a sudden we popped up in this form, figuring out, oh, shit, we got to get away from leopards. We became this, like slowly and steadily. It's just the time frame for us is so bizarre to wrap our heads around with an 80 plus year lifespan to try to understand what a 10 million year period of development is. We can't get our head into that. We don't know what that means. And 10 million years from that with this stuff, when it gets to that weird exponential technology thing that's going on right now, we're going to be unrecognizable a hundred years from now. Well, that's what I feel like Lucas is getting at by creating an actual, a pathway between two minds or between many minds that we can control using principles we already understand. I don't know intuition the way I know the way in the electron's going to travel. I know the way in the electron's going to travel. I don't get intuition that way. So if we can create chips where I can have something in the back of my head and I go like this and Lucas is like stop scratching your arm because I feel it. Yeah. Like that's like that's an exponential touch in your butt. How about that? You sitting around your house all said no Lucas stop it. No. You're on a date. You're trying to keep it together. You could get hacked with that kind of technology. This somebody could hack in. That seems inevitable. Just like you get, there's like someone hacked Twitter today and I must have got a thousand fake tweets about diet and exercise. Oh, wow, I look so good for some of it because I started doing this. Like those bots like a bot got through and just infected Twitter. I think the benefit of having a bunch of people develop their own technologies. You're all affected together. Well, no, if you're developing your own technologies for your own implants, there's some sort of, there's some sort of level of security like some people use max because hey, max don't get viruses the way PCs do because people who want to write viruses are targeting PCs because there's more PCs around. I think that is a blinking oasis in the desert. No, we're going to do a stop anything from getting hacked. Absolutely. Absolutely. The first of all, we've learned about the NSA and spying. It's already shown that that you can't stop it. They've already got algorithms in place, they're going to copy all your emails because of because of bottle, bottle net technology because we can't invent our own internet. There is, we can only use that internet and that internet goes through certain filters. Well, it's also because these fucking corporations have given into their overlords and given up the information. And that's really where it comes down to it. I don't want to live, I don't want to live in a future where I've got artificial organs and all of the information from that is being pumped out to some who the fuck knows. I don't feel comfortable with that. I want that information to belong to me at least so that I can do what I want. I don't want any advertisements because my liver is doing whatever or I don't want people to be able to shut off my liver because I'm not being a good citizen. Can you imagine that? That's like a Ethan Hawk movie. There'd be no Snowden. Snowden's brain would have melted out of his nose by now. They just turn him up and I'm sorry you guys had to take a leak. Go take a leak. That coconut water crushes me everything. Go take a leak. Where do you think the end game is when it comes to all this biohacking stuff? What's what's what's the end game? Like where do you hope that it all winds up? Do you have like a man I hope by the time I'm X years old I can fly. I mean is there is there something like that? I see an end game as something way larger than people screwing with their body. It's all a whole bunch of different technologies that are happening all at once. And the fact that we don't have enough resources on this planet to support the population growth and the amount of people that we do have. And those sort of things add together, I feel like when you look at a company like SpaceX and what SpaceX is doing and the fact that all these technologies are leading towards longer lives. The guy who's doing soilent, the food substitute, guy. I'm at those dudes. My dudes in New York. Really awesome. Yeah, isn't it? A drink. And I think all that adds together and I think that when we have so many people and we're living a longer time and we have the ability to print anything we can conceive, then maybe it's time for us to start moving out to space. Maybe it's time that we can handle 20 years over to somewhere where we'll be doing heavy construction work and zero G so that other people can come there and live and be smarter and move forward from there. Maybe it's time to start space colonization. Space colonization, that's where we're going. We're going to be cyborgs. That would be a waste here for you to be like download your consciousness into a robot and send the robot into space. I honestly think that's the smartest way to do it is to be a cyborg. If you're going into space, it's what I've been saying. Everything in space is trying to kill any biological organism. You can't, you know, apes in a tin can won't cut it. That's what I'm saying. And I think being able to withstand all of the crazy space weather, space conditions. Yeah, the conditions are insane. I mean, the temperature is instantly death if you step outside unless you have a pressured suit. If you get hit by any sort of a solar flare or asteroid you're done. We're too fragile even for this planet. That's why we've got like this stuff on us. Yeah. I think motorcycle jackets and shit. Yeah. The idea of colonizing space as this. I don't think it's too dangerous. Do you foresee a future where we really do download our consciousness into some sort of an artificial human being? I don't know, I don't know enough about the technology to say anything definite. I think that it's a cool idea, but I've never seen anything compelling, compelling. So I can't, I can't really say. It's a mind fuck out. And the idea of like a little you, a little lucus running around, made out of rubber and you, your consciousness is in this thing. It's out there touching things and moving stuff around. Yeah. And also that you could duplicate a lucus. Like if you could download a lucus then your lucus could end up on the on pirate bay. People could just be downloading you and then sending you pictures of their lucus that they've put in some kind of habit trail. But that would definitely be another, that would be another lucus. So because once you start generating independent memories, I think you start having different emotions to talk about things. Yeah. That's going to be really weird. Unless they all interface somehow or another together. What you do that? Yeah. Which I mean, it is possible. Right. I mean, if you're dealing with, look, the idea of sending someone a video or talking to someone through FaceTime or Skype in real time off your phone seems like the dumbest, the craziest thing ever. Like that couldn't be possible. That wasn't even on Star Trek. Oh yeah. They never even figured that out on Star Trek. But it's real. The idea that you and your three clones or whatever they are could be experiencing life simultaneously and that you could multitask and that the mind may evolve to concentrate on one person or another. These two sleep or these two are out, you know, and you're doing two different things at the same time and aware tuning in to either one, whatever you choose, sort of like touching your leg with your left hand while you're writing something with your right hand. It's going to be a problem, man. You're going to have swarms of individuals. There's going to be a Reagan swarms. Like, you're like, Angus Kahn, like, you know, Angus Kahn is responsible for like something like 5% of the populations DNA because they just, you know, he went on a party in spring in the 1200s and the whole world is never recovered. You know, imagine if you're doing that artificially. Well, when you talk about stuff, that's that powerful. All of a sudden it becomes really important who has control of that technology and the initial. But how do you enforce that? It's a race. It's a race. Hold on a second. What? It's called what about him. What about him? The perfect opportunity to talk about it's called because that's what he wants to create. Right. He wants to create an army. Well, not an army army, but a whole group of people. He does live forever. Did you pay attention to the global future 2045 conference? Yeah, I know about the 2045, guys. What do you guys think about that? I like that they're working towards a solid project because that's kind of rare in the transhumanist community. There's just a lot of sci-fi talk and way too much. Just way too much. That's fine. This discontent in the transhumanist that debating on how to handle this correctly. I know what the fuck he's doing with robots. I like the fact that they have a goal that they're working towards. I just, I fear that there'll be a particular group of people that'll get it and then just fuck us for eternity. That's your big fear. Your big fear is someone else getting ahold of the goods first. Not giving you the super chip. I fear about the type of people that'll get it first. because the world didn't fare well when a particular set of people got the gun first. That wasn't good for a lot of the human species. Well, it was good for us though. That's how you're here, dude. That's how you're sitting on the internet with a plastic microphone in front of you sucked out of the earth. I would verteered from oil. I would rather I would rather not have to move forward with that sort of contention and fighting and just. I don't think is that inevitable? I mean, within light and I mean, we have whether or not we've achieved enlightenment, we certainly haven't. But at the highest levels of humanity, I think people are probably more aware and tuned in today than at any other time in history. And it's probably way safer today than in the other time in history. Even though there's a lot of crazy shit that goes down on a regular basis, if you compare it your everyday life to that of someone living in Siberia in the 1200s and the Mongols came storming in. We live a lot better. It's pretty pretty goddamn good. And I think that a big part of that is technology and the access to information. The access to information is freer than ever before technology more powerful than ever before, hence people are safer and people are more moral. I really do believe that. And I think the idea of people being moral is more accepted as not just something that has to be enforced in order to keep the peace, but that's something that's beneficial and you should strive for. It's admirable. I think that really might not have existed on such a mass scale in the past, even in the past 20 or 30 years. I think we're dealing with pretty unprecedented times. And it sounds like really super optimistic. But I feel like one of the byproducts of this technology that we're all experiencing is that we're experiencing a sort of of a mini-enlightenment and a burst of enlightenment because of this information. If that is the case, I think that this kind of technology that it sort of dissolves more boundary. I don't think it's going to lead to a constriction of the people that utilize it. I think it's going to lead to a freedom of the species itself. I really do believe that. I think that if I look at the trend, even though everybody wants to think the sky is falling, the trend doesn't indicate that. The sky is falling for some people in some spots. And the apocalypse is right now if you live in the Congo. If you're in Liberia, the apocalypse is today. That's Mad Max. That's going on right now. But the trend for us here, it's obviously not in that direction. It seems like there's always going to be a worst case scenario on this planet, but that worst case scenario is far better today than it's ever been in history. And the best case scenario was completely non-existent, even in science fiction novels. It's going in that way. Can't stop it. Yeah. Wait until one of these, one of these people invent a swarm of nanobots that goes flying out of their basement to valuing toddlers. I mean, the thing is like, I like the... Todd Toddler's a fun word to say. That's your thing. You always go with dead babies. But, but, but, but no, I think that when you're talking about this kind of stuff, you're talking about acceleration. I think you're talking about technological acceleration. And wherever there's acceleration, there's an increased chance of hurting yourself. If you're on a skateboard going a few miles per hour, you're fine. If you're on a skateboard going downhill, you can wipe out. Well, humanity is on this technological skateboard that's exponentially accelerating. And in that way, the role of the individual becomes more and more and more intense. Which means that with this kind of stuff, when the individual has access to the kind of technology that they have today, they can do a ton of damage. Look at what happened with those freaks. All they need to was a pressure cooker and some ball bearings. And they permanently, yeah. They killed so many people and traumatized so many others in the same way. Five years from now, what happens with when people have access to this kind of stuff? It is day. It is a, we are setting ourselves up. But, you're talking about very unique and individual circumstances. In comparison to the seven billion people experiencing things completely differently, all around the world, the problem is that you're dealing with seven billion people that have access to the internet, or at least a good percentage of them, and have their stories being told. So you're hearing about instances all over the world simultaneously all at once. We are not designed for that. We're designed to take an information from our local community. We're designed to take information from all there's a band of dudes about a mile away on foot and they're coming here to fuck our women. That's normal. That's what we're supposed to deal with. You're not supposed to deal with a story about a guy in Switzerland who fucked his pig to death. You know, you're not supposed to deal with this guy in Detroit that's got a fake Bigfoot in his cooler out back. These are all, this is just you're dealing with so many human beings, an impossible number of seven billion, and you're getting information from a vast number of those people. So you're always going to get these freaks. You're always going to get, but it's still the trend, the overall trend, is better. It's way better than this ever. I agree with you there. I hope would be that we become more ethical before we get the power to cause damage. So even though we're more ethical now, any ethical mishap at this point would be a lot more disastrous. It's not so bad when the most powerful weapon you have is a sword. That's not true because getting his concula, 70 million people with a horse and a sword and a lot of people, a lot of other dudes with them, but they did it with horses. Right. 70 million people over his lifetime with horses. But if you the scenario is you have 3d printers and let's imagine 3d printers in 200 years where now you can like molecularly assemble stuff and somewhere along those 200 years someone discovered antimatter, right? You have 3D printers and let's imagine 3D printers in 200 years where now you can like molecularly assemble stuff and somewhere along those 200 years Someone discovered antimatter right so let's imagine that there's a way someone could create Antimatter that when it met matter would dissolve the universe. Let's just say there's an imaginary technology They could open up a new know what side of it what's gonna happen a few people are gonna die and then it's gonna force everyone to learn How to be really nice to everyone because everyone can create a fucking antimatter bomb in their computer. That's what I hope I mean they say a well armed population is a polite population I mean they were gonna take it to the complete next level Bunch of black holes all throughout our planet that were created by assholes We're gonna have to hop over on our way to 7-11. So glad there's a black hole over there. Oh, thank you Something in transhumanism that people don't talk enough about I think is Making people more ethical. I think there's only talk of making people more capable and intelligent That's interesting. There's no talk of making people nicer for the sake of Just living in a more sane world because we're nice now But what happens if infrastructure goes away and maybe come hungry again and we've got lots of weapons around right what happens Yeah, and it would it would take a longer period to build back up in this state rather than if we were nicer and had Fourth-ought instead of having hunger automatically take over and be like well fuck that guy. He has food. You know We I think that we should start having a discussion about making people more ethical and and being able to empathize with even other species because who knows Who knows? What we'll run into in the future and that might be important well That's interesting you brought that up because that was something that Dimitri It's called actually touched on in the conversation that I had with him where he was talking about that being important part of this whole movement and that the movement wasn't just about achieving some new technological state It's about elevating elevating humanity as a whole overall and I thought that was really interesting that he is taking Then to consideration. That's one of the reasons why in this global future 25 1945 That's what it was right global future 2045 Conference that he had he brought in a lot of religious and spiritual leaders to sort of ask some questions of these different Face to try to get it understanding what their philosophies were and how they would incorporate this sort of new impending technology this Transhumanism idea had it what were it to come to fruition? It was really pretty fascinating stuff I mean he didn't just take it from the technological standpoint. It's kind of really dove He dove into the Psychological in the spiritual aspects of as well which I thought was unique and admirable and probably pretty important if this thing moves further You're gonna have some real ethical questions. He developed immortal cyber beings With skin made out of spiderweb silk. That's bulletproof There's already the trend to you there already there figure out how to do that right? Yeah, the transhumanist Mormon watch what would have just said yeah, that's that's a real that's a real thing It's like saying gays for Jesus Yeah, there is that's hilarious. There is humanism Mormonism. Yeah There's a subset of the Warming community the problem is if you're willing to be on Mormon you fucking willing to be anything It's just about her who brings your doorbell first, you know It's like just to sit down and talk him in anything You're Mormon you believe a 14 year old Dave Joseph Smith in 1820 found gold in tablets It contained the lost work of Jesus and only he could read them because he had a magic rock No wonder whether or afraid of gay marriage your family Because if someone could talk you to be in a Mormon they can talk in the blow in them too Get it. That's right out of my stand-up. Damn it. You got me doing my own You the your a part of a movement right now Whether you call it grinders or transhumanism or whatever you're part of a movement where you're focusing on a very Specific thing you're focusing on incorporating technology into the body to improve the body and as long as you're focusing on that as long As the whole community focusing on that Whether or not now it's just magnets and the fingers and everybody's poo-pooing in saying what's the big deal? It's gonna come a time where it's a lot more than that whether it's some new invention of something that has absolutely no Rejection in the human body so you can add all kinds of things whether that Some new technology comes along that radically enhances perception whether it's visual or hearing or Thinking cognitive function the ability to reach other's minds as long as you both have the chip It's all gonna happen right like you can't text message someone who doesn't have a phone Okay, but if they have a phone you can text them pretty easy and once we all have something like that in our head And it's like your phone will work with your friends phones. Oh Mg I'm looking at you right now, and I'm writing this down You know there's gonna be those moments where we we hit some next level thing that we didn't see coming just like we didn't see the internet Common we didn't see cell phones coming no one saw that shit coming again even Star Trek They had a fucking walkie-talkie man Yeah, I like say that shut it. I didn't flip it over. It's so stupid They didn't see iPads didn't say any of that shit and you guys are right on the crest of the wave Right on the crest of the tiny logical tsunami getting sucked into the singularity as we're all getting Torn towards that waterfall you guys are in the canoes at the very front How far would you be willing to take it if someone came up with some real Steve Austin six million dollar man arms and legs They just had a saw your shit off and put on some new ones Would you be down if you knew if they're like a whole bunch? It was like fake tits or everybody was doing it If it got to that point I think everyone was doing it we'd all do it Yeah, came up to like a woman in the 1800s It came up to a pilgrim or something and said listen I like I like what you look like but I'm thinking So bags of water surgically implanted under your breasts with you know you get a lot more tension They didn't even have a bag. Yeah plastic, but they would think you're fucking crazy Are we gonna think I mean is that us looking at the future about like it's got To be standard like you still have your arms and legs. Oh my god, girl. What are you doing? What is that? Yeah, that that'll be the end of rape everybody's just fucking super robot It'll be the new retro thing though to have a lot of them fight off everybody Yeah, I think that red show comes it becomes an expression of yourself Kind of the way that body modification is already yeah, you know I why would I replace perfectly good arms and legs when I could have extra or maybe something Negreed see greedy mother fucker trying to give a super body like no, but I have a three dicks You've got arms forms would be great if sheva maybe that's what she does all about maybe that is the future The future is the only shit. I never thought of that. Maybe that's what that was all about some crazy Transuminous from the past maybe they figured it out a long time ago and they just barely wrote it down They were so high they wrote down like a few past just in the bag of a gita And then we're back to eat mushrooms hold on six. How about it says it? But I do like that you ask somebody who has magnets under his hands if he would replace his arms with robot arms The answer is yes, of course you would do it in a second even if no one else would do it if you could enjoy like Foot massages anymore would you replace your legs if they were just numb? They were numb but awesome like jumping over buildings running 60 miles an hour, but you there were numb You know you don't feel a good massage are you saying that if you're not you feel nothing? I don't I don't think it has to be a Trade-off I might have to be but if you keep your cock and balls, but the bottom of your sack is numb The only feel your balls if someone squeezes them, but the legs on down fake is fuck super powerful Pistons and then you know nuclear power jump over trees you're saying I could jump over trees, but my balls are numb Going to bottom the bottom of your balls What did you think you would be willing to go through an operation or they remove your legs? I mean what if they get operations like look a long time ago Just something like a fake tit would you'd probably die if someone tried to do that to you You would die just from the fact they didn't not sterilize you you didn't have any way of putting you under sure It was it would be nothing today, but back then it was a serious serious thing today girls go back to work in a couple of days Right the idea I'm the why I keep going back to fake tits I'm trying to find a non sexist way of approaching this and far as male enhancement But I can't find anything that's as standard as the craziness of male Sure, no a female breast enhancement. It's one of the weirdest things human beings do but to try to if we get to some point where Imcutating legs is like nothing. Yes, we're placing with an artificial one Superpowered think that the difference between a breast implant and fake leg right is that Already my knees are given out already my my legs are going to wear out stop right there Obviously the set three tits three kids rather if you're seeing it chicks tits who's had three kids Everything wears out man. We're made out of flesh right would have been way better for so smooth Yeah, we do wear out you're totally right. There's nothing different between those two, but we wear out. Yeah, we do eventually your choice might be shitty legs or Better legs that maybe they fix the Under sack and you know come up some new technology that even though the under sack is artificial it has sensors and sends it I Would just like everybody here to stop pretending that if they had super powerful Robot legs you wouldn't get your legs amputated I see what I wouldn't be what about it. In fact is they're numb. That's a weird thing Man, I want someone to do you're jumping over tree people are already working on on prosthetics that that you know That's your face. Yeah, that feel yeah, people are ready and end. We're working towards more sensitive prosthetics that you can deal more right and you can Pretty soon I'm hoping that you can even dial it so that if you're gonna do something dangerous or painful You can dial the pain down whatever it becomes optional And at that point it why would you keep these these aren't modular? You can't switch them. They don't rotate it. Yeah, why why would you why? Because they feel good when you hold someone's hands, but you can you can always put over a layer of Soft stuff why not just pretend you're alive and jump off a bridge I mean it's at a what point time do we end this? Okay, your your whole body is gonna be this fake robot body and you're gonna take what is the memories of your life in your consciousness and download them into some computer chip and the the you Rots and this dream you goes wandering around till your batteries run out Yes, thinking you're really living on a farm with the Waltons meanwhile You're a stupid thing with a battery. You don't even know what the fuck's going on with your life Meanwhile, you're some you're like holding hands on the beach and getting foot massages While all of us are bounding through the universe jumping over buildings I'm just playing devil's advocate, but there are always are those people that want to hold everything back No, what like those those assholes that we're listening to Science has yet to explain how a seed becomes a beautiful flower and the Yeah, yes actually it has dummy, you know We were listening to these some of these religious people talking to that conference were just like there are ideas We're so stupid and antiquated playing on to the the mysteries that have already been solved But in what we were talking about before those mysteries that have been solved when we do understand the mechanism behind the seed Becoming a flower make it even more fascinating. Yeah, yeah, because even though we understand the process now It's still wow that's cool before it used to be Wow, that flowers beautiful what a mystery. I am so glad God brought this to my life Now we're like isn't this incredible this seed got oxygen and then minerals from the soil and then it converts it into energy And then it's photosynthesis and it grows and then the flowers bloom. This is insane It's like the whole process behind it is like it's like so mind boggling and enriching Like and as a human being that's one of the things that like really jazzes us up when we learn new shit When we discover new shit, it's part of like the well like when you tell someone something go wow That's cool like we were talking earlier today about this this discovery these scientists in Germany and in Germany and America They have discovered this new type of animal that used to be like an ancestor of the human being that's from 41,000 years ago They thought it might be in the anertol they thought it might be a homo sapien and it turned out to be some new thing that they didn't even know Existed it's called their call it a Dennis Solvon based on where they found it and when we were talking about it before we were all like Wow Like there's a there's a part of learning something new and discovering something new That just jazzes us. Yeah, and that's one of the things that brought me to transhumanism the the desire to see The Milky Way I mean learning that we didn't live we couldn't live long enough to explore the galaxy was just to me as a kid was just Yeah, it was devastating because you know you're a super geek is like you know I grew up watching like Star Wars and you're watching Doctor Who and then finding out that we're too fragile and we don't live long enough to see anything It's like we can't what we do is we say what's over that hill? What's over that mountain? Let's go. I know it's dangerous, but hey, there's nothing else to do. Let's do it and The fact that we we can't cross space because we're just too much radiation or there's you'll develop wrong or whatever that to me That was devastating and unacceptable. I think that that that's just What other option is there but to move forward? That's so funny that you're never seeing unacceptable You heard about the there's a gentleman the University of Connecticut. That's the foremost scientist Working on time travel Roy Mallet I believe is it Ray Mallet I forget if we get his name But he's a professor and he started his work on time travel because his father died when he was a young man And he wanted to go back in time to save his father So this guy's like a goddamn character in a comic book He's like character in a spider-man book and he's been working on time travel to go back in time and save his father Cool That but it's those those things like where you like I can't imagine that I'm living in a world where I won't get to fly in a battle Star-galactica ship and fight the silence This is ridiculous. I think that's what's beautiful about transhumanism is that it has the Impulse within it is the same impulse that got people to go on to ships to sail towards a continent that they'd kind of heard about At the risk risking everything with no food probably gonna die. Maybe the earth just ends I think there's something beautiful about what you guys are doing even though I do see it as a kind of self-destructive Act I think when you put magnets under your fingers you you aren't thinking ahead You aren't thinking about what you're gonna be like in 30 years. You know you don't know you can do it You used to have a nose ring For like after three days and I didn't get a nose ring Back to it almost killed you you self-destructive Baster Impulse that to give me the nose ring was not the same impulse that drove explorers through the sea It was just being dumb and high in Venice Beach. There's no glory to it. What these guys are doing is glorious It's really cool. It's just a kind of low. It's a bit you have to start somewhere You know you got to you got to start somewhere you're starting with magnets in your fingers by the way if anybody's listening to this the The scientist was Ronald mallet Ronald L. Mallet MAL ETT from the pH. He's a PhD at the University of Connecticut Would you like to meet Dimitri? It's called the man who founded the global future 2045 conference and if so what would you ask him? You first, please I Would ask him What would you say to him? I mean doesn't even have to be a question. Would you would you have anything specific that you would want to talk to him about? I would actually ask him what his What his vision of the future is if it if it all pans out perfectly in his view What would it look like because I'm very interested in what his utopia is I'd love I'd actually love to meet him What about you would you ask him? I'd like to meet him. I'd like to know what he thinks about Where we're going as As a whole as a group of people who are experimenting with ourselves and doing this stuff and I would ask him for the resources that we don't have when you talk about how Putting a magnet inside yourself. You can't think about the long term. Well, it's not that we haven't it's that the people we talk to Who are professionals in these fields? They can't risk telling us the answers because they have professional Certification boards that would say hey you're behaving on ethically You're telling someone to do something harmful to themselves and they don't know the risks they're taking We're yanking your license and so we don't get answers to questions that we need and I think a guy like it's got off Could probably put us in touch with a lot of people who would have a lot of answers for things that could Really help us out awesome dudes. Thank you very much really fun conversation really interesting stuff fantastic subject and Thanks for doing what you doing. Thanks for sharing your information as well and thanks for having us you guys have a great attitude about all this technology Two and even though I played devil's advocate about it. I really think that ultimately that would be the best way You know fall we all had access But the problem is you know people are weak bitches Crying house wetware please Good night