So it does seem like in addition to everything First of all Dave thank you also as always we're late because we just had such a long breakfast to an fire breakfast Um I hope this conversation could be as interesting as our breakfast just was But in addition to everything else changing You made such a smart point a minute ago about the means of Convincing the public the propaganda machine is completely broken and so what does that mean? You're in the middle of a war You're the middle of a of a massive power shift globally like everything is changing the economy Military strength like everything and it's impossible to know Who is telling the truth? Like who comes out more credible than us in the media like who are the people you listen to? What's that look like well? I think Everybody who's being authentic I think is who's coming out ahead of this It seems like if you look at like the the podcast numbers You know, I mean like it's it's the people who are being critical of The regimes policies. Yeah, it's the people you know from my perspective the people who are telling the truth and so in the media world I think there's been this you know as you know because you were in the the old Media world for so long only 35 years not There you go not that long You put a little bit of time. I'm implicated. Yes. I I always thought and I mean this I used to watch you back on on your MSNBC show And you were always One of the very few kind of authentic people you when you were wrong about stuff and things that you look back on and you're like I've changed my mind about all that but it's an incredibly phony world like like news in general There's something about it. That's very you know, it's very welcome back to the virtual clock noodles Well, you know like yeah, it's just like what is that? That's not are you talk credibility doesn't derive from being right about everything credibility derives from being honest. Yes Yes, but so I think after After the first 20 years or so first 15 years of the 21st century and you know at this point what it were 26 years into to the 21st century now It's a the government every single crises That that's happened and we've had quite a few you know at 9 11 and we had global war on terrorism We had the huge financial crash in 2008 we had COVID We had that okay so on every single crises The government and the media just lied through their teeth to the American people and got exposed Like it's not like anyone now thinks like maybe Saddam really did have weapons of mass destruction We all know we all know if you get the vaccine you can get to the turns out you can get COVID even after having the vaccine as Everyone who got the vaccine also got COVID or just about um and and so it was like all these Phonies in media lying us on behalf of power lying to us about these policies and at the same time as they were getting exposed for all of this And I do think COVID did it almost more than anything Yes, the global war on terrorism was over there But COVID was over here and affected everyone also obviously the you know covering for a clearly um senile president It was a pretty easy one for everyone to see through but so while all that was happening Also the technology You know simultaneously got to a point where you know you can do this For a reasonable amount of money You know what I mean like it's not in 1980 if you want to set up your own TV studio You needed a corporation to get behind you because who had the resources? Where's everyone now can open their computer if you have a phone you can record yourself and put it out there So the technology allowed for tremendous parity and the lying us into all of these disasters resulted in people really craving authenticity And so that you know it's just like the propaganda machine got broken Now to your point the policies are still going on And that just creates a very interesting new time Like there just there never was I cannot imagine If while George W Bush was trying to you know Push the war in Iraq. Let's say for all of 2002. They spent the full year building the case for what well Imagine every day Bill O'Reilly and Sean Hannity were calling out George W Bush for his lies Like the people who George W Bush voters trusted the most Were hearing their favorite news castor calling it telling the truth doing news Well, you can't even fathom what that would be let. Well, that's what it's like now now that's the situation and I don't know what that means exactly But I know that governments all around the world have invested heavily in propaganda campaigns for a reason Because they think that's really important They think it's important that they don't just go in Vader act But that they convince you first that he's got nuclear weapons and he's in bed with the terrorists and they're you know Whatever kind of laser rifle We don't want the warning to be in the form of a mushroom cloud from the bomb that doesn't exist His terrorist friends who he hates who he's not friends with at all, but but so now we're in this new World and it's very exciting as someone who's a part of it and it's it's an exciting moment to be alive But it is certainly a dangerous one You know, they say the most dangerous time for a woman to leave in a be the most dangerous time for an abused woman is when she tries to leave Yeah, right like that's when he might kill you and That's kind of how I feel about the government right now. I think you're I think that's so first of all so well put and also so true Because it can't actually last that much longer because the disparity In power is too great. So I think a lot of people who have podcasts I've been in so many different kinds of media. It's hard to remember what this one's called this podcasting It's the same you know, sure. It's a kind of silly term that doesn't really make sense. He doesn't we don't have iPods anymore I don't know why it just if that one just stuck for whatever reason so true But people who have you know in independent media feel like they have a lot of power. I've got so much power They have no power They don't control the the medium really they don't control YouTube. Yeah, they don't have The FBI they're disposal. They don't have nuclear weapons. So actually they are powerless and through a quirk of history because we're in a change moment That's not obvious, but it has to be obvious. There's too much at stake, right? Yeah There was a don't they have to be crushed? I think it was the CNN lady. She used to work for vice I believe but the the girl who was like known for interviewing like the alt-right figures and oh, yeah interviewed Tim Dylan last year and it was right after Trump One his election and or shortly after and she said you know something like you guys are the real The power center now, you know It's like you podcasters you guys are the ones with par because I guess well, okay the more people watch these shows then watch the traditional shows and Trump came and did a bunch of them and Re-election and Kamala Harris was too scared for wisely people say that was a real mistake She should have done Rogan. No, it wasn't it was a really good call It was a really really good call by her team to not do Rogan actually Yeah, it's like after 2016 when they were like what you know Hillary Clinton's campaign is so stupid She didn't visit was constant more you know like you really think they're that stupid You know numbers went down every time she went so like stop going it didn't like her that's what you go That's which it was actually her best chance was that But anyway, but so that so you know they say oh you guys, you know since you guys got president Trump elected You're the real power center now, and it's like Pretty sure the CIA still has a little bit of power. I think it's still like a little bit Hang on in the Pentagon. I'm not quite sure. It's all in Theo Vaughn's hands at this point, you know But yes, so that's the so I can't continue. I mean let's be totally honest if you Everyone forgets about tank man and chin and square is like Probably we don't even know what happened to him. You don't know his name probably crushed by the tank actually Right certainly yes, well, it's not laughing. I am laughing because just the delusion that people have I've got a voice It's like no Well, but that's the weird It's it's very strange for both these things to be going on at the same time That's why I said to you at breakfast my my analogy is the you know on the road runner cartoons when you run off the side of the cliff Yeah, but you're still in air for a moment and then you look down and realize no, it's like we're there like How can you keep doing this so those people I mean and and you know obviously from for me personally like it's kind of fascinating because I've been in this world and Over the last two and a half years or so. I've done I mean like if you count like all the you know debates and that Pierce Morgan debates or Oxford style divad on like 35 40 debates on you know just Israel or the warfare state or whatever it is you crane a lot of these things and I've never It's like the side broadly speaking because there's a lot of differences amongst people who who disagree with say the war in Iran or U.S. Support for Israel destroying Gaza but broadly speaking it's not only like we've won the debate we've like Just crushed the you know it's not just me there's lots of people involved in this You more so probably than anyone but When you see like you look at the polls There was this one poll I saw and that this is just one poll But there's a lot that back this up but that it was Before October 7th they'd ask who do you sympathize with more? The Israelis or the Palestinians and it was plus 48 for the Israelis Yeah, it's now plus one for the Palestinians and in the U.S. in the US and to just think so basically a 50 point shift in a little over two years and Tucker I mean I don't know you've been You were doing this for longer than me when does that ever happen? When does any issue ever swing by 50 points in two years? It'll be like if you if I were to tell you in two years This country would be 95% pro life You know it's like whoa what happened in those two years? Well, I mean the pro life is most a really one the argument You know what I mean like and so now that we've had for the first time ever a media environment where say Israel is not completely protected Like what what were the debates about supporting Israel on MSNBC or CNN? No, they don't exist. They never happen. You're not allowed to have those days there There's not maybe like one kind of critical of Israel host will slip in here or there But if he says too much he's getting fired pretty quickly and so so we essentially won the debate We it's not close. It's not but it's not a question of fast Yes, you know very short period of time because there was actually a fair open media system now where ever you know It was really democratized in in a way and so you can't look it go does You know are you're bigger than you've ever been before? Candace owns is bigger than she's ever been before I know I'm bigger than I've ever been before Ben Shapiro is weaker and more of a laughing stock than ever before you know like it's just very up but then at the same time Who won the policy game? Mark Levin, you know the president is tweeting go watch Mark Levin show today and his His base his voters are going I think I'll check out Tucker Carlson You know I think I'll and so so anyway, there's just this very weird thing We're like we won the argument. We had the national debate we and we won and yet we're at war with Iran on behalf of Israel And I think what you're getting at is like that does just feel Totally unsustainable like there's either you got a clamp down on these guys like us or you got to reverse the policy and Really hoping it's the latter so whether it's warming which means grilling is here and you're probably already thinking about your first backyard Barbecue of the year What should you put on the barbecue? We recommend good ranchers? We've been using good ranchers for a while in the differences obvious They partner with local American farmers and ranchers to deliver 100% American meat right to your door past your raised no Antibiotics no added hormones and excellent quality and taste Good ranchers also just launched their new custom boxes so instead of choosing a predetermined list of meat choices You can build your own box with the cuts that you want Stakes for grilling chicken for week night dinner. Whatever you decide You start your plan you get to choose a free meat that included with every order at no additional cost plus with the code Tucker You get $25 off your first order. That's free meat with every order and 25 bucks off your first order use the code Tucker to get that Good ranchers.com American meat delivered and it's excellent People don't like to be criticized for their mistakes And I know this from having a wife and children totally fine to be you know Criticized for something you feel confident is the right thing But if you screw something up and someone says say say I told you You want to shoot the person it's very hard for people to deal with that and so if you have a world like this which is obviously You know, it's one of the most profound moments of my lifetime. This is much more profound than 9-11. I think Thankfully not as you know very relatively few Americans have died But you can see that this is the end of something I'm in the consequences are very very serious in the middle of that To criticize the decision to start the process that led to this Feels like you're gonna be punished for that. Yeah. Do you feel that? Yes? I know exactly what you mean and I You know, I almost um like on some I don't know It's some way I feel like I like the political thing or the the wise calculation here would almost be to be like Mr.. President Trump you did such a phenomenal job with this and it's such a success that we should just stop right now and declare victory Or so they like you know what I mean But I'm just no good at being a political operative. I'm only good at telling the truth like it's all I I only have one speed It been Ben Shapiro called me out recently and called me a bunch of names and then I said she said I know I can hear Dave right now saying debate me bro If you believe this, why don't you debate me because no no, I don't debate with it and but He's kind of right in a way that that is my response of I mean I only have one speed. It's all I know how to do like come podcast with me. I don't know anything else So um well because you're rooted in kind of the old America where you know There was a free market not just in the economy, but like intellectually free market of ideas. Yeah, we're supposed to have it at least Yeah, that the whole country is built on that. Yeah, and so but so that Ben Shapiro and etc You know that feel that all his he knows the ideas can't hold up. I mean Hill Hill debate a 19 year old Gender confused kid because he knows he can win that debate. You know, it's not that that kid's more serious than me You know, that's not really the issue, but the but anyway, I guess So just that like I only have one speed I only know how to just tell you what I think is is really going on here and and I think you're right I think it's this is such a disaster because Donald Trump first of all it'd be very difficult at this point even if he wanted to just stop the thing Which I think he does at this point one stop the thing. I think he it seems to me like he believed this could be quick It was an easy like Venezuela and we're way past that at this point But she can't just stop now Well, obviously there's the Iranians and the Israelis are involved in this too, and it doesn't it doesn't seem like either They're them want to stop right now So they're you got a big problem, but also look this isn't Venezuela There's I don't know what the latest sentcom numbers are. It's 13 dead Americans was the last I saw the 150 plus wounded number came out weeks ago. I don't know what that's up to now are bases and you know the in the region have been very badly damaged the damage to the global economy So it's not this way you know you can't just come out of this and then pretend Something really great happened if he stops right now Then it's like oh you just started a disaster for no reason on behalf of a foreign country like this is just awful and Then there's a couple factors. I've seen this play I know you've seen this over the years certainly during the global war on terrorism where there is I guess what you could call Like the sunk cost fallacy of war which is the worst of all sunk cost fallacies, you know, but it's you go You go well those boys died for nothing if we don't finish the job And it's like oh man is that a bad trap to get into because the reality is that Those boys died for nothing That's over and if you continue this more boys will die for nothing that's great. And so no one you know I Pierce Morgan had a panel once or a debate between Scott Horton who is the as you know You've had him on the show the most incredible foreign policy guy in the country like just unbelievable levels of brilliance and his books Enough already Fools Aaron which are about the global war on terrorism or the best books written on the subject his book provoked about the war in Ukraine Is the best book written on their literally exhaustive? I only know Scott Horton because of you and what Improvement to my life. Yeah, I mean he's the he is that he's been such an incredible resource Like he's a good great friend of mine one of my closest friends But he's also just been he's like my mentor in the foreign policy stuff and he's just so great because he's like He's such a tool because he's got a photographic memory So like I can literally just call him at any point and you'll just be like It's when Iran invaded Iraq in 1980 the in 1982 Weren't they fighting here and then he'll just be like yeah, they were fighting here and here and then this guy has all their names and everything It's really incredible but so he was debating Wesley Clark on Pierce Morgan's show to talk about the new media world that we live in and how crazy it is now that Scott Horton Gets to square off with the four star general and Wesley Clark Who you know look I have my issues with him, but he did give us that great Ignition about seven countries in five years. So I'll always kind of be grateful for the him now He tries to walk that fact, but we all heard what you said but He goes at one point talking about I believe it was Gaza if I'm getting this correct He and he said this was while it was still you know intensely going on and he goes But if we just leave now then Hamas gets to say they won and you're like sir General that's your opinion on war, but that's a recipe to be in forever war always We can't ever leave anywhere because so what happens is you get this thing where it's like there's the sunk cost fallacy We can't leave now because we have to win and then Donald Trump is now of course he put his entire presidency on the line for this which was really foolish and So now he's just he's got to get a win let me get a win and then I can get out You know so let's do a big thing But then you do a big thing and they respond with a big thing and then you go shoot now We got to respond to that and this is the escalation trap right like that and this was what people like me and you have been talking about for years and The all the war hawks in the country really enjoyed mocking me and you for the last seven months or whatever It's been from between the 12 day war and and this latest war in Iran going oh you guys were acting like this was gonna be a disaster And look it wasn't a disaster Okay, we're back in it now and it's a disaster and precisely zero of those people are going oh I guess I was wrong about that no no they'll be claiming for you to be arrested and imprisoned Yeah, of course right because you know your existence is a mark of shame Because you you remember right so anyone who remembers has to be taken off the board. I'm just interested not I never think about You know those people the mark of I say a prayer from Mark live in every day because it's more religion I'm supposed to but he's not I mean Mark live in zen idiot. He's not pulling any strings He's a tool of larger forces. Yes. When I'm fascinated by are the assumptions that like ordinary non-mark live in Americans have about the United States the nature of power history that allowed us to make the greatest mistake of my lifetime, which is this war What are those and a lot of this has to do with the second world war? Yeah. Oh, yeah so We're reading the wrong lessons into that and I just want to say for the hundredth time I'm the opposite of pronouncing I'm against authoritarianism and all its forms but why is it that we look at the second world war and then make a bunch of false assumptions that get us into Engagement's like this that hurt us. Well is that what are the myths? Well, I think the way the way I look at it right and This is you know, I've defended darryl Cooper quite publicly quite often for what he said on your show which really it was by the way It's so revealing and totally proves his point the response to that There's just no reason why that should have been such a huge thing, you know, but like the thing is that a Darryl Cooper did Hitler kill a lot of Jews. Yeah, he did he did like hours upon cast on it. Yes Yes Hitler killed a lot of Jews. I mean what that's not just he just put out Episode two of his new Series on world war too, which I have not I heard the first one. I've not gotten a chance list in the second one yet for some so good They're not really about that. I don't think any same person I've never heard anybody in my life say Hitler didn't kill a ton of Jews or hit or like love Did you know Hitler hit the Jews killed a ton of Jews? That's bad everyone agrees with that It's not really the holocaust that they're mad about that's not Well, look I mean the threat right so most people don't wake up in the morning and decide to feel horrible Exhausted foggy disconnected from themselves, but it does happen and it happens slowly You're working hard. You're showing up and in your energy disappears by midday your focus is dull Your weight won't move a lot of people are told that's just getting old. That's what it is, but that's not actually true For many men and women these are not personal fears. They are signals tied to your metabolism your hormones and Nutrient in balances that go undetected for years. You don't even know you're deficient And that's why we're happy to partner with joy and blokes a company that was built for people who are Done guessing and ready to figure out what exactly is going on and that starts with comprehensive lab work and a one-on-one consultation with a licensed clinician an actual human being explains what's happening inside you and builds a Personalized plan which includes hormone optimization peptide therapy targeted supplements So don't settle go to join blokes.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 50% off your lab work and 20% off All supplements that's joy and blokes.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker 50% off labs 20% off supplements join blokes Get your edge back so world war two was Objectively speaking the worst thing that's ever happened in the world. Yes right is the biggest bloodbath in human history exactly and destroyed Europe and go it's just so it's so horrible You think about that that humanity reached such a height in the 19th century the 19th century there's two things that happened that could not have been predicted You would have seemed insane if you had predicted it beforehand it probably the two greatest achievements in human history are that Well, there's the industrial revolution and for the first time ever there like there's economic growth You know like if you if you look at economic growth on a chart it basically doesn't exist until the industrial revolution There's a different a portion as well. Yes. Yes. So for the first time ever human beings escape like the back brushing Backbreaking poverty of nature. You know what? I mean like it escapes zero son some economics. Yes, they're well right zero some economics But just where people got reached by looting now you can get rich by creating things that did exist and we could raise the standard of living in a meaningful way in very basic You know ways and also there was the abolition of slavery which just would have seemed like that That was the way of the world for all of human history and that I'm saying the abolition of slavery in the West obviously there are other parts of the world It's still had it and and the industrial evolution was in the West also so not you know But these amazing things happen and then in the 20th century we take that industrial capacity to go to total war with each other and in the case of the first world war just over nonsense I mean over a political assassination Not even come on. Yeah, it's not like somehow this thing spins into this catastrophe But so after World War two that's even bloodier than World War one which was supposed to be the war to end all wars And it wasn't it was the war to create the conditions for the worst war in human history and of course as you've talked about and gotten a lot of heat for civilians were targeted on all sides Now of course we didn't go genocide on the way that Adolf Hitler went right but we targeted cities when we knew the military was out You know targeting women and children dropping nuclear bombs on on cities and so and also the kind of The the military industrial complex the national security apparatus were truly created in in the aftermath of of world war two like there were intelligence a but the CIA is created and that you know The form of government that we actually live under was kind of erected during and after World War two and so you've got the most profoundly awful thing that's ever happened and this new government plus a new government in Israel a couple years later that are created and so it when you have something like that You really got to tell yourself a damn good story about why that is justified and That's not when you say this sometimes people go oh sorry you say the Holocaust didn't really happen It's like no, it really happened Really have a point is that yes the point is that the Holocaust happened in a context of 60 million people dying You know what I mean like it's just a funny. It's all reduced to the okay just to be totally clear not denying the Holocaust Okay, it's not about that. Yeah, the thing the immediate post-war changes that you just list The deindustrialization of the West the partition of India mmm-hmm The you know the creation of the national security state if I could say an authoritarian national security state in the West the delivering half of Europe to the Soviets. Yeah The partition of Germany like these are all the genocide of German civilians after genocide of German civilians after the war mass mass ethnic cleansing mass mass rapes and murders All types of horrible. So none of it's not a defensive Hitler Who I oppose to say all those are bad? It's just kind of interesting that this war which is supposedly so great Gave birth to things that are subjectively the worst things. Yeah, and what is that? Well look I mean it's it's a it's a disaster of government you know total power and There but look even like if you say like if you're talking about the revolutionary war like let's just say like back in the 1980s Or something like a school teachers teaching kids about the revolutionary war they don't go like well You know the king of England was tax and a little bit more than he should and then the framers kind of had these wild conspiracy theories about what he was gonna come do none of that was really true and anyway They got into the you know they tell you George Washington never told the lie and when he chopped down the apple tree He said to his paw. I can't lie to you because like human beings just need this narrative of that makes and so what ended up happening was that the very When you challenge World War two orthodoxies you're challenging what Darryl calls the load bearing myths You know the the load bearing pillars right of the existence of the most powerful forces in the world and You know you know look it's it's very clear like again the reaction to Darryl is the proof Of the claim like what is this if somebody were to say you know this is how you find out what the national religion really is You know I could sit here and trash Thomas Jefferson for Raping his slaves no matter what you say doesn't matter this isn't gonna generate any outrage at all You know in fact I might generate some applause from different quarters and so but but you talk about this and it's very very different And then as you've seen as we've all seen it's used To justify every subsequent war. I mean like everybody is just right authoritarianism. Yeah, that's right everybody is Adolf Hitler I've lived through the the you know It's Saddam Hussein was Adolf Hitler nor Diego was Adolf Hitler or Bashar al-Assad is Adolf Hitler Vladimir Putin's Adolf Hitler You're a Adolf Hitler Nick Fuentes is Adolf like every Every time they want to smear someone that's the smear they go with Donald Trump got the same treatment and Anytime you oppose a war Well, you're Neville Chamberlain, you know if I if I think like hey We should just put in writing that will never bring you crane into NATO because man This is causing all these problems. Okay. Neville Chamberlain You would have just given Czechoslovakia to it. It's like dude That's not the only lesson in history the only lesson in history is not always go with aggression Never go with de-escalation, but so that's kind of what this has been turned into and I do think But I would just say big picture if it was such a Never go with de-escalation. But so that's kind of what this has been turned into. And I do think, but I would just say big picture if it was such a victory, why are all the winners falling apart less than 100 years later? Yeah. Yeah, that's a good fair point. I don't, again, shut up your pro-Hitler for the fifth time. Not pro-Hitler in any sense. Yeah. Well, what's the answer to that question? Well, there's a brilliant philosopher named Rosie Perez. And the film, white men can't jump. She said, sometimes when you win, you really lose. Yeah. And that's what's interesting. It is such a simple but very, very true statement. And there is something about, well, isn't it kind of interesting that the United States of America started as the experiment in restrained government? Right? Like there had really never been a government that was created that was so restrained. And the whole idea of it was like, we're going to take the power of a king. And then we're going to scatter that amongst three different branches in the federal government. And the federal government really only oversees all these state governments that have their own autonomy. And we are these United States of America. And even as we became more centralized, obviously, the articles of confederation got overthrown. And the Constitution gets put in. And then, you know, but even say like if you look after this from the end of the Civil War, this was always the best stuff about like Milton Friedman books and stuff. But in this part, I really think those Chicago guys got it right. That if you look from the end of the Civil War, so like 1965 to around say 1910, okay, in this period of time, you know, try to imagine that this was our government, okay? The US government, the federal government spent like maybe like one and a half or two percent of the national income, a tiny amount of spatter. There was no mass federal regulation or anything like that. There was no central bank. There was no income tax. And just try to imagine like like this was truly in the closest to a real experiment in free market capitalism that humanity had ever seen. And the result of that was the biggest economic expansion in human history, the greatest raising of the lot and life of the average person. You know, like where the average person could actually have a pretty nice life. And you could work at the factory and your wife didn't have to work and you owned a house and you sent your kids to college and you drove a couple cars, you played poker on the weekends with your buddy. Like you had a good life. And if you look at the United States of America today, it is the most powerful government in the history of the world. Like somehow this thing that started as an experiment in the smallest government became the biggest government that the world's ever known. And so there's almost something where what happens is these free markets create so much prosperity that there's so much more of a tax base. And now the political class can tax you more and more and more. And you're still living a pretty good life even though they're getting fat off of you. You know what I mean? And so similarly, sometimes something like after World War II, you see this with America and then you really see it after the collapse of the Soviet Union where it's like because you win, you get so much power. But as Lord Atkins said, that power tends to corrupt. And so you get all this power, but then it totally corrupts your own soul. And I think that's kind of the story of America. That's and I think it's the story of our lives. I mean, the number of men I know who've gotten what they wanted, what they worked for, the job, the exit, you know, sale of whatever they built, all of a sudden they win. And then they fall apart. I've seen that so much. I felt it in my own life, by the way. For sure. You know, easy success is not good for you at all. Struggle is good for you. And so I wonder if the United States was hollowed out by its own victory, this loss and unfortunately, I think we can say already, it's hard to imagine getting out of this without being diminished. Yeah. I mean, what is what is a victory here? I mean, you know, it's also a terrible situation where victory might victory might be the worst case scenario. I mean, like, you know, like victory, like if the whole goal is to topple the regime, you're like, okay, but every other time we've toppled the regime in this neck of the woods, it's led to migrant crises and death and terrorism. You can't topple a regime in the Persian Gulf because the world's energy supply needs to move through it. You have to extract it, refine it, make it into petrochemicals, do it every fertilizer to everyone. In the Persian Gulf, then you have to get it out of the Persian Gulf. So that means you have to have a controlling authority. You have to have strong governments there or else some rebel group who thieves with drones will shut the whole thing down. You have to have, you can't have chaos in Iran. Yeah, they call it the Persian Gulf for a reason. Exactly. You have called the Arabian Gulf the other half of Persian. It doesn't matter. Chaos in the Persian Gulf means no energy or fertilizer from the Persian Gulf period. So you're going to piracy there. So the option to that is keeping an Iranian regime in place. And that means that Iran is more powerful than it was when the war started. This is also obviously unless you nuke them, which is, I think, an option. And then you set off a chain reaction that is the worst thing imaginable. Inflation makes credit card statements, particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just by groceries and gas things you used to be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the banks charge you 20% interest. If the system is designed to keep you underwater, it's working. But there's another option. Our friends in American financing are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people mortgage rates in the fives supporting the American dream of home ownership. And they're showing homeowners how to take their hard earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now we're against debt in general, but in this economy, most people have no choice at all. So don't go bankrupt and sleeving yourself to a lender. Average savings are about 800 bucks a month. And it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a salary-based mortgage consultant. Now upfront fees are obligation to see how much you can save. Give American financing a call. 800-685-5696. As 1-800-685-5696. Or visit American financing.net slash Tucker America's home for home loans. So anyway, I think there's no way to see this as a win. I pray it is, but I don't see it. If it is a loss, maybe that is not all bad for the US. Well, there is, I think sometimes things need to get really bad before they get better. You know, things need to get bad so that people wake up even more. There's no question people have woken up a lot, but maybe people just need to get angry or, you know, and I don't know. I don't know what I'm trying to see this in the full list of history and God's plan, but I just, because it feels like such a disaster, it's affecting my sleep. I love America. I have kids. I don't want this to happen. I'm not in control, obviously. So, but I do think that like you're often surprised by the downstream results of things. I think people who return from Normandy would be shocked by the condition of the United States and Great Britain 80 years later. They are shocked. Obviously, they may interview some hundred-year-old guys like, we died for this? Yeah. No, it's totally, I mean, like talk about just a scracing their sacroids. Oh, it's the greatest disgrace. Our self-abassement is an insult to their sacrifice on our behalf. But I wonder if the opposite isn't also true that maybe in your defeat, there are things that, I know this is true for me. Every time I've gotten sick or gotten fired, like I just, I understand the world better and I become more joyful and stronger. Do you feel that? Yeah, no, I know for sure. I mean, many times in my life and yeah, you learn a lot more from your losses. Yeah, your defeats are actually your victory. Yeah, that's right. That's right. That's right. And, but, you know, the problem is just this is man. We're just playing with fire with this thing because it's so dangerous. You know, it's um, what worries you most. Well, um, I guess I'd say number one, um, I, what we're doing to those people over there. I mean, I think it's just like horrible and I don't say this as like, I'm not trying to like virtue signal that I care so much more than other people. But like when your government takes your money and just starts slaughtering people in, poor countries compared to us, you know, there's just so profound. What you do to others will be done to you. Yeah, that's a physics principle. You can't get away from that. So that's just well, imagine, imagine like there was a guy who was like a convicted pedophile and he had molested a bunch of like Iraqi children or a bunch of Iranian children. And then you were like, well, I'm going to have him babysit my kids. He only does it over there. You know what I mean? Like he only, he only felt like, what? No, dude. He's hurt children. You can't let him anywhere near your children. Okay. Well, these, these same monsters in government are the ones who are rule and over me. and my family and my country. And the idea that you just go kill like, you know, I know I said this on, on Rogan show the other day about the, the school that we had, or he killed like 165 or 170 little girls. And then people, you know, give me some, those numbers haven't been verified. That's just the claim of the Iranian government because well, our government's not denying it. And in fact, they did an investigation and concluded it was almost certainly us. It was a Tomahawk missile. What's the question here? We know where this came from. The only question left is like, who gave it that coordinates or did it miss or was that intention, whatever? But like, kill a whole bunch of eight year old girls. I mean, jeez, man, is there anything more evil you could do than that? So just on a, on a basic human level, you know, there's like this. And you know, we would do that. I think it was clearly accidental. But I also think having done a lot of accidental things, it's essential to apologize for it. And anyone who doesn't apologize for it's a dangerous person. Well, also, even if you did that to them, you'll do it to my kids. Yes. And it also, it stretches the definition of accidental a little bit because even if very specifically, like we were trying to hit this building, but instead we hit this building. And there's a point I've been making largely through the Israel's destruction of Gaza, which is was not that at all. They were just leveling in the place. But you go, look, man, like you start, you start dropping bombs on people. You start blowing things up. You know innocent people are going to end up dying in that. So in that sense, it is intentional. And maybe you didn't mean to hit that exact, you know, target or kill that many people. But like if you, if you, you know, if you blew up a building, you know, that you, suspected somebody else was in, but then it turned out that there were a bunch of little kids there. It's still a pretty profound crime. But then, of course, on top of that, I really worry about getting trapped into a broader war, a wider war. There is not, and I don't, I'm not saying that I think this is going to be like a rack or a Afghanistan. I think already this is very different than Iraq and Afghanistan. There's a, Iraq and Afghanistan did not have the ability to do what Iran is doing right now for one. Number two, I just don't, I don't think it's going to be that. I don't think, I think it would be more the Libya or Syria model than, than the Iraq or Afghanistan model, which did require a small amount of ground forces. So we used head chopping Ben Ladenites in both of those cases and put the Ben Ladenites in power in Syria. But just to be clear, our country would not survive another Iraq or Afghanistan. There's no United States of America coming out of that. We don't have a 20 year catastrophic ground invasion in us. Like it will, it will bankrupt the country. It will destroy the culture, the country culturally. So like, so that's a very scary thing. We don't have, you know, in, in, or the launch of the global war on terrorism, we were coming out of the 1990s. This was a different country in the 1990s, you know, and anyone who was alive then, those people lived here. Yes, yes, different people, different culture, different economic realities, different military realities. Now then the other thing that I really, really worry about with all of this is that we've never really had, we've never dealt with a full like Shiite jihad war against the West. You know, our beef was always with the Sunni radicals. Those were the terrorists. We had to worry about the al-Qaeda and ISIS and stuff like that. And that was quite a big problem. You know, we had a, a lot of terrorist attacks in America and in Europe, particularly ISIS-inspired attacks, al-Qaeda as well. And, you know, so I've kind of called out some of these, some of these people, I'll do it again here because they're like some of the biggest frauds in the country. These like pretend intellectuals like Sam Harris and Gad Sad and guys like this who have spent a career demonizing Muslims. Their entire career has been talking about what irrational, violent people, Muslims are, how awful the religion is. And, you know, and look, there's been some points that I agree with them on. You know, if someone, you know, writes a cartoon about Muhammad, you don't have the right to kill them. Sorry. You want to be in the West. These are our rules here. Exactly. We value free speech and I can make a cartoon about whatever the hell I want to make a cartoon about. Okay, but if you spent your whole career arguing how violent and irrational the Muslims are, what is killing an Ayatollah mean? You know, that's not just a political figure. You know, you murder an Ayatollah and his entire family. And we've already had a couple terrorist attacks over here that at least seem like and there was the shooting in Austin, Texas that came like the day after we launched the war. And the guy was wearing like an Allah Akbar T-Sh, I'm assuming that might be related. And so, you know, then you have this real issue of like, there's unfortunately in in the old, like controlled American media and all the, you know, all the people like Mark Levin and all these guys when they talk to their audience, whatever audience they got left, and they always love to talk about how a round chance death to America, you know, which they do. And I'd like it if they stop doing that. It's not the nicest chance. But none of them ever even try to say, to even approach the question of why? Why do they chant death to America? Why do they hate us so much? And this was the latest for freedoms. Yes, right. So the older you get, you realize how fast everything can change. One day everything is fine. It's great. And the next day things are not great at all. That's just the nature of it. But if you're realistic about that, you have to think about your family, something happened to you. What would happen to them? The problem is getting life insurance is not only kind of depressing. It's a huge hassle. Medical exams, paperwork, waiting weeks for approval. A lot of people just don't want to deal with it. So they don't deal with it. And that's not the right answer at all. You have an obligation to think through what would happen if you're not here. And so we're partnering with ethos. Ethos makes getting life insurance super quick and very easy. It's a hundred percent online. You get a quote in seconds. You apply in minutes and same Dave coverage. There's no medical exam. We just answer a few very simple health questions. And you get up to $3 million in coverage. Some policies as low as $30 a month. So 10 minutes to get covered. Life insurance through ethos. You'll be glad you did. Get a free quoted ethos.com slash chuckles as ethos. ETHOS.com slash chuckles. Obviously application times may vary as may rates. But it's pretty darn easy. This was after this is so funny that it is so funny that that was at funny in a dark way. But that that was actually the question. I remember I was 18 when 9 11 happened. I remember asking that question with all sincerity. And that was actually the national conversation. That was the first question before it got answered with they had when 9 11 happened. The average Joe six pack American went, why did they hate us? That's how ignorant we were of our own position in the world. We didn't even know there was a beef. Yo, what are we talking? We thought Bill Clinton was the time of peace and prosperity. That's what Americans considered that time. The time of peace. Arrakis did not consider that a time of peace. Hundreds of thousands of more more getting killed due to the blockade. Clinton's bombing campaign. It wasn't peace and Serbia. You know what I mean? It wasn't like there but to us it was like, oh, that has little wars. They didn't really mean anything. You know, but it wasn't now all you got to do is ask that question. And I'm sure it's almost like implicit in the mark within world that will why do they hate us? Well, I don't know because they're crazy. Darker, darker people and they hate us. You know, there is lomo fascists. I don't know. That's what they do. They hate. But if you ask Iranians and not the ones who are, you know, paid by missiles from out wars, but like, they'll tell you very quickly why they hate us. And the whole beef rate goes back to 1953. We overthrew their government. We installed a dictator who they did not like very much who was not very kind to his political opponents to put it mildly. And then the other big thing that they point out all the time is in 1980, Saddam Hussein invaded Iraq. Now a lot of people from my generation remember this because this is actually what the neo-cons would would they would often like vaguely cite this when they were trying to push the war against Iraq. They're like, he used chemical weapons against civilians. Like yeah, what they leave out is that they were backing him when he did that. They facilitated the sale of those chemical weapons to him. And they backed and gave the green light for Saddam Hussein to invade the country. And so, you know, Iranians remember that. Like they remember that. There was I think 500 or 600,000 Iranians died in that war. Like they remember this very well. By the way, another lesson from that war is they never surrendered. Even after taking losses like that, these Shiites are not playing around when it comes to matters like that. And fought and fought. And so anyway, I say all that just to say that it's like these things do inspire hatred. And they inspire hatred for generations. And generations. And that is real. Yeah, it turns out in 2002, a letter emerged written by Osama bin Laden. Of course, it was then still alive that he had written right after 9-11 in Kandahar, before he fled to Toribora. And it came out a year later in the Wall Street Journal. And I worked at CNN at the time. And I read it on the air. and answered that question. What is this about? Why did you do this? And the letter, which briefly became famous before it was pulled off the internet, said, you know, I'm mad that you have troops in Saudi, where Mecca, Medina are. And I'm mad about your support for Israel. And that's why I did this. I wasn't trying to justify 9-11. It can't be justified in my opinion. That's right. But I think it's important to know why things happen because you want them to happen again. Well, a group of rabbis got together and called me an anti-Semite, which I wasn't then and I'm not now and tried to get me fired for my job. I'll never forget that. And CNN called me the corporate lawyer called me, you know, where's it all mad at you? And I'm like, I wasn't attacking anybody. Of course. I just think it's more than Americans don't know. I think they've been prevented from knowing that actions have reactions. Well, that's why the term blowback that was coined by the CIA. And what they described it as was it's not just like we do a thing and then there's a reaction to it. It's that we do a covert thing and then there's a reaction to it. And then the American people have no idea what this is even in response to. It's just like, whoa, at a nowhere, these guys attacked us. And you know, when that... But we're going to need a police state to protect ourselves from the blowback of this war. I mean, that's real concern. That's a problem. Yeah, that's a real concern. We're so vulnerable. Those countries wide open and all of our infrastructure or energy infrastructure are food, our water, all of it's unguarded. And the only way to protect ourselves from the inevitable blowback that she at terrorism we're going to get, of course, to killing the riotola is going to be to turn this into a surveillance state even more than it is. Yeah. And of course, also on top of that coming off of the Biden years where we don't even know who's here. We have no... I mean, it's just the mix of these policies, like the mix of having forever wars and open borders has just got to be the most well-fetched. Yeah, I know what I mean. Just throw everything in it. And a drug war on top of that too. And a drug war so that drugs are illegal. There's a black market. The gangs want to smuggle the drugs and like every single policy on top of it just makes this situation like so much worse. But yeah, when that, when the Osama bin Laden's letter to America went viral on Tiktok before it was... Many, many, many years later. Yeah. Oh, yeah. My support is just to bring it to the country. Yes, to be clear, this is written in 2002. It was like a couple years ago when it went super viral on Tiktok. And all the young leftists were like sharing it. And they were going like, oh my God, look at this, turns out now, of course they're left us. So they always think too collectively, right? And so I saw a bunch of people going, turns out he was right or he was the good guy. And you're like, no, no, no, that is not the takeaway from this. Like, you know, there was that one time the guy, Hassan Piker, who's like a left, left he like a streamer. And he had said that America deserved 9-11 and that was like what got him in a lot of trouble for it. And it's like, but no, stop speaking like a leftist. We're not, we're not collectively, we're individuals. The individuals who had nothing to do with these policies did not have it coming. Having breakfast to windows in the world and get killed. Yeah, you don't deserve it. You don't do the whole put. Now what Osama bin Laden said, I don't think this was in the letter to America. I think it was in, it might have been, it was either that or in his declaration of war. He had two declarations of war against America also. But what he said is that civilians are fair game because you vote for, you know, you vote, they bill Clinton's in the George Bush's Inn who slaughtered all of our children. And so you're fair game. But that's the logic of Osama bin Laden, the psychopathic, you know, terrorist. And that's, and the whole point of why we're against all this shit is because we reject that. We don't agree with that. That's not, and you know who else use that same logic? Every goddamn Zionist who said they elected Hamas in Gaza. By the way, they don't even have regular elections in Gaza. They had one election 20 years ago where Hamas won with pluralities. That was enough for them to say to kill their hate in the conscience. And so, so no, the whole point is that no, it does, you don't have the right to take vengeance on innocent people. That is the standard of civilization. I have said that, you know, pretty consistently for the past couple of years. And I thought that was like just a baseline understanding that everyone in America knew and believed. I thought that was the whole point of America. That's what civilization is. You can't punish the innocent. And that turns out to be incredibly anti-Semitic. I didn't know that. I've never, up until recently, all the Jews I knew were 100% on board with that. I mean, I can just like hear a rabbi going, you can't kill the innocent. Amen. Yeah. Brother. Except in this one. But now it's like all of a sudden these, you know, I don't know. I don't think it's about any specific group. In fact, by definition, it's not. It's a human standard. Yeah. I'll be held and do our best to hold others. You can't kill the innocent. Yeah. And also it's not, you know, it's not about one specific group because. Well, by definition, it's not about one specific group. Well, also it's not. It's also just not, you know, and this is the problem where when people try to make it about the Jews. And it's so weird, the dynamic because you, I watch you, you literally bend over backward to say that it's not about the Jews as much as possible. Because it's not. So the point and as someone who's like a Jewish fan of yours, I find myself going like, you could stop making that. But you've said it enough, you know what I mean? But you do every opportunity. You go, I don't believe it's not. It's not because I'm afraid of Jews at all. No, you're any better afraid of anybody. It's because I think it's the standard that we have to uphold. Well, also everyone is insisting that that's what you're really saying. And so you want to go, no, I'm not saying that. That's why I've been defending Muslims. It's not because I'm Muslim or taking money from Qatar to late now. You're an economy. But it's because I think these are human rights bestowed by God. And they abide every person because they're inherent in every person because every person is created in the image of God. That's the point I'm trying to do. Yeah. And I completely agree with you. I also think it's just frankly inaccurate. I mean, it's not. Look, I know, I saw one poll today that said 60% of American Jews support the war in Iran, which hey, that's a lot higher than the general population. But that means 40% of them don't. You know what I mean? And so like that's a huge, huge percentage of them. I think a third of Jews in New York voted for this mom, Donny Guy. Now, I'm annoyed with them for other reasons because he's a crazy socialist, but they're clearly not on board with the Israel-Labi's plan here. And then of course, as you've done a better job of exposing than anyone I've ever seen, there's a lot of like Ted Cruz's and Mike Huckabee's out there who as you, I think correctly pointed out our different animals, right? Like Ted Cruz is a cynical lying politician. Mike Huckabee is like a true believer of sorts. I'm not sure which is worse. They're both pretty rough and both totally humiliated themselves when they, when you interviewed them. But there's also like the point is that the Israel-Labi encompasses a lot of non Jews. And then there's a lot of Jews. There's the Max Blueman Thals and Norman Finkelsteens and Glenn Greenwalls. So it's just to just say it's like this group now, you're missing the point entirely. Well, I would say that the advocates for the war are primarily responsible for that. And speaking of blowbacks, speaking of blowback, I mean, it's hardly my job to like defend Jewish Americans, but I wanted to defend all Americans. And I definitely want to defend the principle that we should be judged on our own terms, not by people who look like us or were related to. Like I think that's the most important thing. But I mean, I do think you offer your own answer to some of the shows on the rise. I agree with that. Yeah. And I wish it wasn't true. But that is absolutely real. And I know that I'm blamed for it. Okay. But I think you're one of the... I'm really against... I know people will mock me for saying this, but I genuinely think it's true. I think you are one of the leading fighters against anti-Semitism in the country. I think so. And I think I do what I can to be that as well. I think if you really want to see a decrease in Jew hatred, then I think maybe it would be good to have Jewish people saying, hey, I am totally against this. I am not for this. But also it is... And I'm not defending collectivism of any stripe. But it is very predictable and it is just human nature. You know, if you have... That's why it's so scary. Yes, it is human nature. Yeah, that's exactly right. If you... If there... Let's say you just have a neighborhood, okay, there's like a neighborhood, all things being equal or whatever. And a bunch of black teenagers or black young men are going around in mugging and beating up people. Do you think anti-black racism is going to go up, go down or stay the same? Prime plus is racist. Right, is that for you? No one to shut up! Yeah, what? Now is it fair to the black guy who didn't mug or beat up anyone that there's already... No, it's not fair to him. It's also a predictable and frankly, at times an understandable response from someone who was a victim of getting mugged and beat up. And so if you're a black person who's like in the public eye, it might be reasonable at that point to go, hey guys, we gotta stop mugging people and beating them up. Otherwise they're gonna hate us. The way I always looked at it, this always just came very natural to me. This was so obvious. I'm Jewish. I love Jewish people. I love Jewish culture. It's who I am. It's a big part of me. And I think some of the best things about me I got from Jewish culture, valuing intellectual curiosity and family and hard work and humor and a lot of things that really define who I am are very much a part of Jewish culture. It's just a huge little to go along with what it was saying. Yeah, sure sure also just whining about things, complaining, fetching, you know, this is all part of me. That's what I do for a living. It turned it into a pretty nice career. But that being said, it's like I just look at it, I go, okay, so we're all the stories I've heard from my family and our history are how we were brutally oppressed here and killed here and kicked out a here, relocated here and then we came to America. Now I have grown up in the United States of America. This is where my kids live. It's where they are going to grow up. As you say all the time, that's the only thing that matters to me is that my kids have the best life I can give them. Literally the only thing that matters to me. Everything is a very distant second from that. And I go, okay, so I'm we're 2% of the population in America. We are by all objective standards thriving. We're doing great. These are not an oppressed minority in America. We're doing. percent of the population in America. We are by all objective standards thriving. We're doing great. Jews are not an oppressed minority in America. We're doing better than the average American is doing substantially. And I've never once, I mean, I don't know. I've had like people on Twitter say things to me or something like that. But there's never once been an obstacle put in my way because I was Jewish. I never couldn't go to this school or couldn't get this job or couldn't do anything like that. And I've had a really great life here. In fact, probably the most like anti-Semitism I've ever dealt with is from the pro-Israel people who call me like a capo every day because I don't support another reckless war. So, capos with the Jewish collaborators with it, not the United States. Yeah, right. So, it was a really nasty thing to call somebody. But whatever, that's the game we're in. So, so my perspective was like, okay, so you're telling me the whole world treated us like crap. We've come here to America where we've been just very successful and treated very well. My default position is to love the country for that. Like, oh, well, then we should be really grateful to this country. That should be the attitude, not going around lecturing people about whether they've been to the museum about our suffering from decades ago. Like, what is that? It just seems like such a, and look, again, I'm not a lot of the critics of Israel are left wingers. I'm not coming at this from a left wing perspective. I'm a crotchety old right winger. Like, I don't agree with that. I'm sitting here and saying, if we, if any self-respecting conservative or self-respecting right winger saw any other minority group complaining about their mistreatment in another continent, in another country, in another century, you'd go, hey, shut up, get over it. Pull yourself up by your bootstraps. That's like what I'm saying. And then by the way, with you's like, oh, you already did. You pulled yourself up by your bootstrap. So, like, what are we even talking about here? Why? And I don't think, I don't think like obsessing overpass trauma is always the correct answer. And certainly not insisting that everybody else suffer over or obsess over your past trauma. So I just always, it was always very natural to me that like I'm on team America. I'm rooting for this country to succeed. The country that fought the Nazis by the way. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Lost a lot of Americans fighting the Nazis. Why are you lecturing me about the Nazis? Yeah. Like, country fought them. And to almost anybody, like anybody at Fox News. Now again, maybe I talk about like Mark Levitt in Fox News and these guys like too much. Like, they really are irrelevant. But I guess it's just that I'm stuck in the, you know, on the age I am. And so to me, it's still like, hey, this is Fox. But any one of them would completely agree with me on this if we were talking about any other group of people. You know, if we were talking about any other group of people talking about victimhood or any of that, you know, if they were, if there were some black guy talking about how racist this country is because of slavery, they would have made your exact point. They'd go, we fought a war to end slavery. Hundreds of thousands of us died. But you know what I mean? Like they would, they would write away. And it wasn't even here. So back off. Yeah. Right. Right. Yeah. No. I, I couldn't agree more. And underneath all of this, and the reason that I really do worry that the country is going to become like openly tribal, and that leads to violence every time, is that a lot of the same people who are upset about the rise in anti-Semitism, which again, I think is real. I mean, I can tell it's real. And I don't like it either. Are the ones who have bedded all the anti-white hate for so long, which is still not being addressed. The Trump administration sued Harvard over its anti-Jewish discrimination, which is like right. It's deranged. What a slap in the face to white people. Well, it's unbelievable. Oh, like, and, and of course, the anti-white hate is still totally embedded at every level of our government and in business and most famously in schools. So that's like an attempt to hurt people on the basis of their race. And no one has said anything about it. And my point is these are either universal principles. They apply to every human being in dad with human rights by the creator, or they're just preferences. It's just your tribe against mine. And then I'm allowed to fight your tribe for the benefit of my tribe. Like it just evolves into Rwanda. So like, I think we could diffuse a lot of this. If like the head of the ADL would be like, I'm every bit as opposed to anti-white hate as I anti-inta-inta-Jewish hate. And we could all just agree that it's all wrong. Then we decelerate. But until then, how can I take you seriously? Yeah. And it's, and I think along with that is we just, we have to stop fighting wars on behalf of Israel. And we have to have a some type of separation. I mean, I'm not saying that like, I'm not saying we should be enemies with Israel or that we should go to war with Israel or anything like that. But the, it just, the relationship, the special relationship between the US and Israel is so freaking weird. And now in this new media environment, it's been exposed. I don't think you can put that toothpaste back on the tube. It is something that I think a lot of people were kind of happy to look the other way about for years. You came on my show. You came to Maine a couple of years ago to do something on Ukraine and Greenwald too. I love and have no a long time. And both of you like had a moment where you're like, yeah, Israel is proud. I'm like, uh, I agree. But like, I don't want to, you know, there's, I just want to pretend this isn't happening. It's not worth it. I don't want to be denounced by hub-bought or whatever. I'd still want to have the fight. Well, you let me or Grinn, Grinn, Grinn will lead your door and that would not be happening. I was, yes, I get it. No, I get it. Part of that, like it's, it's just not worth it. Well, look, even the, in my opinion, the greatest living American hero, Ron Paul, used to even he would kind of like try to say it in a gentle way. Like he would go, well, let's let them fight their own fights and we'll just kind of be over here being non-interventionist because of course, on one hand, it's like, there's a lot of things. First of all, I don't know if people who are listening to this show can appreciate this, but you know this much better than I do. But there was a time, you know, Donald Trump will kind of say this out loud. He'll say that, you know, A pack used to totally control Congress and now they don't control them anymore. Like he'll just say it, which is so wild. They give me hundreds of millions of dollars and I do whatever they want. It's like, all right, dude, you're just saying that out loud. I thought that was like a man's I some had a conspiracy theory. Not just something the president said in the Kinesis. Yeah. But the thing is, right, in the old order before there were podcasts like this. And look, if you think about like, I used to always point to the example because I thought it was so interesting about where the technology where social media was is when Bill O'Reilly was the number one show Fox News, the number one show in cable news and at the 8 p.m. hour. You were also the number one show at Fox News, the number one show in cable news at the 8 p.m. hour. When they fired Bill O'Reilly, Bill O'Reilly went from being like one of the biggest voices in the national conversation to being like relegated over to the sidelines who was like, you know, he still has a show somewhere, but he's not like never really moving the needle at all. You got bigger than you were there. And part of that was who you were, who your audience was, was ticked on a big part, a big part of it. You had another platform to get rid of too. I would be fly fishing full time and it weren't for the technology. So maybe and that's maybe the technology ruins are like, you could have just got a happy life. They pulled you back in. But I don't know that people appreciate how much in the old order in the old days when Bill getting fired took you out of the conversation with Bill O'Reilly days or whatever before that. Getting the Israel lobby on your back would ruin you. It would absolutely ruin you. And it didn't matter who you were. Absolutely. But the makeup artist, you could not fight with the idea. That's right. I mean, there was just it. That was just it. I mean, there's so much, you know, I mean, whether it's the 80 L of Southern Poverty Law Center or APAC or, you know, whatever, any of the American Enterprise Institute or National Review or the, I mean, the Israel lobby is like this huge powerful thing. And back then, I mean, it didn't matter if you were Pat Buchanan. Really, dude, I'm Pat Buchanan. I've been in four. I want the new answer, primary. I've been in four different presidential at three or four different presidential administrations. A New York Times bestseller, a fixture in America. I mean, he hosted Crossfire when you asked for your first stuff. You know, doesn't matter. They could take you out. They could take Ron Paul. They could take all that. And so there was for many years, almost I feel like a leftover residue of like, you just don't want this fight because man is this going to get ugly. And you're going to be smeared as every vicious name in the book. But at a certain point, it was like, oh, well, you know, you kind of can talk about these things now. And in fact, the people who do talk about them are being rewarded by their viewers because it's refreshing that someone's talking about the thing you weren't allowed to talk about. But now that that has been exposed and the toothpaste can't be put back in the tube, it's too, it's just too much. You cannot have it. I know you talk about this a lot. You look at examples like, and these examples are countless. You look at Ted Cruz saying to your face, as he said in other places, that the reason he ran for Senate was to be Israel's number one defender. You got Tammy Bruce saying America's the second best country to Israel, kind of tongue in cheek, still a really weird thing for an official from the administration to say, you got Donald Trump saying that Sheldon and now Miriam Adelson give him hundreds of millions of dollars and all they want, they come in every day asking for stuff on behalf of a foreign country and he gives it to them. Which they love more than a man. Yes, sure. Sheldon was on tape. Have you seen this? Yes. He's on tape. He said his greatest regret in life is that he wore the US military uniform rather than the IDF uniform. Now, I'm sorry. That is intolerable from any just same perspective. It's nothing to do with hating Jews or even hating any other country. If people were talking like this about Norway, we'd be like, yo, what are you doing? This isn't Norway. This is America. And like, there's move to Norway. Yeah, like fine. Go ahead. But no, you can't. And then to have, you know, people like Mike Huckabee saying that God promised Lebanon and Saudi Arabia to Netanyahu. Like, I'm sorry, but there's just no, this is simply not how public policy maker, I guess it's not a policy maker, but a politician, an ambassador to this country, you can't be talking this way. This is insane. Like, we don't let anybody just dictate their policy off. God told me to do this and then a very weird God told me something on behalf of a foreign country. I think we're at a point where if, and this is kind of my rejoinder to a lot of those, you know, people who call me and you anti semi, I guess I'm a self hating Jew and you're an anti semi. Listen, man, there is a rise of Jew hatred. And if you really do care about that, the only way to combat that is that we got to end this. You know, like the same way we needed a separation of church and state. So we don't fight religious wars anymore. We need a separation of the Israel lobby and the United States of America. I think it's tough. I think it's tough. As a non-Israel hater, you don't hate anyone. I'm not going to allow myself to hate anyone, period. But just being as honest as I can be, you know, we're very enmeshed like more than people understand. Representatives official and non-official of the Israeli government throughout the US government at every single level state and federal. Okay, there's that in our institutions. That would include the Pentagon and CIA are biggest and most important. And then there's the question of like, what does that mean for Israel? Like do they just allow the United States to be like, you know, you're just like, whatever France now or Spain, we're going to treat you like, you know, and now I but not not a sibling. I think that we get punished for that. People are afraid of Israel. That's the difference between Israel and Spain and we're going to love Spain. It's the Spanish. We don't have bases there. But missiles there, it's all great. But no one thinks if you pull back aid from Spain, they're going to hurt you. But everyone is afraid of being physically hurt by Israel. Maybe they're overstating. Maybe they're all anti-Semitic and paranoid. I don't know. I can just tell you from living in D.C. there is a fear of them real fear. And anyone says that's not just freaking lying. No, it's like saying there's a fear of the intelligence agencies. Like that's the fact. It's a fact. I think we're pretty out the open about that now. Yeah. Well, that's right. That's right. And it's um, you know, so if if that's the case that it's almost like there's our leaders are just too afraid to do something about this. They're afraid. And I don't know the genesis of that fear. Like maybe again, maybe they're all just reading the protocols, the elders design, and maybe they're all anti-Semites in their favor of stating the influence of G. Whatever. I mean, that's totally people do make crazy calculations. Maybe there really is a physical threat. But it's it's not arguable that US policy makers at every level are afraid. This is not all voluntary at all. Yeah. Well, it's it's um, there's something about like the, you know, I like Megan Kelly. I think she was the one who said this. I don't know. She coined the term, but she was the first one I heard say it, but she I think it was with you, which she said the, the Israel firsters. And that was how she described. I was like, oh, that's a good. That's a really good term for them. Because you know, the, the thing is that, you know, John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, like they call it the Israel lobby. But then when you say that a lot of people just think you're talking about a pack, but they're not talking about a pack. You're talking about this whole different, all these different organizations and individuals. I hear it is foundation. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. I'm posting no Washington Institute for Near East policy and the, you know, all of these, these organizations and then all these individuals who clearly are here to that is their number one issue. And it, the thing I almost resent most about him is like, it's like just admit that. Just admit that this is what you care about more than anything else. Barry Weiss, clearly you do, right? Like this is so great. And because then in effect, you are like a foreign spy, you're kind of like an agent for a different government. And the point is that, you know, because people will try to argue the technicalities of this. But the point is that all of the whole global war on terrorism was all a bunch of Israel firsters who've pushed the administration into that at every level. You know, this is by the way, you'll, you'll like this just because some people don't get this, but you'll, so David Worms are who, you know, work for Dick Cheney and was, he's the author of the Clean Break memo. So he, so I talk about this all the time. A lot of different podcasts on yours on Rogan's. I brought up the Clean Break and how that's what this whole real strategy is. It's what the Clean Break morphed into is essentially, and you could look at this, David Worms are in Richard Pearl and Douglas Fife wrote the Clean Break memo to Benjamin Netanyahu in 1996 was first became prime minister for his first term. And he had written a book, which is worth reading called Fighting Terrorism. Very easy read, by the way, it's a little book that Benjamin Netanyahu had written the year before. And essentially the, the break was from Oslo was from the peace process. The break was from Yitzhak Rabin, who had now been murdered by a Benjamin Netanyahu fan after Benjamin Netanyahu really pushed to, I mean, that's a whole other kid of worms, by the way, but I know like, if Yitzhak Rabin's wife, I believe still blames Benjamin Netanyahu for his status real do. Yeah, and now there's a lobbying campaign to get the murderer out of prison. Well, they, so I mean, they were, he was given anti-Rabin like marches and they were holding coffins before he died. Like they were like implying like someone should kill this guy because he had said not that he was really ever going to do this, but he had said we got to find a two state solution. We got to give the Palestinians their own state and we'll start working toward that. Now the clean break was the neo-conservatives, brilliant idea. The Israel firsters here that, well, no, no, no, see, you got this all wrong. You think you need to make peace with the Palestinians, because that's the only way that you'll have, you'll normalize relations with the broader Arab world, but no, no, no, no. We just got to go top all the broader Arab world and overthrow all those governments. And then you never have to make peace with the Palestinians. Okay. So it's essentially a blueprint for greater Israel. And this was their whole strategy pre-9. And for regional hegemony now, it's not just about control. Yes, which is a West Bank. It's about controlling the Middle East. That's right. That's right. Yeah. And so now because we live in this crazy world, we live in now, David Worms are did a podcast where he responded to me. Now, now from my perspective, I'm little old me, some stand up comedian who just talks about all this stuff. This is David Worms. This is the guy who's the author of the clean break memo. But to the new internet world, he has like 300 followers on Twitter. Nobody saw this. Nobody knows about it. But so David Worms and he's there to debunk my interpretation of the clean break memo. This is the funniest thing I've ever seen in my life. And so the host brings him on to be like, the Dave Smith guys out here saying that all these wars were about Israel and blah, blah, blah, blah. And this is ridiculous, right? So why don't you just tell that this is all not true? And his response was he just goes into like a monologue about how Israel is the cradle of civilization and that all of Western civilization is downstream from Israel and that we always must protect. So anyway, in the attempt to prove me wrong, he just totally exposes that like, this is the mentality that all of these guys have. So when if Mike Huckabee supports a war for Israel in his mind, that's not selling out your country for another country. This is God's plan. You know what I mean? Like this. So they're also it's like like the fish doesn't know he's in water. Like they don't even realize they're the Israel lobby. They go, what are you talking about? So this is what what Jeff Sachs said to me. Jeff Sachs, who's often attacked Jeff Sachs is really I think very smart. And I think very smart is a decent guy. I wouldn't agree on everything. But like he's a he's an honest guy. Like he just says, so I say to me, you've been watching this all these years, what do you think this is about? Why does this tiny country have so much control over our giant continent size country? And he said, well, you know, a lot of contributions, their threats or questions with the Kennedy assassination, like that they're willing to use force and assassination state what they want. He goes, but I don't think that I don't think that explains it. I don't think either one of those bribery or threats, a character stick. I don't think that actually is the whole picture. There's a spell of some kind. There's like a supernatural quality of this. Good people. Like I don't think Mike Huckabee is like in favor of genocide. I just don't think that pretty nice guy. Very nice guy actually. But he believes with this fervor that suggests that he's not thinking clearly. Like there's there's another quality here. And do you just do you know what I'm talking about? Yeah, no one on this. And I think Jeff Sachs is pretty secular guy by the way. I don't know, but I don't Jeff's Jeff's not a religious extremist that I can say for sure. Right. Okay. Yeah, but they but everyone recognizes, like I told you, lesson, there's not such thing as atheists. They think they're all right. Theist, but no one know you were an atheist. No, I, but I wasn't, but I thought I was, but you never really are. It's not like you can't work. Well, because I would just say, I don't really believe in any of that. And I don't think that that's real. But of course, like as I told you, the story last time I was here, then when my daughter's born and I'm worried about her life, I immediately find, and it's like, I always knew I always, always in there on some level. So I remember one time here in this debate. And I wish I could remember who it was, but it was like a Theist atheist debate. And it might have been Christopher Hitchons or something like, maybe not, but it was one of those like does God exist debates. And so the guy arguing that God does exist said something about how there are spiritual forces in the world in blah, blah, blah, blah, or there are evil spirits. There are evil spirits. And then the atheist guy goes, he goes, look, like we all know that there is depression and there's this and there's this. We all know that there's dark forces in the world, but you don't need a supernatural explanation. I'm like, did you just say dark forces like dark forces? I mean, what is that you're saying the same thing in different language? Yeah, like it's just like there's actually no gap here between anyway. But so I do think there's a spiritual component to all of that for sure. Because I don't want to be the kind of person who imputes the worst motives to my opponents. Okay. But I am because most people are like, why is this person doing something that's insane? Doesn't make sense. It's irrational getting paid. Like that's always the first explanation that people come to. And I have myself thought that. But then if you know someone really well, I don't know intimate with Huckabee, but I've known him for so many, you know, 30 years more than it's like, I don't think Huckabee is, you know, he's into money. I get it. But I don't think he's like totally motivated by greed. I just don't believe that. No, I think there's, well, look, I think I don't think he's evil, but he's defending evil. So what is that? I think a few things can be true at the same time. Right. So it could, it can be that you're under a spell that there's a spiritual aspect to it. And then it can also be that there's soft incentives for you to continue being under that spell. Right. And so the you know, the history of, of Jewish influence Israeli influence, I mean, look, obviously, much of this goes back to the fact that Jews dominated finance for many years. And part of this was because Christians weren't allowed to, to lend money. Right. But there is now, there is a form obviously of like abusive usory, right? There are loan sharks out there. There are some of them are even credit card companies that will charge you like 30% interest or 29.9, whatever they're allowed to do on, you know, which is like kind of a crazy interest rate. And they kind of prey on desperate people. Now, they are not necessarily like even the loan shark or the credit card companies, they're just kind of benefiting off your desperation because it's not like if the credit card company wasn't there, it's not like, oh, now everything's okay. The American, the reason they're putting necessities on the credit card to begin with is because other conditions have, you know, led them to this desperate place totally. But, but the problem, so then you had for much of Christendom, right? It's completely banned to lend money at any interest, which is that, you know, I do not think is abusive to have any interest rate on your money because that's actually a very necessary part of an economy. There are, there are people who have a very good idea, but don't have any capital. And then there's people sitting with capital and they go, well, look, I can't just give this to you because if you lose it, then I just lose my money. And if you pay me back, all I've gotten is that I get my money later rather than having it. Right. Now you have my money, then I can't use it for exactly. Right. I want to build, right. So there's a cost to me to lending you my money. However, if I go, hey, I'll lend this to you, but you pay me back a little bit of interest. This is, this actually is really facilitates economic growth because, you know, or just good businesses being created because like, oh, yeah, the guy with a good idea, but with no capital, now can, so anyway, so, so Jewish bankers ended up kind of filling this void. And then you had very powerful Jewish groups who became very, very wealthy and banking and yada, yada, a lot of things later banking, you got very, very corrupts. But again, it's important to keep in mind, this wasn't most Jews, most Jews were living in poverty. This was, but like the Balfour Declaration is written to the Rothschilds, right? Like it's not the creation of Israel was at least part they had international finance backing them. And so that's also true in America that much of the, the largest banking institutions had some Jewish influence. It's also the case that after the creation of the state of Israel, they're, you have the Mossad, right? Or you have Israeli intelligence. And no, Jews are smart. And I like that much smarter than everybody else, but they're a pretty smart group. And then the Mossad had an advantage over every other intelligence organization that would really be a dream for any intelligence organization, but the Mossad had a diaspora of people all spread out in the world that were Jewish, right? And so, and also there was this wide cultural belief amongst Jews that the Holocaust is what gave birth to the state of Israel and that the state of Israel is the guarantor of another Holocaust not happening. And so you could very, like I imagine the CIA had that. Imagine you just had little Americans in every single country, you know, little groups of Americans, maybe not every single country, but you had pockets of them in lots of different places. And they really passionately believe that the existence of the United States of America was the most important thing in the world. What an advantage for them. Go around, hey, find any American somewhere. You want to serve your country, you want to do that. And so, I think between finance, between the Mossad, and then the neo-conservatives who really were not old money when they first came into it, right? Like if you know the first generation of neo-conservatives, they were having their debates at city college, not at Harvard. You know what I mean? They were in college. Yes, these were middle class guys working class. They weren't the Rockefeller guys or the Morgan guys. They weren't a council on foreign relations. But what they did was they went and they made their relationships with the military industrial complex themselves. And a lot of this was, you know, the problem is that you create this empire, you create this military industrial complex, this big government scheme. And then it's right for someone to take it over. And if you go look at like every last one of those Bill Crystal think tanks, Bill Crystal needs to have 16 think tanks. He doesn't have a thought in his head, but never got all of the literally never right in New York. Yeah. Like his dad was smart. All his problems. Bill Crystal was never smart. He was revered as the smart guy. Never, never something smart. Yeah, literally. But every last one of those think tanks is funded by Lockheed Martin or, you know, Raytheon or whatever. So it's like the thing is that a lot of times in government, there's, it's a very different thing to be like swim with the current than to swim against the current. You know, there's no such thing as the Fabian libertarian. You don't, you know, you have, you might have some hardcore communists. And then you have like an AOC who's like, I want incrementally more government. You can't get incrementally less government because there's no, that's asking the government to have less power. Now, if you're the Neo conservatives and you come around with like, hey, I've got a plan to fight forever wars. You know, I've got a plan to go topple all of these different countries. You're going to get some money from weapons companies. And so anyway, just saying, aside from spiritual fascism, I thought that's what fascism, I mean, leaving aside the anti Semitic component of the Nazis, which was a big component, but the idea of fascism that the state you know, merges with the industrial powers. Yeah, this is what it is. And also just swap out the Jew hatred and make it Muslim hatred or make it German hatred or Russian hatred or whatever it it, you know, they always pick another thing to some that in that hatred. So yeah, it's not, but that's exactly right fascism one man. It's so, it's so ironic. The same when sometimes when you really lose, you know, you could, they could say on paper, and I'm sure there's some historian professor who would say no, like capitalism and communism one the second world war and fascism was defeated, except what arose out of it was the fascist model for everybody essentially, right, which is, and again, it's fascism is kind of ill defined, but kind of ill defines. Yeah, well, but broadly speaking, I mean, what are we talking about there? The FDR and the entire progressive movement, the original progressive movement, this is what they were advocating for, right? It's like it's we got to get away from Lazy Fair free markets. We're not going total communist, but we need a strong powerful state powerful enough to regulate the economy and the country and then also fight wars abroad. I mean, without majority support. Yeah, I just don't really see what and we can cling to this idea of democracy, which is always really an illusion, you know, it's never really true. It doesn't really, not in fact, there was a study done. I want to say this was at Princeton from remember correctly. This was like 15, 20 years ago, but they did a study where they said they just concluded that we're in oligarchy, not a democracy, and they literally just went through it empirically and we're like the American people's feeling has no impact on. No, you could say we have elections. And if you really don't like George W. Bush, you can vote for Barack Obama instead of John McCain. But what you vote for him for because he said he'd close Guantanamo Bay and then the wars Guantanamo Bay is still open today. And we're on the seventh war of Wesley Clark, seven wars in five countries. None of that stopped. What did we get during Obama? We got a massive escalation in Afghanistan. We got wars in Libya in Syria in Yemen, drone bombing campaigns in Pakistan, continued the war in Iraq, ended the war in Iraq, then reinvated Iraq when his ISIS left over from the war in Syria. So I think you're describing the upside of all of this. Again, I haven't slept eight hours in a month. I'm so distressed. I'm not in no sense for this. I argued against it. But it's happening. And this is the end of the empire as we knew it. Hopefully it'll shrink back to something. against it. But it's happening. And this is the end of the empire as we knew it. Hopefully it'll, you know, shrink back in the same manageable that serves our interest. But who knows what will happen? But we're definitely not going back to where we were a month ago. We know that. So one of the upsides, well, one upside is you might wind up at some point with presidents who want to run the United States. No president wants to run the United States because why would you want to run the US when you can run the world? Yeah. By the way, you don't know the people you manage when you run the world. They don't like come to your office and complain about your treatment of them. It's like there's no cost. It's all upside. You're just, you're the king of the world. I don't think future presidents will have that option. And so maybe we'll get people are like, you know, lagoorti airport smells that Miami airport is like an atrocity. Maybe we should fix that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, maybe this will cause like a reorientation back to what matters, which is our country. Yeah, quite possibly. And that's the, yeah, that's really the best case scenario. And you know, like I try to, well, I look at, you're right, models like, you know, when the Soviet Union collapsed, right, there's, for, I remember there was a, so Murray Rothbard talks about this in a speech once, Murray Rothbard for people who don't know is in my opinion, like the most brilliant political theorist of the 20th century is a genius. And he was a, you know, of course, he ended up supporting Pat Buchanan in 19 years ago. He was an economist and historian and a philosopher. And so he was talking about, I guess this was like a speech he gave shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union. And he was talking about how he had seen like a, a, a video of a Chinese family under a Chinese communism at the time. I guess maybe this was back. He was talking about from like before Mao and Mao Zedong died. And he said that the, you know, the interviewer asked some questions, they were just talking about how much they loved the regime and how, they said, would you rather your kids had a, um, it was something like would you rather your kids had a prosperous life or were loyal servants of the regime and had a very difficult life. And he says loyal servants of the regime in a very difficult life, no problem. And so Murray Rothbard said he watched this and he was like, my god, I mean, this is just so horrible. Like they've actually done it. They've created the communist man and destroyed the human soul. And then he's talking to his buddy who's another genius who went to China a lot and was like a China expert. And he goes, no, that's what they say when the cameras are there. That's all that is. Like that isn't believe that. You know what I mean? They just know this is on tape. You can't say anything else. And so that's what you say. And then they go about their day, not really care on what the regime says. And so like when the Soviet Union collapsed, um, from all like I've read about it, like that was essentially the state of the Soviet Union was like no one believed the government anymore. They just all knew they were liars. They all knew this was bullshit. And they were really actually we're in the bridge now. Right. And so now, of course, the the war hawks and the neo conservatives, they always viewed us luring the Soviets into Afghanistan and getting them bogged down there, fighting the the mujahidean and Afghanistan, including the foreign Arab mujahidean and Osama bin Laden who we were supporting. But they always viewed this as a great success because it brought down the Soviet Union. And I'm I'm I don't know enough about what factor led to watch. I mean communism is not an effective economic system. And but I'm sure the war did hurt them a lot. I know how costly wars can be and how much they can degrade our country. I know wars in Afghanistan can degrade your country. So I'm sure that was part of that. But my point is that it wasn't like America went in and toppled the USSR. Right. Like they collapsed on their own, partly as a result of fighting foreign wars and partly as a result of, you know, just government lying and terrible economic policies. But at a certain point, like the soldiers just weren't willing to fire. You know, like there were there were attempted countercoos. Yes, there were attempted coups in the past where they did fire and they were like, no, you're not leaving the Soviet Union. But by this point in 89 or whatever it was as the people started rising up. They were like, we're just not we're not doing this anymore. They themselves don't believe it anymore. The government and and so I guess it's a long way to get to what I'm saying. But like at a certain point, we might just we might hit a point where like the people just aren't believing this anymore. The law enforcement, whether military or police just aren't going to crack down on the American people in that way. And that would maybe lead to a rise of a real president who actually ran the country. And I don't know. I think if I'm not mistaken, I believe in, um, when there was like German reunification, they didn't from what I don't, I don't, they didn't really punish like the people in the communist government. They kept them on their pensions. Absolutely. They went kind of, and I feel like we almost need something like that. I know Curtis Yarvens talked about this a bit, but something where it's like, look, man, I think there are some people at the absolute top who need to be criminally prosecuted. But like, we got to find a transition from here to there. Like if we're, if we're by and off bureaucrats, that would be cheaper than continuing this system. You know what I mean? Like there's almost something where if a president could come up and say like, Hey, all you guys working in the intelligence agencies who were working to undermine presidents, you all have amnesty, but you got to pack up and go home right now. Like that's it. In a weird way, we need, as you said, we need an actual president who's actually running the country. And who can restore peace here? I mean, I think older Americans believe their country is more united and cohesive than it really is. You've got an entire generation of people who weren't born here. It was parents weren't born here who came here on the promise that can't be fulfilled, which is it, you know, of a better life economically. And I think it's going to be tough to make good on that promise, honestly. And so what do you do with that? What do do you do with dash expectations at scale, millions of people who kind of thought they were getting something and didn't get it? You know, a country where half of all households get a government check, half of all households. So, and the average age of the first time home owner is 40. Yeah, exactly. So you've got a lot of issues here. And all over attention is there. It's in the Persian Gulf or China or Venezuela, wherever. But once you readjust and start thinking about how does this country deal with dash expectations and remain coherent? How does it prevent the rise of like a truly dangerous demagogue? Yeah. Yeah. Well, also, it's not like the two, it's not just that we're focused over there. And so we're not taking care of what's going on here. It's the focus over there is destroying over here. 100%. And so always does. Okay. So the angriest I've ever been at you was when you said that, uh, you said Lindsey Graham's views are, uh, war everywhere and Austrian economics at home. And I was like, no, you're right. You're right. You're right. No, but look, I mean, because and it's not just I don't care about just like the term, but it's it's the, the idea is that essentially what's going on, monopoly capitals. Yes, yes, but the opposite of Austrian economics, big government central banking record, you know, record high government spending every single year. And so what happens essentially is, and this is what also went up so furious at this administration over over this stuff. And, you know, I don't know it's your in more of a, uh, you're in a tougher position than I am where you were the guy in Trump's ear trying to convince him not to do this or one of the guys who got to meet with him and convince him not to do this. I think the only one. Yeah. Well, the last one is no longer with us. Um, so, uh, you know, there's that and yeah. Yeah. So, um, but you know, so the thing is like me, I'm like, I'm no good at being a political strategist. Like I said, I'm just good at being a part of the fashion for age that was so intense. I lost my vision. Yeah. I understand. It's worth it. There's something was in that angry over. Um, but so, you know, I kind of go, I don't know political strategy stuff, but I go, I think you should just like, you know, try your best to stay being able to at least he has one person who's telling him to do this. But the thing is that I'm just not capable of doing that. And I'm not close to the administration. So I'm just like read behind the eyes furious. But one of the big things I'm furious about is that there, there are handed this country right back over to the Democrats who really are every bit the threat that we were making them out to be over the last day. These, these, and they're going to come in more authoritarian and more angry because they are furious that we disobeyed them and put Donald Trump back in the White House. There's all to end like all their plan. I mean, look, we saw what they did through COVID. We saw what they did with tech censorship. And I don't want to find out what a central bank digital currency looks like and what carbon, you know, social credit scores look like. And the thing is that what look at you watch the Democrats as they're winning now, right? Like you could look at the races when mom, mom, Donnie one in New York, when the new governor, uh, one in New Jersey, the new governor in Virginia, there had been a couple races in Texas where they were like outperform in what they should be performing in Texas. Every last one of them is running on what they now call on affordability. It's like they just made up a new term because they and literally none of them. I don't, I just really don't think if I had one of them sitting where you're sitting right here and I was grilling them. And I go, what is an unaffordability? I don't think one of them has an answer. Yeah. I don't even think they know the term currency debasement. I don't even think they know that that's what it is. Human rights at all. Oh, no, not here in Virginia, which was conservative or normal 20 minutes ago, they bring in some guy literally born in India from another country to lead the effort to confiscate people's guns and no more self defense in the state. That's just happened. I mean, it was like not long. I mean, I year ago they had a Republican governor. So it's an even, not much of one, but it's still it's an evenly divided state. The second they take power, you can't defend yourself. Right. Well, but just to simulate, it brings some guy from another country to lecture you about your country where your family was born, you don't have the right to have a gun. Yeah. No, that's it's such an outrage. I mean, it's just like unbelievable. But look, but the thing is that it happened running on affordability is winning for them. Obviously, because that is the issue right now. They don't understand that unaffordability means price inflation. It means that you've debased your currency. Right. And so this is so the thing is now we're handing them this thing to run on. Well, Donald Trump is talking about, you know, working with the Ayatollah about the Strait of Armusa or whatever, your local Democrat is going, Hey, why are your grocery prices so high? Why is that by the way, all the price inflation from the Joe, but you know the way this stuff works. It's cumulative. So Donald Trump, we live in an inflationary economy because of the central bank. It doesn't matter what their inflation means. It inflates the money supply. Right. Because they they will, no matter what, print enough money so that we don't fall into a deflationary, you know, economy, that's they're going to do that and they're just they're not even printing the money. They're just typing into a computer these days. So they can get ahead of it. And so Donald Trump might brag that the CPI is only at 2% and not at 9% where Joe Biden was. But for every regular American, we lived through all of those price increases. And now it's just 2% more expensive than it was under Joe Biden. So you haven't been helped any. The prices aren't going down. They're just going up at a slower rate. It's like I think it was Michael Malice who had the the phrase where he goes, when they go, they go, we cut inflation in half and they go, it's literally on the level of if you knew somebody who gained a hundred pounds in a year. And then the next year they gained 50 pounds and they go, I'm getting thinner. And you're like, no, you are not. You are getting fatter, sir. Like the goal is not to slow down how much weight you put on. But the it really does just come down to this, right? Is that we have a government that we cannot afford. We cannot even come close to affording the size of government we have because it's the biggest government in human history. It's the biggest organization in human history as you often point out. And that organization is parasitical in nature. It gets its money from taking that money from expropriating that money from the American people. But you can't tax them enough and you can't borrow enough. And so we have to print the money. And so we have to print the money because we can't afford the size of government. And so then that makes the price of everything go up and up and up. And so essentially the point I'm getting at it. And this is why I just I just point out that to say it's Austrian economics is gets it because the what guys like Mmdani can come in and do now is say, hey, look, everything's so unaffordable. And you know what the answer to that is a government program or more government, more government, more free buses and government supermarkets. And on the surface that kind of probably sounds reasonable to some people. But the thing is that we're here because government is too big. That's what's got us to this place. And so like I think it's important to just like point that out to people that it's like, no, this is the thing is that we cannot afford. Here's the real hard honest truth that Americans don't want to hear or at least maybe the first part they want to hear. People are okay with me saying this. We can't afford the world empire. We can't afford it. We don't have the money for it. We only we're pretending we have it. We're just devaluing our currency. And therefore, by the way, destroying young people's lives. Now there's days I know a bunch of young people like in my family and friends who are literally like good people go to work every day, make 70 K a year. And they're like, how am I going to settle down and start a family? No, dude. I mean, like the average house around me is going for 800 grand to make 70 grand a year. That math simply does not work. And this is not I'm not saying the bomb on welfare. I'm saying like the young man who's getting up and going to work every day. And we can't. So we cannot afford this empire. The other thing is, which no one, including Republicans, ever wants to say, we also can't afford the entitlement programs. And they're insane. They're the most indefensible thing in the world. I mean, leaving aside Medicaid for a second. But Social Security and Medicare are from a different time from a different country that are totally indefensible than, but they're really indefensible. And that's ability. Yeah, you're telling me you have a wealth transfer program from a poorer group to a richer group. I'm sorry, the seniors aren't the ones who need the help right now. It's the young people. And I think that I would love if some politician, I think Ron Paul is the only one I've ever seen. I'm sure Massey would agree with me if I said this to him. But I wish somebody would just run on that. Unlike, yeah, they used to say that's the third rail of politics. Like why? Because boomers just need to get everything. Everything has to be rigged in favor of them. I mean, I'm sorry. Like the thing is, you kind of have these like abstract political debates sometimes, which I'm a nerd for this stuff. I really like them. But so you'd have like a, you know, you'd have like a Keynesian debate, a Chicago school guy or you'd have a socialist debate, a free market guy. And like the free market guy would argue that, you know, there's a better allocation of resources in a free market. And then the socialist would argue that some people fall behind. And so you need redistributive policies to take from the wealthy to give to the people who have fallen behind. But who argues that you should have a redistributive policy from the poor to the rich? That's the whole United States of America. That's all of central banking. That's all of government spending. All it is is they take money from the working people and they give it two millionaires. Go look at any of the suburbs of Washington, D.C. None of them make anything. They're all in three million dollar houses because government spending is north of seven trillion dollars. Of course. Well, that unfortunately is getting the point where that kind of is our economy. Yeah. Yeah. So you'd really need to reorder things on the beginning with the foundations. Yeah. Well, but two good things are happening. One, the empire is by necessity shrinking. And so that's a cost savings. And that's a reorientation back where the attention belongs, which is here. And two, you have the baby boom going away, which is 1946, 1964. So people born in the middle in 1956 or no 70. Yeah. So there'll be 80 and 10 years. So you that generation, clearly, I think everyone agrees not everyone in it. But as a generation destroyed the country. Oh, yeah. Just the words. And then the lead to country with some notable exceptions. Of course. My mom included. She's cool. But the rest of them. Oh, many notable. A million baby boomers that I got a million, but I've met baby boomers. I like, well, I just couldn't. I mean, the thing about it, not that many of those. There's Jeff Diced is really, really brilliant guy. He was the, he ran the Mises Institute for years. He's over at monetary metals now, but he's a really, really brilliant guy. He had this speech one time where he was talking about the boomers and like the evolution of the generation and what they believed at the time. Yeah. And it's so it is just the most self-absorbed, selfish generation ever. I mean, they literally, they're slogan was don't trust anyone over 30 until they turned 30. Exactly. And then he does like, Jeff Diced like went through the whole thing. I don't remember all of it. But then by the end, they were the ones pushing COVID. Like they started out as the don't trust anyone over 30. And then they said, shut down the schools so that I don't get sick. Like take from my grandchildren's generation so that I'm protected. And yeah, I mean, they're dumbest too. I mean, the thing about their narcissism is the core sin. Like that's their main problem is they're all about themselves. The thing you notice what people are all about themselves is how unwise and badly informed they are because they don't pay attention to other people. Therefore they never learn. Therefore, and I'm noticed since I was a child because these were my teachers, they may be boom. They'll fall for anything. They're the most easily manipulated people who've ever lived in this country. They're the most dominated by their herd instinct. All the kids are wearing masks, all the kids are taking the shots. All the kids are going into fines. Whatever all the other people are doing, they will do. They're the Mickey Mouse Club generation. Yeah. They are truly without creative impulse. They're just not impressive. In addition to being super annoying, one of the least attractive generations, like there's a lot about them that we can the least attached to their own children. Yeah. You've got two houses, but your kids have no house. How does that work? Oh, yeah. The generation of no fault divorce, the generation of, I got to be me. I got to pursue my own happiness when you got little kids. But you was not that interesting. Yeah. But the more you think about you, the dumber you get, that's just what I've noticed. It's like one of the most profound ironies in life like this kind of counter intuitive thing where like if you're only concerned with yourself, yourself is going to suffer for that. You know, like it's really true. Like, and you watch this all the time with people who really have like, you know, like really bad depression and are just like miserable. And they're constantly talking about their mood today. It's like, hey, step number one, stuff thinking about your mood, your mood is not that important. Here's step number one, starting about other people. How about this? Try doing something productive for someone else other than yourself. And don't think about your mood once while you're doing it. And you know, I'll tell you, I've, you know, I've been on this earth for about 43 years and I haven't learned that much. I've got a few things. There's, I've never been anywhere near as happy since I got married and had kids. Like once my life became about a family and not just about me, you know what I mean? And I think I was in this generation. That we expect that. No, man. I mean, I don't know. I always thought before I met my wife, it was always to me like everything in my mind was like professional success. Right. You know, like that was what I wanted to be a successful comedian. And I wanted to, I wanted to talk about politics and all of this stuff. And I wanted, I always wanted that. And, you know, it's weird now because I've kind of like, like I've kind of gotten everything. I really wanted in all those years. And it's nice. Don't even really love my career. I love what I do. I love this. I love doing shows with you. And it's great. But like, it's so unimportant compared to family. I mean, you know, like it's just not even, it's not the older you get, the more you realize it's like that's all that really matters. All that really matters are your, your wife, your children, the close friends that you have around you, like the good people in your life, connection to other people, connection to God. That's all that really matters in life. All the rest of it is kind of just part of the journey and part of the thing. But um, hey, do your best. No, I know when you're probably not going to move the ball that far. Yeah. Well, you know, I read this, there was this really great book by, um, I believe the author's name, I, I, you know, I don't know if I've ever actually heard it pronounced. I've just read it, but it's like a gene twangay or 20 or something. Yeah. I was saying. Now I don't know about her. I think she was on Bill Marsha recently. And she said one thing that I thought was really stupid. And I turned it off because I was like, I really liked her book. I just don't want to, I don't want to know, you know how you feel? So you're like, I don't want to don't, but she wrote this book called, um, I think it was called the me generation generation me, something like that. It was really great. I thought it was really, really good book. And it was kind of about my generation who was raised by the boomers. And you know, the way I was raised, and again, I'm not, I did a really great mother. She's really great. And still a lot of really good things in me. This was bigger than her. This was just the culture. But we were raised and I didn't think it was so unique at the time, but I was really kind of a child of the, um, you know, a child of the unipolar moment, I guess you could say, and then a teenager young adult Berlin wall. Yeah. Well, I mean, I was, I remember watching it, watching the Berlin wall come down. I was at my grandfather's house and my grandfather, as I told you before, was from Germany. And I just, my only memory of it was I was a little, I was born in 83. So I guess I would have been six years old when this happens. I'm a little kid. And I just just remember, um, I was being a little kid and probably being loud in the living room or something or walked in front of the TV. And I remember he snapped at me and went, shh. And I, I just remember being like, oh, was your grandfather when he left Germany? Uh, he would have been, I want to say like 15 maybe. Oh, wow. So old enough to remember. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Old enough to remember some really vicious things. He got out in 1938. Um, but so anyway, uh, he, so sorry, just remember like, oh, this is really serious to grandpa. What's happening? And it was the Berlin wall being coming down. Yeah. It was a big deal to him. I'm not sure he liked it that much. I think he was a little, uh, concerned about German, but even if it could be worse, you know, as, as you could imagine, um, but, uh, turned out to be a good thing. Uh, but anyway, so, you know, I was, I kind of grew up in that time in the 80s and the 90s. And there was, we didn't have things that I think almost every other generation had like, we weren't raised with like God, chivalry, nation, country. You know, there wasn't this, it was like you go to school and, you know, get your homework done so no one's mad at you and then you can go play basketball outside. It was, or there's a new video game at it was, let's, let's hang out with our friends and have fun. There wasn't like this, this, this like purpose, you know, like put into your life, which most people have in most of human history, even if it's just a good culture. Yeah, culture, religious views, you know, like, you know, it's important things. And, uh, I think there were, uh, a lot of people in, in my generation were like that that it was almost like, again, like we said before, you can't, you can't take God out of the equation because something else just becomes God. And, and in a way, like, I know if heard you say this before, but it's so true. It's like the desire to worship is so hardwired into the DNA of the human soul that you just can't, you can say you're an atheist if you want to, but then like, I'll find out what your religion is pretty quickly. And oftentimes it just becomes yourself. You know, when you don't have other things, it becomes like, well, let me have fun. Let me go get this. But that is, like I said, 43 years, I haven't learned much in life. One thing I have learned for certain is that if your highest goal in life is your own pleasure, you will be a miserable, miserable human being. Yeah. Well, I've learned that, I've learned that too. So as you look around at 43, among people, you know, who are your age group in the same world you grew up in, how many are thinking about the existence of God right now? I think a lot more than ever were as you ever know. You ever know religious people growing up? Yeah. I mean, I knew, I knew some, um, but it was very few and far between. Like, that were really like religious or talked about it or what, you know, like I knew, um, you know, even like I went to like Hebrew school, but I went for like a year to like my mom wanted me to be bar mitzvah, but it wasn't really like a deep religious conviction. It was more like, this is what our people have always done, you know, and like got to respect to your father and your father's father's father, you know, like, like I can kind of understand that. And so I went, um, but it was like a reformed, you know, uh, temple where I went there. And I remember even the rabbi, like, you know, like some of the kids would be like, well, do you believe in God? He's like, yeah, you know, everything that's good is God and everything. You know, you're just totally like Jewish, you know, like essentially atheism. And I grew up around so many people like that. Yeah. So it was just, you know, there was, there was just a lot of that. And I don't, you know, I certainly think that one of the things I really focus on as a father, I have little kids. So, but I will focus on this more over the years is like instilling the idea of purpose and stealing the idea of like God and and not just God, but like what that represents that like, hey, your, you know, your here, we're all here in this life together. This life is a little bit of a mystery. We don't know everything about that. Exactly. But we do know that like we other people exist too as we exist. And human beings can be, we have this amazing capacity to be demonic or angelic, you know, like you can really, you, one person, you know, there's little moments in life where, you know, whatever it is, like you're at the post office and it's 501 and you had to get this letter out today or you're getting fired. And you're like, you're my life is ruined. If you're talking to some person on the other end, can you please just take this one pack? You know, I'm just coming up with scenario. And that person could go, all right, come here, get me the package and you're like, you just saved my life. You know what I mean? Like, you have no idea what you just did. And like, you can do that for other people. You could try your best to throw out your day and your career and your life. Be like, yo, let me help this guy and be that person or, you know, you can be what Benjamin Netanyahu is to the Palestinians, you know, like just a monster, the guy who just like ruined their family his life. And so if we're kind of given this world and we don't have all of the answers to it, but we kind of know that we have like an ability to be either one of those things. Hey, really focus on being the angel for people really focus on trying to help others. And I think that makes you a much happier person the more you focus on that completely. And do you find that people you knew in the secular world growing up or reaching some more conclusions? Yeah, I think I know several people like that. And I do. I think that um, you know, he had an amazing meteoric rise and a really tragic fall. But I think this is why Jordan Peterson was such a phenomenon for years that it was like, you know, going around and telling young men that you should search out purpose and search out God. And it's amazing how like powerful that is. I love that. Yeah, me too. He takes a lot of abuse and, um, you know, he's against me or whatever. I don't even care less, but I will always appreciate that about Jordan Peterson. Yeah, me too that he did that. Yeah, you know, I like, um, I in a way, he was a guy who I always really wanted to talk to and never did. Um, he was a, you know, obviously, I mean, him joining the daily wire and going on that side was just a really, really tragic mistake. And, um, I think he threw away all of the credibility that he had with the younger generation when that really could have used his voice, you know, he was never much as a political actor. He was always something else. Oh, he's a Canadian psychologist. Yeah. Like this, this was an, you know, sit that part out. He missed the mark on a lot of his political points, but I mean, you know, when you're on record, tell and Benjamin Netanyahu to give them hell. Uh, that's, that's really hard to come back from. But he came on, you know, he came on Joe Rogan show, the episode after I debated Douglas Murray. I believe it was the next one was Jordan Peterson. And I remember watching it and I did feel like I was like, oh man, I think he's going to like say, you know what I mean? Like I think he's going to say something, you know, nasty about me because he's been Shapiro and Netanyahu's guy now and they just had this big debate. But, and he didn't, um, he kind of said, oh, I thought he didn't name me. He mentioned Douglas and Joe and he said, I thought everyone involved did a good job. Good friend. So I was like, okay, that kind of, that was nice to me in a way that I was like, oh, he had, you know, from someone at the daily wire. That's a bad as good as I can expect from that. I mean, I, you know, I thought he had flaws, but I was never, I, you know, I always hit charitable and still do have charitable feelings toward him. Douglas Murray, however, that's a different one. What happened to, is he still, or is still living in this country? No, he's doing great. I think he got a gig writing speeches for the Israeli government. Oh, we do. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if I've, have I said this on your show before? I don't think so. Um, because I think last time we spoke was right after that debate, or less than we spoke on the podcast, not spoke in life. But last time we were doing the show was right after that debate. But before this came out and it was Ryan Grimm and the guys over at drop site who, who published this. But so if you remember the famous, you've never been argument, well, I'm sorry. I should not call that an argument. There's, it's not an argument. Did it arise to the level. But what he said, what he was trying to say, which was really, you know, kind of silly, but he was like, uh, you know, should not call it an argument there's not an argument did right to go level but what he said what he was trying to say which was really you know kind of silly but he was like uh you know he goes well uh he said i have the journalistic courtesy of visiting a place before i talk about that place this was he was lecturing me about journalistic ethics now i'm not a journalist talker i understand a comedian you you've been a journalist for many years so maybe you can fill me in on this i don't i'm not an expert uh and journalistic ethics what are the ethics of covering a country and not disclosing that you work for the government is that up there it you know i would i would have to consult like a professor of ethics like Sam bakeman frees parents yes we have a whole infrastructure designed to answer complex like that Dave but i have the courtesy of um of not advocating for wars that i'm not willing to fight in myself that's my professional uh courtesy i think that is a much better standard well who spends i mean what type of person and look i i but he never went away didn't i mean Douglas Murray was like uh i took him through so by the way i knew him well and um i thought he had you know things about him that i felt sorry for him uh because of them but in general it's smart and i never had a problem with them at all had a couple of fun dinners with him that debate which you were proclaimed the loser of by a lot of people i think that just destroyed his life yeah well again it was like no one except the people who already had made up their mind that is real is the greatest country ever none no one except them thought that he won the debate a few of them seem to celebrate that the comment section under the video was just torching him like every regular person went oh he just destroyed himself and then i will say a lot of people including some uh prominent people who you listen or know including charlie kirk by the way um texted me after that debate and we're like yo dude he just destroyed his credibility or like you're you like that was crazy that he came at you like that i had people um you know this is whatever i won't name all of them because i don't want to give out private information maybe i shouldn't have i i i mentioned that about charlie kirk because kandas months back had had called on me to like to release whatever private communications i have that might be relevant and i thought one of the things was relevant was that he said after the debate that he largely agreed with me after the Douglas Murray day which was he sure he did i talked over this topic yeah i'm yeah so i did think that was relevant into like wear his mind state was but other people like i think a lot of people kind of expected him to be like the real like okay dave you've been blowing through these debates but this is the best guy on the other side so he's gonna come really give a chance there was no chance well that's right someone from broklin was gonna be well it's yeah i guess that's the first uh advantage that he had but you know there's a weird thing where again kind of back to what i was saying before you see this thing where so after that debate happens i have this huge like groundswell of support from people then Donald Trump tweets out you gotta go get Douglas Murray's new book like two days after the debate or something like that and it just i thought there was an interesting parallel between that and when uh Donald Trump just tweeted the other day about how great not the one to watch the show but he treated last week about how wonderful mark lavin is and how everyone arguing with him is awful or something like that and if you look on twitter that's an twitter is everything but it's one little you know glimps into things i mean mark lavin gets ratioed by random people like not even like like you or megan kelly or someone like that i'm saying like some random guy will just call mark lavin an idiot and way more people like his tweet than like like mark lavin's tweet he's out there he's feuding it with megan kelly and he's calling you at every name in the book and then the entire audience is just going with us and then trump comes out and says we're all so i saw that when when trump uh tweeted that about you read you know Douglas Murray's dumb books and i kind of will fully ignored it because i was so focused well because i like trump but also because i was so focused on the aran thing and just have to prevent a war on that's more well i don't know though i mean that that was foreshadowing that actually there was a lot of content why would the president states be promoting Douglas Murray who you know is not even american and he's like totally discredited why would the president be promoting him well i mean do and mark lavin is much worse i mean look Douglas Murray uh i do think he he was ridiculous and he kind of made an asset of himself in that debate um but mark lavin has gone to a level of retardation that i've never seen at it you know like i listen i was never to i was somewhat impressed by the first generation of neocons you know i think i worked for them yeah well i i know i was one but i think well sorry no i mean like i mean like leo strass and urban crystal and those guys right and and but then i always thought like i always kind of went you know if you remember the um it at fox news now he wasn't really on your show a lot but if you remember the reverence people used to have for charles kraut hammer yeah like they would all talk about it like to his face they'd be like to jean yeses here and then i'd be like i've never heard him say anything interesting ever i just don't agree i don't know what that but all of those guys so i was always like one thing i'll say about charles who i knew really well it was a very nice man and he was a nice man because he had had to reckon with you know being paralyzed on the chest down from medical school and um and so he just had a perspective on life i spent hours hours talking to him and i knew his wife and i really liked him as a man but his views were you know impossible to fend if you cared about the night yeah that right but anyway i guess with all of them i was never particularly intellectually impressed with any of them no i want to see by the way if you want to see if you've never watched man scott horton debating bill crystal at the the cell forum it was you really exposed just how much bill crystal has nothing no knowledge no argument nothing he literally i've never seen it happen for he threw in the towel in the debate essentially he literally at one point scott makes some argument there was like a back and forth section and it's got make some argument and he goes well we just have fundamentally different world views and you're like yeah that's why you're debating but you have to make an argument and then he will never explain what his world well right and then it is in his closing there was still like three minutes on the clock and he just stopped anyway i say all of this to say i've seen some dumb arguments from neokons over the years i have never seen anyone go full blown mark lavin the way he goes like it is that he's literally just a ranting old man yelling insults unattached to any argument at all like his whole show is just like yeah that's little punk wants to come and talk to me a little fascist like it's like what is this dude like and so there is something about Donald Trump promoting that that is that's like several levels worse than promoting douglas no but it's so then you have to ask like well what actually is in it's not designed to win people over its design to increase hatred anti-semitism by the way it's absolutely i mean if you were if you were you know whoever mark things he's working for the Israelis i guess you would look at the students say this is not helping us don't do this yes don't get some articulate decent hot woman on there to make the case or whatever you do a marketing thing this is anti-marketing this is designed to repel people so why would you want that i don't know the answer but it's clearly true second his relationship with the president is bizarre you think Trump likes that there was a there was a moment at some anti-stop anti-semitism event of some kind or hanakis albair shar some jewish themed white house event where trump is there with marclaben and levincum's over and puts his arm around the president's neck and pulls him in now i know trump well i mean i wouldn't like that and i'm not even the president or germaphobe yeah what is that and under normal circumstances trump would never put up with that you just what you're you're doing them oh i'm dominant smooth over the president and over Donald trump are you not just the president but Donald trump the most dominant alfemail guy that's a dominant does that to other people exactly yeah but even trump who is very much about donuts obviously most powerful men are he would trump would never throw his arm around someone and give him a headlock like they know i help hold you in while he shakes your hands 100 percent what did he do that one of the g7 meetings or whatever where he cuts in front of some other world literally but like there are by the way this is another thing that i'm so breaking the rules dude i but i'm oblivious to this thing but this is as you said powerful men are like this where there's like alpha moves like taking your thing and just make you know like whatever like if you have a little thing a peanuts here that you're eating and i just reach in and tail you know what i mean like but to do that to Donald trump i understand i'm not trying to make too much of a little it's not a little bit that was there was something some bug and then proclaims him the first jewish president um you got a very strange that trump he did never said this to me but just knowing him you got to think he's filled with rage and someone doing that to him well look what puts up with it anyway so and but why would you do that to him so if you want to exert influence over someone who's powerful like there's a way to do it but the last way to do it is to be like i'm in charge here just so you know i'm more powerful than president yes that's what leven is saying and trump is putting up with it this is either it's a former state of masochism but it also reveals like the true architecture of power in a way that's like what yeah well i think what is that well here i'll say this and i'm just to preface this i'm not saying anything other than what i'm saying i'm not implying something that i don't know any more than this and maybe you know more than i do but i will say you know people used to say when Donald Trump was first rising to political uh it's political career in 2016 when it was running when it was first president i i remember uh liberals used to always say uh that he's dog whistling bigotry yeah and you know we always thought this was so always like a dog whistle it's like a thing where you kind of first of all it's kind of weird because you're like well then wouldn't you not hear it if it's a dog whistle because wouldn't only the biggest career it isn't that the idea also that seems like a very convenient way of saying even though there's nothing i can actually point to that you said he's always raised but what i always thought was that what Donald Trump did was he would very often stoke or give a wink in a nod to conspiracies oh that he was look he went out there about obama's birth certificate um he obviously called out the whole uh russia gate thing which was a legit conspiracy to unseat the sitting president was a cute thing the cute thing he he'd he'd float at the obviously the the election being stolen the but all the witch on and of course now with abstien when it's not really a good well it is a conspiracy but it's a legitimate one but he's saying oh it's you know there's a democratic hoax he is very quick to any time it will help him look good to be like it's a conspiracy against me never once with butler never once and it's kind of crazy man like we don't we have like no infirmate they haven't even like attempted to give us a national story that puts a little bow on top of like who this guy was or what happened how there was such a security failure that could allow a sniper 130 yards away to get a clean shot at the president a former president and current candidates head um what that just kind of no internet history can't get into his phones uh he wanted to kill anyone he could that's all nothing to see here and it's just a little bizarre to me that you would think like all other things making sense you would just think you would hear Donald Trump going they tried to kill me they tried to do this they tried to but i mean days afterward he just thanked the secret service for what a great job they did and i don't know what any of that means i know a lot about it and i'll just say this which we said publicly is i you know i got a call from somebody who said i've got a lot of material from the gunman and not disputing he was the gunman by the way seems like the gunman question is like was he working in concert with anyone else where there other people involved right it's the same with the trolley curtain it's not a question of i'm you know i don't know anything but the question is never just did the guy pull the trigger of course yeah who ever disproved that with the videotape that we don't have from the trolley clerk assassination for some reason but whatever the point is that's only one part of the story the question was were there other people involved in the case of butler this i got this corpus of information from a guy almost off the street we showed that it was real and always skeptical of this stuff very skeptical but it turns out this was actually from Thomas Cripps' YouTube account and the fbi claimed that this didn't exist well of course they knew it existed so then it then the question was why are they since the man is dead in this soul shooter crime there's a lone gunman and a lone gunman's gone why would we hold back anything any evidence we have but they did and that would include video surveillance of the shooting range where he trained to shoot pretty good shot over a hundred yards the two two three i should do that's like everyone's all these seals like oh that's nothing but like for a non-saying right it's a decent shot so there's videotape from the shooting range to detrain alone who was with him you ever been released and the investigation was shut down shut down so what does that mean i don't know but i mean like what is going on yeah and i got to say um why can't we know well hearing the heroic former director of counter terrorism come on your showing kind of say the same thing does just have a lot more weight to it when the guy was literally the director of counter terrorism and going like hey what's going on here we have not gotten answers and he tied the he tied those facts those are facts he stated facts by the way when he now we've just heard the fbi's not actually investigating him that was all fake he retained a security clearance until the morning he left so if he was under investigation for treason or something he wouldn't if held his clearance right that's a nice level intelligence which he retained until the day he the moment he resigned so okay that was all lie but he said point blank one of the most informed people in the United States with clearances higher i think even than mark of ends there's a connection between trumps decision to go to war in a ron and these not fully explained acts of violence he said that so okay before we denounce him is crazy which maybe he is i don't know doesn't seem to be but i hold up at any possibility what is he talking about and there has not only been zero interest from like the people in charge of jinning up interest like the internet the influencers right there's been calculated discouragement and attacks on anyone who persists in asking the question yeah well like and i haven't gotten involved because i know everybody and it's it's so emotional to me but at certain point i'm gonna you know whatever i feel like i've got a pretty close advantage on all this stuff and i'm getting a little sick of it because every american has a right to justice not just for himself but for any other american citizen our whole system rests on the idea that there will be justice affected by the u.s. government and we have a right to know you have nobody to keep that for me on what grounds you keeping that for me you can't brow beat me into it by screaming candace oans again and again and again and again yeah that's right and and look like sick and then i've tried it's outrageous no absolutely and listen i'll say just just personally like i uh you know and i i knew charlie and um not super well we weren't like close friends but like i'd done a show a few times and we texted a few times that he had me at that that last uh let me do the debate there and we hung out for a little bit while we were there and you know it's uh i wasn't as close with him as is you were but it's even just like being friends with someone like that it's it's first of it's like it's very jarring uh to see that happen and then he's got a wife and little kids really tragic horrible situation and on like my incentives on all of this is like i just don't want to believe that this was anything more than like one crazy guy with the transfer e-boyfriend or whatever like that that actually is much more comforting to me than it's some conspiracy half a twitter seem to think i was the one who got him killed or something like that or me and you and me and i was very much so vehemently want to believe yes right so like we don't want that i will say so and and i have not done like deep dives and and watched all of kandas' shows on this or something but like there's little pieces of information just like it's been confirmed by a few different people that he was texting them they're gonna kill me like hey man that's got to be like totally exhausted and investigated i mean what is this here this is a pretty big deal you really got to get to the bottom of stuff like that and look as you're sitting here and you know it's almost like sometimes people will will call you know the call you out for being a conspiracy theorist or something or you know you they say that just asking questions worse than being conspiracy theorists is having no curiosity yeah about questions that have not an answer well also it's there's just not a conspiracy theorist and i believe in curiosity and skepticism i've encouraged that in a lot of people and some have been very resistant to be curious yeah skeptical and there are two sides to this there's not simply the people who are coming up with the conspiracy theory some of them obviously fantastical and wrong i would think there's also the government side which is telling you shut up we have the solved and i think we should apply the same skepticism to their claims as well there's no reason the fbi she gets an automatic on the basis of what will also attract record of always telling the truth to people like what are you even talking about well that's and how dare you threaten me and call me names i mean i'm not getting paid for this i you know i've stayed out of well i'm just getting too mad well watching that so even before the Epstein files got released back when the Podesta emails were released in the original pizza gate theory was was born and you know if you you look through some of those Podesta emails look they're clearly talking in code now what is the code i mean people are speculating that it was about children now i've absolutely no reason to believe that but they're not planning pizza parties you know what i mean like they're speaking in code that's he abstines urologist who's just prescribed him erectile dysfunction drugs says take the pills and then meet me for pizza and grape soda i that's in the Epstein files maybe they're maybe there's nothing to a sex maybe they're actually you get wicked hungry after you take a boner pill i don't know but the fact that nobody cares to find out or even interview the urologist just bring me to say hey what is this that's right and i felt the same way that's great soda what are you even talking there's no white person america drinks grape soda stop i haven't had grapes i maybe had grapes soda when i was a child i'm not against just like talk to the urologist no a right exactly so it's the thing about it is right like even with the original pizza gate thing the position of like the corporate media was to sit there and go you're an idiot if you think this code is about all you're a conspiracy theorist if you they instead of putting a microphone in front of john padaesta and going hey you're clearly speaking in code here people are assuming that that code is for raping children so clear this up because it can't be any worse than what people are speculating so what is it sir and no one ever even thinks to do that it is in all the most of the is aimed at people who are asking the questions and and that that's a tell right there yes is people here you've gunshots ringing out in my country people getting killed or attempted murder couple of attempted murders there will be more unfortunately and anyone who's interested in like finding out or doesn't automatically trust the government which we're supposed to be skeptical of that person is the villain yeah that's right and and you know in in a similar thing there i don't know i maybe i'm in a struggle to like word this the right way but there's certain things that in a vacuum might be true but aren't true in all circumstances so in in other words like if you typically speaking you go hey before you want to start you know believing something you got to see strong evidence for it or something like that or you can't just start theorizing and speculating about things without like some indication or something pointing you in that direction but then like if me and you both just wake up together and we we're blacked out for the last 10 hours and we're chained up in a prison somewhere or something like that and you start going like we got to start speculating about how the hell we got here because this is so crazy you know what i mean and then i'd be like hey my neighbor said something this morning to me about how like i bet it's going to be a rough day you know and i'm we got to think maybe my neighbor had something to do with this now then some some skeptic could come along and go your neighbor saying it's going to be a bad day doesn't act isn't actually evidence and you're like okay but we're here like we got and so in in a sense there's like okay yes you could you can be skeptical and it's good to be skeptical of some of these claims but at the same time we're sitting here watching it it's so crazy to watch right but the never trumpers are now the biggest hardcore trump supporters as they're destroying the coalition that they were afraid of right destroying trump himself just right and so you've watched this happen and that does lead you to go how exactly did they pull this off how is it that people like um you know so i you know look i'm i'm a little bit more hotheaded than you at times and maybe this is because you know i'm a little um i'm a decade younger than you and i still drink big glasses of whiskey and i i still and i'm just furious about a lot of things and i'm um uh maybe i should you know let some of that go but uh you know like i'm still furious at ben chapeiro and the only reason i hate ben chapeiro's guts is because he called ron paul jiu hater uh back in the day when it was totally just ridiculous you read some of these tweets recently i think ron paul is up there talking about how it's it's not wise to fight multiple wars this is what brings down nation and ben chapeiro goes but you just want to strangle a joo you know like fuck you dude i dare you speak to a man so much better than you that way anyway but um so i was furious over the 12 day war uh last summer it was too and i i went on breaking points uh great show with uh christolan and sager who i love very much um and smart man great those literally love sager to death he's just great uh someone really happy to call a friend and um he uh so i went on the show right after it and i called for trumps and peach mint i said he should be impeached and removed for this he's launched a war of aggression it's illegal it's for a foreign country it's what he promised not to do he was very angry i still stand by that but i i was angry and then of course all of them all the guys you know josh hammer and ben chapeiro and mark live that they all just start talking shit about me look this guy doesn't support trump oh he voted for trump last time but he's calling for his impeachment now as if i don't remember where all you guys were in 2016 when national review was running their never trump uh addition and ben chapeiro promised for for deeply held principal reasons he could never support Donald trump and mark lavin was never all these guys were never now that he's become a war hawk what he explicitly ran against being in every election now that he's become that they all love him to death and they're destroy like so anyway my point is sorry sometimes you see facts like that and you go that's worth speculating about i do have some questions i'd like to ask on how exactly these guys were able to infiltrate this movement destroy it from within and you know set our country on this trajectory toward another catastrophic or that's there's there's a lot that went into that i happen in a green more i guess the the only last thing would say about it is you started by saying the legacy media covered for the crimes of their masters the ruling class okay got it i mean that's what they exist to do that's why we have nbc news that's why yes you then it's right no i totally that's why foxes here but to see people in independent media doing that in i understand it's for easy to get sidetracked like you're mad at one person and so anyone who is asking similar questions to that person like must be on that side of but like try to retain independence in your head like don't get sidetracked certain questions have to be answered no matter who's asking them right yeah one of the questions i still can't answer is why is it that all the neocons are the ones leading the screaming in any one of ask questions about trolley kirk's death when trolley kirk was an enemy of the neocons like open enemy of the neocons invited you to tp usa like you don't infot and he didn't it's not because the kids at tp oh say like oh i grew up loving dames back yeah well that's i i said that i've said this on other shows too but i said this to you that it's like there was something about invite you know inviting you or megan kelly yeah we're on foxes fine yeah a huge famous yeah i'm right not just like someone on fox news like two of the big shows reason to invite you to attorney put event unless he wants the kids in the audience to hear your views yeah which he did because he subsequently agreed with them and i would know because i talked about this a lot like a lot a lot over years so for the neocons whom he at best didn't trust and mostly really didn't like i never talk about what i think trolley fuck because it feels so weird yeah but i just have to say this they're the ones leading the charge and shut up don't ask any questions like you tell me what this is well that's in a i'm not gonna take orders from them who are these people anyway this is the same reason why this is the reason why i i read that text message that he uh he sent me and it was because well part of it was because kandas asked and i'm friends with kandas and she was very she lost someone she was very close but part of it was that you know because it's a weird thing to do it's a weird thing to share private text message oh i agree one i think especially someone who just died and i got some pushback for that and i understand why people like i get their point maybe i shouldn't have done that i'm not sure but you know it was the thing where like net nyan who immediately is trying to hijack his legacy josh hammer and all these guys are immediately try to hijack his life and so it's kind of like selling their books right right literally dude i it's the most disgusting thing i've ever seen in my life josh i'm ready three interviews immediately after the only reason anyone's interviewing him is because he was friends with charlie karker he was close around his circle or whatever and every single time he mentioned how much charlie loved his book it's like jesus dude i mean i just could never imagine getting a little strong everybody who has to always friends with josh hammer well okay but he he had him in his circles or whatever is handle or whatever it was but you know i remember you know right before charlie died he called me and he said man i just wish everyone would listen to your podcast it's like this is so crazy of a thing to say unbelievable but the reason i released that is because i'm like look i don't know exactly where charlie was on his evolution on this topic obviously he had at one point bin a die hard pro israel guy but a lot of people were that and then kind of woke up over the last couple years but i know that he texted me after my debate with Douglas Murray that he said he thought i did a great job and he really did he said something like i read verbatim on my show but he said something like i believe it or not i really didn't disagree with almost anything he said yeah and i'm just saying binchapira wasn't sending me that text no so for people to try to pretend there was no daylight between the two of them it's just a not true no okay there was hostility right big time and not just with you know those guys hostility i mean i don't want to overstate it i'm not saying he hated them as people but i mean he did not agree at all and certainly didn't agree with war with the ramp at all and with also honestly some of the christian zianist leaders i mean charlie is very he loved israel as a country for sure and i think he had a complicated theology which i did not fully understand and still don't fully understand but um the idea that you would put another country before your own like he just rejected that flat out and some of those some of the christian zianist leaders are very aggressive and shark like and very money oriented and pushy and he started talking about that openly we talked about it with me a lot yeah well you talked about it on makin kelly show i mean talked about the reaction he got from the angelic leaders from well maybe not from the even josel it was a mix it was a mixture yeah i'll yeah i probably a mix of you know juish sainas like um like the guys you mentioned but also the people he grew up with who are even jello cold leaders and uh he was upset with them i mean i talked to him about it at length it's if i could name names with who's upset i'm not going to but because he's gone but yeah that's just real and i don't know i i don't even like talking about this but i'm just offended It named names with who's upset. I'm not going to, but because he's gone. But yeah, that's just real. And I don't know. I don't even like talking about this, but I'm just offended by where this is going. And the bottom line is every American has an interest in every murder getting solved. And not just in getting solved, but fully solved. Yeah. And if you have a government agency that's shutting down a legitimate line of inquiry, at very least you have to answer the question, what you're doing that. And they, and Joe Kent has said in public multiple times, including to me, the FBI shut down any effort to look into international connections here within days of the killing. So someone should ask the FBI like, why'd you do that? And no one seems willing to ask. And look, we also know what we know about this FBI, who I just could not be more disgusted with. And, you know, I know you saw when everyone's afraid of them. What Dan Bongino was talking all types of shit to me on Twitter or whatever, but it's like, look, man, you just, you know, there's a thing where people were saying they were trying to go, Dan Bongino into debating me because he was talking shit about me. And you know, as I was, I think I've responded in kind. But the thing is like he can't. Dan Bongino, not only can he not come debate me, Dan Bongino can't ever do a difficult interview ever again for the rest of his life because he's ended in one question. I literally one question ends it. I just go, hey, okay, so you looked the American people in the eyes and you swore that you had seen the proof that Jeffrey Epstein killed himself. Well, it's been declassified by an act of Congress now. So go ahead and tell us what you say. What's the proof? It's all declassified now. What it doesn't, it doesn't, what are the, the few exceptions in the rule if it's national security or if it harms the victims or something like that? How would it possibly be any of those for you to just tell me what you saw that made you comfortable enough to go out there and swear that you had seen proof that he killed himself. Cash Patel, Dan Bongino, but these guys specifically, and this is one of the big things I think that really. I just want to interject. No, no, no, not anyone in particular, but you know, we say we know things, but I would always add the caveat to the extent you can know things like of course. I thought I've known many things. I've turned out to be wrong. You know, so I could be wrong, but this is sincere. I believe I can say was certainty that Jeffrey Epstein was murdered. So I, so I mean, but of course I'm always open to countervailing evidence always. I'm so sorry that my capacity for being wrong, but I can say if you could x-ray my heart, you would find that I believe with total certainty he was murdered and the people in the US government knew that he was murdered. So I want that to be true, but I believe it is true. So like it's going to take a lot. You're going to have to show me that that's false. So the reason why I have so much contempt for Dan Bonjino and Cash Patel, particularly, and Pam Bondi too, but more so the other two, is that these guys went around and really Dan Bonjino. Cash did many podcasts and stuff, but Dan Bonjino got rich doing his show at a really big show and he flamed that Epstein stuff for so long was like, don't let go of this one. This is a huge scandal. We're going to get in there and expose it. And I got to say every bit as much as the war in around, maybe not quite as much as this most recent one. But the covering up the Epstein scandal did so much to damage this administration. Because it went to something very fundamental. The fundamental promise of Donald Trump and the reason why Donald Trump, I believe the main reason that he wrote to political success and won the presidency twice was that he said he was going to drain the swamp. And it was an incredibly effective campaign slogan. He was essentially saying, look man, on some level almost all Americans know this. This city in DC is filled with corruption and the people in political power have committed profound crimes against the American people and none of them have been held accountable for it. And we're going to hold them accountable for this. And for this justice department now to go in and put up zero deep state arrests. I mean, dude, if you just think about the fact that the intelligence agencies framed the sitting president for treason for four years. And in obvious deep state coup to overthrow an attempted deep state coup to attempt to overthrow a democratically elected president. Like it is, it was an outrage that they did it to him on the campaign. But it is a little bit different when he's a presidential candidate than when he is the commander in chief, the president of the United States of America. He framed him for being a Russian spot. Donald Trump is a lot of things. He is not a Russian spot. Okay. He's never been one. It was the most ridiculous thing ever. It was all complete phony evidence and they knew it. They knowingly went forward with that. Andrew Andrew McCabe admitted on 60 minutes that he said their plan was to invoke the 25th Amendment. But they realized they couldn't get enough people to go along with that. And so they settled for Robert Mueller. They settled for a special investigation that would tie him down and not let him get his America first agenda throw. So there's that. There's COVID. There's, you know what I'm saying. There's the Epstein stuff. There's all types of crime. I mean, COVID, you think about it. We, they've re-enlocked down the country and didn't disclose that they made it. They made the germ themselves. Fauci was like the hero of the response for like a year and a half before they finally came out that it was him who made it. I mean, just, and, and they have just at every turn protected power. And again, like with the Epstein thing, man, like you don't have to, you only have to know like, I don't know. You just know like, if you know like five or six things about it, you're like, okay, this is some type of huge conspiracy. You know, like I don't know exactly what it is. And by the way, the files being released did shake up my interpretation of the whole thing. I tweeted this once, but I kind of, I mean, I was saying it tongue and cheek, but I kind of meant it sincerely that I used to speculate that Jeffrey Epstein worked for Mossad. And after the files came out, it's looking a lot more like the Mossad worked for Jeffrey Epstein. I mean, I did not think he was the, the Roth child's guy. I didn't realize that. You know, and so like this thing is a gigantic conspiracy. It's a, it's an interesting limited look into how power really works. And, and you know what I mean, like what's really looking through a stained glass window. You don't get a clear picture, but you see the shapes and you realize this is not what I thought it was. I actually came away from reading a lot of the Epstein stuff with the view of Israel that was diminished. I thought Israel had less power. Of course he was working with Mossad. I said that got called a Jew hater, whatever. It was just true. So we're also working with CIA and intelligent services from around the world. But what he really was doing was acting as an employee of others as a kind of communications hub between the biggest stakeholders in the West. And so what you really saw was the governments aren't in charge. There's no meaningful nation state with full sovereignty. Like that's just not a thing. There's a superstructure. And who's outlines I can't fully see or even partly see. But it's clearly there. And it's not all being run from the Levant by Netanyahu's probably got IQ of one tanning. It's not a genius. So like, do you know what I mean? Yes. 100%. It's way bigger than Israel is just like a place to hide out if you've been accused of a crime, get a passport, do some money laundering. You know, whatever. It's a lot of things. But it's not Israel is not running the world. Yeah. No, there's something that you're absolutely right. There is there is their power structures that we do not fully know about that are way more important. And it bought the biggest lie of all, which is a competition between nation states and you know what I mean. Yeah. That's right. I mean, I got it so interest, but so to Singapore and China and India and it's like, yeah, to some extent, but that's not as soon as you have the free flow of capital, a globalized economy, then you have a globalized government. It's just a fact. And by government, I mean, a governing body, which may be informal or have blurry edges, but it's still totally real. It's way more real than countries. Yeah. Yeah. That's like almost a medieval view. Well, even countries with grains and armies. That's like so dumb. Yeah. No, that's right. And maybe it was, you know, it's like it probably wasn't even true in medieval times. Literally, it wasn't. But like after 1848, like after you had like the creation of like real, there was semblance or the, maybe the fiction of nation states. I mean, I think it's more complicated than I'm making it sound. Yeah. It's clearly not as simple as everyone else assumes. Yeah. Well, I know there's actually in their own interest. It's one. It's an, there's this really great book, uh, Britain by Murray Roth bar, who I mentioned earlier, uh, called the progressive era. And it's about, you know, the, yeah, it's about, I think that it goes from. It might like Theodore Roosevelt for sure, would draw Wilson FDR. And one of the things that they talk about is that there was, and this really is true is that there were like, there were real people who really like meant well and were kind of in my opinion got it wrong. But you know, the, the kind of moderate socialist types or the progressives who, who were like, hey, we're such a wealthy country. Right. We should have more of a managed economy so that we can make sure it's working for, for everybody. But really what ends up happening in the progressive era is then all the, you know, all the titans of industry. Um, although Robert Barrens, as they call it, they all got on board with it. And they went, oh, yeah, totally. We should have a managed economy. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. We'll be doing the managing. You know, it was all, it was like all the money interest that they supposedly wanted to reign in where the guys who ended up getting control of the government anyway. And so this is how it works. As matter as sponsored by Microsoft. Yeah. That's right. That's right. So it's the gay pride parade has like a bank of America float, come through it. And you know, like, I mean, I know there is some leftist out there who really believes in the gay pride parade, but like something bigger is going on than what your game is. It's liberation just trust me. This is going to be liberation. It's too ridiculous. No. Oh, well, good. Thank you for everything you're doing. I'm sorry if that got, I never get emotional, but I'm sorry to start yelling at you. But that just stuff just I enjoy it. It's literally nothing makes me happier than to help that in agreement. I'll take one. Dave Smith, you're the best. Thank you. Thank you, sir.