The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night Hello Duncan I don't think this is gonna work Oh my god, I can't see oh fuck I can't like I can't see at all. I don't know. He's will see a deadly outfit I guess I just put that on when I want to say something incriminating Yeah What do you mean well the thought police? So pull up that article Jamie at the beginning of this podcast. We should probably go right into this because apparently the Department of Homeland Security and Twitter yeah, we're working together are we on yeah, I don't hear there we go the department of Homeland Security Was they they had a plan to police information and they were working with Twitter in In some fashion Look at this Quietly broadening its effort to curve speech it considers dangerous Yeah, what does that mean? I don't know an investigation By the intercept has found years of internal DHS memos emails and documents obtained via leaks and ongoing Lops and all on and an ongoing lawsuit as well as public documents illustrate the expansive effort by the agency to influence the tech platforms Yeah The work much of which remains unknown to the American public Came into clear of you earlier this year when DHS announced a new disinformation governance board Lord a panel designed to police misinformation false information spread unintentionally disinformation false information spread internally and now intentionally excuse me and mal information factual information shared typically out of context with harmful intent Mal information's a weird one mal information. Yeah because it's factual But it's shared typically out of context With harmful intent that's where you're like you'll go look you don't understand why we mow down those reporters With the chopper. It's out of context. You can't just show the video While the board was widely ridiculed immediately scaled back and then shut down within a few months other initiatives are underway as DHS pivots to monitoring social media now that its original mandate the war on terror has been wound down So that's been wound down apparently Platforms have got to get comfortable with government. It's really interesting how hesitant they remain Microsoft executive Matt Masterson former DHS official Texted Jen Eastley. Look at that platforms have got to get comfortable with government. Oh What does that mean? I don't know Tim pulls at me this this morning. I didn't get a chance to read I was in the gym Look you got to get comfortable with government. Yeah, that's what I've been saying just get comfortable. Yeah, why are you comfortable? Cozy up put on some sweatpants Cozy up Wow, that's creepy. I mean I guess we all kind of suspected it though Alright, it's not like any but that's is that a shocker? Well with with a Tim Poole said is that Twitter was working with them That they I guess they weren't being honest about it. They're working with them Will we tell me that Jimmy Kimmel tweeted something and tried to delete it? Yeah, it looks like I Could be wrong about this, but chemo was pissed at Musk why for buying Twitter? What does he care? What does he matter about? So basically like a lot of people seemed to be really upset with Elon for buying Twitter because Elon is saying that he's not going to Sinceer Twitter anymore. He's gonna like let you know all the banned people are gonna get back on apparently You know, it's like they're trying to figure it out how to do it and so this is upset a lot of people who Were happy with the idea that it was being like hyper moderated in a way I think that fits in with their politics. Yes. That was the idea So it's like so like their team was in control for a second and now somebody you know what it reminds me of It's like when a new booker shows up in a comedy club And all the comments are talking shit. It's like scary It has been interesting over the years to watch you blossom from the electric car guy into a fully-formed piece of shit Wow and look see it says this tweet was deleted by the tweet author learn more He was replying to a tweet that Elon tweeted and what was the tweet on deleted? Which I think that was the tweet where it's this It's like the Santa Monica observer or something like that was tweeting something about the Paul Pelosi attack and that Santa Monica Observer has been known to tweet things that aren't that aren't correct Or at least has or not tweet published things that aren't correct at least has in one instance that they were citing something about Hillary Clinton I don't know but You know he I think what Elon tweeted was there's a tiny chance That we might not be getting the full story and then he tweeted that story Yeah, this is the idea that maybe Paul Pelosi knew this guy because people have been trying to pin that guy and say that he was a right-wing Maga guy, but didn't he live in like some fucking hippie collective and he made like hemp jewelry He did woo to cue pipeline He went woo to cue so like he apparently had some kind of blog or something. I think he started off woo super hippie ayahuasca Mystical and then Gradually kind of devolved into cue cue and on the best analysis I saw of it was a reporter saying that what the real story here is not like Is that there's people who are psychotic all over San Francisco from? Doing so much speed math drugs. That's the real story The real story is that all over like the great cities of America people are like high as a fucking kite and have been for so long that they're like Spinning out of control and that that's what it is. That's the story of stories is like yeah, sure this guy Went woo to cue Very common it happens you start off you're like into like Taking supplements that leads to a new supplement. You've never heard of that leads to like some weird website You go to the next thing. You know, you're rubbing weird bomb all over your body With a crunder a crystal still fine still cool, but somewhere along the way You you get on like one of these slides that lead you down into cue and then the next thing You know, you're like Completely like deep in that so that's what I've heard is woo to cue would a cue pipe last yeah I like it like that term is that a new term would a cue have never heard of it's been floating around for a little bit It's just like it's just one of the you know, it's one of the things that happens. It's like yeah You know Robert Anton Wilson the great Robert Anton Wilson His recommendation is maintain agnosticism When it comes to the exploration philosophically of these of anything really But so when you're Contemplating this or that let yourself believe it But don't believe it all the way maintain agnosticism You can like play around with the idea that the earth is flat you can play around with the idea that The Illuminati elite run the planet you can play around with any idea You want in fact in the great simulator of your brain, but don't go all the way if you go all the way That's where you can start like spiraling out and Here woo anon the creep of QAnon into southern California's new age world. Yeah. That's it. Wow. We would a cue Wow We would a cue pipeline right there. Okay, so this is a new thing You know the I think part of the problem with a lot of these theories is that some people I'm just gonna try to say this as Kindly as possible. They don't have good brains And I say this as a person who is like a decent brain. Yeah, but I know people with fantastic brains It's not there's no there's no fairness. You know, I met this guy the other night This poor guy. I don't know what was wrong with him. He was like hunched over and you know It was very very frail and hunched over and Whether this is because of a disease or whether this is because I don't know what was wrong Something was wrong though. I'm like this is not fair. It's not fair. This guy got Just a shit roll the dice. Yeah, now he has this body that's failing him and then you can meet someone like Francis and gano Who has this insanely perfect body like he's like the super alpha? All right, UFC heavyweight champion six foot six 265 pounds of just Pure athleticism. It's not fair. It's not fair And then that the same applies to I think everything like all sorts of Aspects of being a human being and the same replies to the way your brain works and if you're a person Unfortunately for no fault of your own You you you have this brain. It's like not that good. Yeah, and it can't discern Things that are illogical. It can't it can't make reasonable conclusion. Yeah, you can't look at things objectively It just can't right. It's like a Like a two-gear car I was like And then other people have a Tesla and that thing can just sort of maneuver around I do Oh, I see what's going on here. Oh, this is a influx of all these yeah conspiracy theories that all come together And yeah, this person is unfortunately adopted these Wholesale right and hasn't looked into them at all Yeah, and now thanks there's lizard people that are shape-changers that are behind closed doors that are running the world Yeah, and they're trying to collapse all the societies You know, there's a there's a real benefit to letting the the fucking culture Figure out what's right and what's wrong, but along the way People are gonna get tricked. They're gonna get dipped and some people are gonna fall into the hands of very manipulative people That are very charismatic. Yeah And they have wacky fucking ideas about lizard people or whatever it is whatever Look at fucking Heaven's gay jones town. Yep. Yep. Fuck. Think of that like how Out of it. Do you have to be to get to the point where someone is like it's time to drink Signide or and you know, he's been doing the test or something every day for a while But how out of it like if you want it that's see that's what's scary about being human We're hackable hmm. We're fucking hackable. Yeah, and people are really good hacking us and you you might think you have the most incredible mind of all time But you're still Suceptible in the same way. You got a great immune system. Have you ever been hypnotized? Yeah, I got hypnotized my mom hypnotized me and a wart came off my hand It's not weird. She's she was like studying psychology She hypnotized me. I had this wart on this finger and then over the next few days. It just kind of like fell off Hypnosis is real man. Yeah. It really does work But what it is is not what everybody thinks it is. I think Before well, I just correct that it's not what I thought it was I thought like you don't know what's going on and you go into like some sort of a trance in the person can get you to do anything Give me your ATM code But but what it really is is like it puts you in a state of mind where you're very aware They're in the state of mind And I've been thinking about it a lot and I've been thinking about like the cult thing a lot and just the the the cult of Joining one party or another party too, you know, like deciding your conservative or deciding your progressive I Think it's a part of the design of the human animal that got us to cooperate in tribes I Think in order for things to work and function you have to have a very strong inclination that there's one leader right and Then you know you have to have resistance of that to find the better next leader And so that's what people get angry at this one person that's running the whole thing But I think that when you scale that out to like 300 million people it just doesn't work It doesn't work. It's chaos. Yeah, we didn't design it for that right Or or whatever designed us I should say didn't design us for that designed us for like tribes of 150 people I Think what the internet is is the great connector and the internet is connecting Reality with this animal that desires to have a singular leader Because it wants someone to protect the tribe But then the internet is like spitting and pissing and shedding all over that It's like an antidote to it right like the like Twitter's Twitter's fact checking the president United States is incorrect facts right which is crazy That that's happening well, this is the emperor wears no clothes. Yes. That's the fable right like this naked dudes going around Everybody's scared of them. So they're like beautiful robes. Yes. And then some kid is like he's naked Look, he's obviously naked and then another person like oh, yeah, you're right. He is it's like that is the Pop that is the like I guess the hope of the internet is that truth Comes out and it destabilizes bad power struck bad structures exactly you want to you want to throw a monkey wrench in the shit That doesn't work so that it like stops working and you rebuild instead of patching up old wobbly Things that are like smokes coming out gears are flying off and you're supposed to pretend like it's working right? That's where it gets creepy is like you know if the if the machine that is failing Starts telling tech companies or whoever Like what is real and what isn't then a broken machine is then like articulating truth Which then so if someone starts telling the truth They're but wears no clothes and then like Twitter throws up underneath like this is potential misinformation Or whatever that's why this Department of Homeland Security thing is so creepy Because that would be the same people The same people that are telling you things that are factually inaccurate or that are getting fact checked on Twitter would be the very People that would get to dictate what is mal information yeah like mal information was the craziest one like everybody thinks You shouldn't be able to say things aren't true Right or if you do you must correct them like you are you are you telling the truth or you manipulating with lies right? He can't manipulate with lies so If maybe you said something and you thought it was true Let's correct that yeah, but if you just keep doing that over and over and over and over and you never admit that and then you're the one Who gets to dictate what's mal information? Right, it's like the death throws of a dying system And it's reaching out in a time and it's acting and behaving the way it used to be able to behave when it had total access To what gets in what people get informed about or not right it had complete control of that at one point in time Well, it's massive. I mean, we're talking about how many offices are filled with people working for the government right now? Like how many if you put them in a building like with the building go all the way to the moon I like a high rise that when probably the moon will be covered with government office buildings, but like it's it's massive and then it's so huge that you know just people get put into departments and Some and some of the people that get put in the departments are good smart people and some of the people that get put in the Departments they suck right like everything in all walks of life. Yeah, right? That's all it takes so you get one like Everybody's had a shitty manager you get one shitty manager and some job where like he's got a little more power than he's supposed to have And then he's probably got people around him or like this is a bad idea And he's like well you're fired and then people come in who are like this is a really good idea He's like you're a genius if you think this is a good idea because it is then you have this like terrible geometry of like Where were the contagion happens where this one assholes like starts getting surrounded by concentric circles of assholes and then those people have so much power and And that's I think what's going on with it is it's just like there's just too many people running things and of those people There's got to be some that are great. I know there is and there's some that are just abject monstrous power hungry cooked up assholes and I think that's when you start seeing shit like that. It's clearly a sign of I mean again my ground being naive But I'd like to imagine that that's coming from like a few assholes That's not coming from the totality of the US government all of it It's just coming from like what a thousand assholes But then there's also the real problem of actual misinformation that's being spread by bad parties Right like we know that we know that there's misinformation that gets spread by bad governments by like our enemies like we know that there's a Whole industry like these Russian troll farms sure you know we talked about this before but On Facebook 19 of the top 20 Christian sites were being run by Russian troll farms. I remember you saying that You know how nuts that is that means they're like they're Like some conversations that are insane. They'll make any sense like how is this how is this a conversation? Well, it might not be It might be right we're getting manipulated It might be there's a bunch of and then the problem with people we were talking about before that we have this natural inclination to follow leaders We do that online two man It's just like some really good tweets that point in a certain direction people will start agreeing with it Right people are easily the idea that manipulation only applies to like verbal or Or written in a statement. No it fucking applies to tweets too. You can manipulate people do I get manipulated all the fucking time? Are you kidding me? I'm like always getting caught up in bullshit. I'm like I like go through like phases of like yeah I Pinulate between teams or I'll get caught up in some like deep crazy conspiracy I like I get like I it's a very potent By the way, I'm not saying it's potent because I get manipulated easily, but it's a potent drug yes, you know that's a group of potent drug there's all kinds of operators It's not just Russian troll forms. It's discordions. It's just basic like trolls who are bored It's who knows what probably some call will never know about just some weird cult on an island somewhere with some nefarious Purpose that's like trying to put some certain information on the internet. It's a ocean of madness and maybe like the the Horrible ideas. Okay, we can control the ocean of madness. That's what we're gonna do because some of these people are Other states trying to cause discord in our society that could lead to a civil war or the collapse of the United States We've got to do something about this call up Twitter Listen, it's a problem. You got to let us tell you what's real and what's not real and it first Maybe that's great. It's like look this is a hundred percent coming from Russian trolls this this whatever this is This is Russian AI trolls, but then of a sudden the president calls that department is like hey is there any way that you could also start applying that to? People who say that I seem like I'm kind of out of it But it's not even him. He's not making that call. It's like yeah his butler's well talk imagine just imagine You know how like if you're a lawyer and you have like a Sneaky suspicion that your client is probably guilty But it's your job to get them off Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's your job if you have to if your lawyer Your job is not to make a judgment in your head I think maybe this guy's lying and maybe he did it now your judgment is to try to get your client off That's it and that's why a lot of defense attorneys men. That's a slippery fucking weird world to be in right Well, don't you think it's the same way in the government if you're a person if you're If you if you're that poor lady who's the White House press secretary where's job? Like it worth job It's the worst job you get all the hate of the president another power. Yeah, fuck it everybody hates you Yeah, you're like a punching bag. You just have to absorb that every day and you're under like extreme stress You're a person like no one knows who you are all of a sudden you have to speak publicly for the country That is such an insane role. Yeah, and and to be young like this lady is doing it now Like how old is she's 30 something? She's so young young to be to be in a position like that We have like notebook in front of you and you have to like answer answer these complex questions So what the fuck is going on in Yemen right like what it's good? Why are we giving so much money to you? Crane what and well the president feels that the president you're your fucking talking for the whole country Yeah, that's such a crazy role you have to like go into a meeting and they tell you What your precious 48 she looks great god damn. I thought you like 33 She's healthy as fuck healthy healthy press secretary But yeah, you got to go into meeting you Have to like they're gonna tell you like look they're gonna ask you about this for sure yesterday The we saw the vice president And the vice president this obviously didn't happen the vice president grabbed a baby Out of someone's arms and threw the baby on the ground now The reason this happened is because We accidentally dosed her with some new MK ultra shit and she thought that she was like a Greek goddess and the baby was like a Hydra head don't worry about it. It was a bad experiment, but Anyway, you they're gonna ask you why did the vice president throw the fucking baby on the ground You'll tell him we drug her with it accidentally with MK ultra drug you got to say uh low blood sugar The vice presidents having low blood sugar and in her hand shook and she didn't really throw the baby Obviously you've got to like go out there with that just load of shit Figure out a way to say it Not just to like one reporter, but to like 20 rep they don't like one will ask in the whole world In the whole world's watching. Yeah, yeah, you have to come up with some weird turn of phrase It doesn't make any sense like when she had to explain why Joe Biden Was bringing up a woman who was dead top of mind top of mind. She was top of mind. Yeah, I mean it was really like The it was like for what she had to work with It was some incredible gaslighting Amazing she stuck the top of mind top of minds a good one because it's nonsense Because you're sitting there thinking like what is top of my Think you're getting distracted by so you're like it's top of mind Top of mind and she just kept saying it was top of mind. You know top of mind TOM top of mind Okay, what it reporters are like to but But they're all thinking is I don't even know that top of mind exists That's brilliant because I don't think she just came up with top of mind I think they're sitting back and they're like just say top of mind over and over I think that exactly is probably what happens like there's probably some sort of consultation and what's the best phrasing Top of mind top of mind. So it's good. Yeah top of mind. That's good. That's real good So that's her job just like a defensive turning it's their job to try to get their client off. That's her job What? That was I thought you had been an objection. No, it was just this her here. We get Was as you all know you guys were watching today's event a very important event on food insecurity The president was naming the congressional champions on this issue and was acknowledging her incredible work He had this was after he said called out her name and she was dead the congresswoman's family To the White House on Friday. There will be a bill signing in her honor this coming Friday So of course she was on his mind. She was of top of mind of TAP for the president. He Looks very much looks forward to discussing her remarkable legacy of public service with them when he sees her family this coming Friday Here where's Jackie she must not be here. I totally understand. I just I just explained she was on top of mind Goodrides flutter and What we were able to witness today and what the president was able to lift up In this at this conference at this event was how her her focus on wanting to Deal with combat food insecurity in America pause pause please imagine if this is someone working for you Imagine if you're in an office somewhere. Yeah, Duncan you're the CEO of a corporation and something like this happens And this person explains what happened to you you'd go I can't have you work for me anymore because you're a liar I thought you're lying. I thought you meant like if you're if you're like a CEO of a company and this late Like what you like have a meeting of like there's some sort of a disaster took place like what happened and then Your confronted with information right this nobody said over and over again. Where's Jackie is Jackie here? Yeah, you must not be here Like are you trying to say that he didn't forget that she was dead? Because now I can't trust you about anything right you've sacrificed for the obvious Any trust that I could have in you about anything the future. Yeah, because it's so obvious right well I mean that's their job. I mean that's their job is to like professionally, but it doesn't work Here's the thing doesn't work. It kind of works. It doesn't kind of work. It kind of fucking works Man, it works as you have to drop it you have the news cycle won't you can't keep going back to top of mind The news cycles got to move on. They know that you just you just like You know slow it down enough and then some other shit happens and then everybody gets memory old people forget about it And then it just moves on a mansion of Biden was doing your brain surgery Everyone was trying to tell you he's great. He's fine. There's nothing wrong. Oh my god Can you fucking imagine imagine you have like a rare sort of brain disease You have to open you up and it's only like a seven out of ten chance. You'll even survive the operation Imagine if you're a Uber driver Oh my god We would have to play it we've all heard heard and do it you want to do it you want to play it Do you feel he playing it? I was just showing you it was felt like a good time to put him up there Do you want to play it? I play it So I want to thank all of you here for Including bipartisan electric officials like represent governor senator Braun senator Booker Representative Jackie you hear where's Jackie Think she wants to come be here to help make this a reality Thanks to senator stab and I'll represent the laurel for their leadership You'd be like grandpa grandpa Well, he's a grandpa. He's a grandpa. We put a very very old man. Yeah, and The most stressful job on earth on earth on earth on earth like worse than working in the namazon warehouse Yeah, man like a job in the most stressful job on earth, on earth, on earth. On earth. Like, worse than working in an Amazon warehouse. Yeah, man. Like a job that if I had that fucking job, I'd probably be like talking like that too. But just because I've used glasses on Academy, all the fucking time. I'd be like so high because it's the only way you could cope with it. How could you even cope with it if you're high? It's ridiculous. If you were a logical person, Billy, we have to disband this position. Is this position as ridiculous? Yeah. We might as well be a king. I'm the king of the land for four years. And for four years, I'll be a just king. Yeah, I'll be a good king to the land. It's its fucking crap. It works if there's 150 people. What do they get paid? What is it? It's not a good salary for what they get. What is it? What is it? 400K, I think. 400K, we're paying our fucking president. That's one burnt Chrysler show. What the fuck? We should be paying them more. If we're paying them more, maybe more people will be like getting the job. Like, shouldn't they get at least like what? Like, I don't know, an A celebrity gets for one movie? Shouldn't they at least get that? We're going to pay them half a million dollars to like... What's even creepier is what they all wind up being insanely wealthy. How wonder how that happens? It's really interesting. What happens is they give speeches. So they give speeches to these people that help them get into position of being a president. So like, say if there's a large corporation, a large corporation, they donate a lot of money towards campaigns and they also... We'd love to hear you talk some day. Wait, you're not saying the corporations that give hundreds of million of dollars for the president to come and give this speech are actually secretly private. Well, that doesn't even make sense. No one would think that. Why would you do that? I just think it's a really fortuitous pipeline to insane wealth to become a president and then give speeches. Well, listen, if I was running a big corporation, you better believe I'd love to have a president come and give a five minutes of being a friend of mine. So I heard Hillary Clinton speak once. What did she say? He said it was really weird. It's like you're just watching someone get paid. Yeah. You're just watching some boring-ass speech. I remember when Giuliani, Giuliani came to California and some people I know what to see that too. And it was the same sort of thing. They were like, this is weird. It was like right after 9-11. And it's like, wow, you're just here to see a guy get paid. They're just saying a bunch of things and they're like, okay, another 10 more minutes. And then I'm going to get out of here. And what am I doing? Like, what are those speeches? Imagine a speech that's worth a half a million dollars. Imagine you're going to bring a president in and he's going to give a speech to all your CEO's and all his folks. It's going to be worth in value to you a half a million dollars. That's a million dollars. It's not like fluffy selling out the Dodger Stadium and crushing and doing stand up and having people cry laughing for an hour and a half. No, no, no. He's just going to go. He's not an act. He's not the Rolling Stones. He's not tool. He's just going to go up there. And they're going to talk about things that everybody already agrees on. Like the environment is a real issue. Yeah. We're going to solve it. Yeah. By partisan means. And there's these, these, these speeches that they give like what do they say? What kind of information do you have that you like? I have the secrets of the scrolls. I'll read them all. That's what that's worth a half a million dollars. It's like a half a billion. If you press your tape seven times and then pull your earlobes down, your hair will grow back and it actually works. That's the worth of million dollars. That's the worth of million dollars speech. But yeah, it's worth a half a billion at one point. Oh, you mean the president? Yeah, they get to like crazy wealth. Like wild amounts of money come at them. Right. Yeah. I mean, it's like what's funny about this sort of thing is it's inarguably true. Like it's just you can't describe it in any other way. It's like that we can't just handbags of money to people when we want them to like do things for us and the government. But we can like hide it and do a speech. You can't, the funny thing is it has to be a speech because like that is a thing. What's like, why do you quantify the, the worth of a presidential speech? You can't have them come and say like paint the wall or like clean a bathroom and you give them $400,000 and it has to be a speech. And so it's like you, all of this stuff, it's all out there. It's 100% true. We're not being cynical or conspiratorial. It's fucking weird to pace anybody that much for a speech, much less somebody who's still in power and is going to be responsible for potentially passing legislation or helping legislation pass. It's going to massively impact whatever your particular industry is. It's obvious what's going on. This is the kind of stuff speaking of hypnosis that's like just on the periphery. Right. Like if you want to hang out and default reality, you're not really supposed to spend too much time thinking about that. You're not supposed to spend too much time thinking about the fact that private corporations and public government sectors of government are weirdly the same thing. They're connected by an invisible. It's not even invisible. It's just kind of shadowy. You're not supposed to, like the idea is the private sector is supposed to be separate from the public sector, the private sector. If it influences the public sector, it doesn't via voting. That was the idea of democracy voting, not through like donating money to the campaigns that make them get elected because they have the most money. That, you know, because like there's probably the most charismatic, incredible, brilliant dude out there. He's got it all figured out for real. Someone who makes JFK look like a complete fucking idiot, like someone like that good. And I don't know. He's living somewhere and maybe he's like, man, I think I could really help. But he's like, how am I going to raise $500 million to run a presidential campaign? I can't do that. So he doesn't run. He can't. And if he did try to run, he couldn't get the money to get to the point where the other ones have gotten to because they're being supported by the corporations. So really what we've done is like we've managed to filter out all the other people who could be awesome because they can't get the money. It's so sad if you think about it. Really is remember this last election? You're looking at the two choices. Like imagine the Olympics, you know, or any like any other competition. Imagine if like you're watching the two finalists and some Olympic, I don't know, gymnastic challenge. I don't know like a tumbling or ice skating. And like they both are really bad at fucking ice skating. You know what I mean? And you got to pick one. It's a binary now. But they're both in different ways. They're like really bad at it. But you got to pick one. That's what really sucks. That to me is like the real embarrassment in our country right now. It's like you're giving us a shitty binary every fucking time. And if I say I don't want to participate in the binary, people are like no, don't you get it? The state our country's future is in your hands. You're like yeah, but I don't like either of them. They both seem awful. One I don't like the other. I don't like me. I would not leave my kids alone with either of them. I don't want to fucking support it at all. But we have to because it's a binary and do not love your country. Do not believe in democracy. But really you're looking at like surely there were better people than this. Like surely this isn't like the greatest representation of leadership. And like if there was if I'm sorry I'm ranting a little too much. It's perfect. Here's the thing. We could reverse all the conditioning. Everyone fucking has been injected with on one side of the other for the last 10 years. Then we like just present like all right, here's this dude and this dude. One is Trump, one is Biden. Would you like either of these people to be president? Who would be like oh yeah, let's get the fucking like megalomaniac or let's get the old like man who can't really put a sentence together. Those are definitely the best choices out of all the other awesome charismatic young people out there who you could pick. It's really depressing man. It's really depressing and it's sad that we're all at each other's throats fighting over these like you know what I mean a stupid binary like we're presented with a dumb binary. It's I don't know why keep saying fucking no it's a really good point. It's a really good point because that's what separates most people. That's not really their values. It's that you think the other person is on the other party and the other party is inherently bad. Everybody's doing it. It's mostly incorrect. Most people agree on most things. Most people are good people. Most people we can't concentrate on the ones that aren't the most. And we can't align ourselves with the ones who aren't the most. The people that are the most ass holy on the left that freak you out are just like the people that are the most ass holy on the right that freak you out. Yeah. They're the the fucking the rare extremes because that's just the spectrum of fucking human beings with any ideology. You're going to have the worst examples and the best examples. You can meet Christians that literally make you want to go to church. Yeah. Oh my god. The way this man carries himself, the way this woman lives her life, the way they talked, with the treat people. I want to be like that. I want to be like that. Like they can because they're good at it. They're really good. They're good. And this that's like that with everything. Yeah. With everything right with politicians with everything. And if we are as a group aligned with only one of two choices. And so you're either on this side or you're on that side. And you always look at the people across the fence. Fuck you. And they look at you fucking losers. That and it's dumb. It's the best way to keep us divided. It's fucking stupid. Most people agree on most things. And the things that we disagree on, we should be able to talk through. Right. It shouldn't be. There should not be a prohibition on a conversation about shit, man. I don't think that whatever the system is that's picking the people we have to vote for, the kids it down to two people. I don't think this system is working very well. Any let's imagine what you were designing a machine, the machine somehow could scan apples. You press a button and the machine rolls out two of the best apples out of like 500 apples. I don't know why you want the machine. You just like good apples. But imagine you press a button and two fucking worm filled rotten apples roll out. And instead of being like, oh shit, the machine's broken. You go like the machine works. Literally these are the best fucking apples. Pick one of them. You can only pick one of them. But don't say our machines broken. It's picking the best apples. Look, they're great. It's that. And then of course there's going to be like bitterness and fighting and division. Because it's like cognitive dissonance, man. It's like you have to like find a way to fix in your head that you have hitched your fucking wagon to a bad apple. Right. And that sucks. And that's going to create insecurity. Insecurities creates fear. Fear. And then you just have a shit ton of insecure people battling each other because they're both somehow incapable of saying, yeah, our guy sucks. So does your guy. Yeah, our guy really sucks too. The movie starts saying that. Then things could get really cool. That's where it could get really interesting. Because I mean, I think most people should agree like, come on. Come on. Is your guy really that great? You pick which guy it is. Really? Is that the best example of like an American or a human being? Is that the best example? I mean, would you want that guy to be alone with your kids? And I'm saying you could use this for anybody. You could use that test. If you don't have kids, would you want that? I don't know. Would you want that guy to be alone with? I don't know. I can't fill in the blank if you don't have kids. I'm sorry for doing like a reader talk. It's a good one. Like the most, the people that you're, you're, you protect over. And I don't mean alone with your kids like they're going to abuse your kids. I mean alone. I know what you're saying. Are they going to be able to, uh, tendier kid? Are they going to remember to feed your kids? Are they going to like keep your kids from doing all the crazy shit kids do? Will they even be able to pick your kid up and put your kid in the crib? Like are they capable of being alone with your children? If the answer is no, you got to find someone else for the fucking job. Because they're in charge of all of us. They're in charge of all of us. You got to find someone who can like, who's like, who's going to like be able to do shit that like keeps all of our fucking kids okay. You know, if they can't be alone with kids, then probably they shouldn't be president if you ask me. They shouldn't be president if they can't drive a car. I don't think they should be president. This isn't an ageist thing to say. I mean, it's whatever age you are. You should be able to drive a car. You should know how to like get in a car and drive it down the road and use your turn signals and what the speed limit is. It teaches you what everyone goes through every fucking day when they have to drive to work when they're driving. So no how to drive a car should be able to be alone with kids. I think this is, we should put this in the fucking constitution. Like this, we should have built into how we're doing these things like prerequisites, prerequisites. Or the job, just like any other job. You know, it doesn't have to be like intense prerequisites, but it's just really depressing, you know, and there's a prohibition on just pointing out the obvious shit. But here's the problem. What are the alternatives? We'd have to blow up the system. And if you wanted to blow up the system, the people that are empowered have to lose power. They're not gonna do that. The FBI's like, you know what? We're not the best at investigating shit. You guys take over. the CIA's like, you know, intelligence. Have we done the best? I don't know. Maybe there's a better option. Why don't you guys take it? No, that's fucking never gonna happen. Ever, ever, ever, ever. The idea is just to continue to improve upon the systems that we already have. They're not perfect, but they're better than nothing. And if we blow it all up, who the fuck is gonna take? If we blow it all up, it's William Wallace up in this pitch. Okay. If you decide that this government no longer has power to the people and then a bunch of people start assuming power and saying that they have power, you got to know. a real fucking pro. I don't think you got to blow it up. I don't blow it up. I don't think it's even necessary. That's what we're saying. That's the only way it's going to change. I think there's other ways it could change, but what it would require is, you know, okay, this is what I say change. I mean, like a complete restructuring. I don't mean, like let's make it so the politics don't get bought out by money. I mean a way where people have to be informed about the things that they have opinions on that are super critical. So like there's a real responsibility for everyone that's involved in all these decision-making aspects of voting to know what the fuck the consequences are for real. The problem is when it comes to certain things like climate change, right? You say climate change. You don't agree with the consensus of climate change. If you don't jump on board immediately, people want to bark at you and very few of them done any research. Right. And I'm not saying that climate change is not real. I'm just saying when something's like that, where it's like, this is what it is and the scientists are almost immediately, I'm like, hold on. Yeah, right. Hold on. How where are you getting this information from and why do you think it's going to be this insane disaster? Are you sure? Yes. Are you absolutely sure? Or is it possible that this has happened throughout history that people are have always talked about, whether it's the ice ages coming, whether it's there's always been some big fear-mongering thing about some climate disaster. It's always happened. You know what's funny to me about that stuff is people take themselves out of the climate. So it's like people talk about climate change as though the climate where something external to the human, whereas like there's an interior climate like a subconscious climate, a the unconscious climate that like is the sum total of the interior lives of everyone on the planet. And that gets left out because we can't quantify it to climate. It's a fear. It's a climate of compassion. Yeah. Whatever it could be. Whatever it could be. Whatever it could be. But it's in their storms. Yep. There's storms, hurricanes that rip through that. And the war. Civil war or just riots or war. And so whenever you're seeing a war happen, you are looking at like a sort of subjective internal yet collective societal hurricane happening and destroying stuff, but it's doing it via like the human system, the human biome. And we so to me, I think that there isn't a quick fix to this, but Carl Jung, Carl Jung, you know Carl Jung is, he's like Freud's okay. Carl Jung, I'm sure a million people have already said this on your podcast. This idea was that leaders are a projection of the collective unconscious. So whatever the world leader is that you're looking at, you're actually looking at a physical representation of the internal subjective lives of the collective, right? So when you see like a Biden, you're seeing the shadow of society. When you're seeing a Trump, it's our shadow. That's what you're looking at. This is where the inner connectivity, interdependence comes up. It's like we're all connected. Whoever the person is that ends up being the mouthpiece for all of us, we all have a tiny little thread of quantum energy injected into that thing. And we're kind of looking at ourselves, part of ourselves we might not want to admit is there. The idea would be if you can find in your own little internal climate a way to cool it down, cool it down. Stop heating up so much. Get peace. Stop, I remember a long time ago, man, you talked to me about this about like it was really stuck with me for the longest time because I was more turbulent back then. But it's an idea of like maintaining an even keel. You know what I mean? Find a way to be stable consistently every day in your own life and stability will appear naturally around you. But if you are prone to reactivity, anger, freakouts, whatever it is, mania, whatever the thing is, then the people around you, they're always kind of worried like what version of this dude am I getting today? Am I going to get the happy version? Are we going to the freaked out version? We get the angry version? I'm going to get the cool version. And if it's really extreme, the way your behavior is warping and shifting, you could only expect chaos around you because people get nervous around instability. So then if that was all of us were reactive. Like if suddenly a wave of reactivity swept through the whole planet and people started thinking it was normal to like pendulum between moods and react to the moods. And like this is me or what the fuck or extremes, then you would expect the representation of all of us to be kind of fucked up. And so the idea is if we could all kind of calm down a little bit, find some peace, find a way to like be actually calm, not repressed. Like you know when you're freaking out on mushrooms and you try to pretend you're not or when you go to a party where they give weed. I don't know if you're having an edible weed party. Yes. And everyone's trying to pretend they're not freaking the fuck out. The worst parties. Dude, that was a judge at a cannabis cup. There you go. I was like seven, eight different flavors in because you have like they give you like a pill box. You know like a Monday through Sunday pill box and each one of them has a different strain and you're supposed to test each strain. By the time you get to Wednesday, you feel the idea with the fuck you talking about. Yeah, man. I remember talking to this dude who was telling me about the cannabis community. It was really interesting because I was beyond barbecued to the point where like words were coming out and I would hear the sounds that the words would make and I would see the words coming out of the person's mouth. But what I got was feelings. I got like bars of feelings, like registered feelings above each word. So as this guy was talking, I could tell what he was trying to do and he was trying to to say that he loves and appreciates the cannabis community and he feels very close to them as a community and that they all have each other's backs. I know if anything goes wrong with me, the cannabis community has my back and it was this thing that he was doing when he was communicating with me because I was so barbecued. I got to be like, that's what we're doing all the time. Yeah. We're doing all the time. We're not always just trying to get our words out. We're trying to like project a tone and figure out a way to get people to like us more or think be more impressed by us or. And that's like a giant percentage of what people do when they talk all day. Yeah. Well, it's insecurity. I mean, it's like the idea is you have, I just read this shit man, it blew my fucking mind. This idea, everything is your mind, right? So not like spiritual, we literally, everything you see is your mind because your sense organs are taking in phenomena and that's all getting translated via your brain and as something we call reality. So literally when you're seeing the color yellow, you're seeing your own mind. That's the way your mind translates. Whatever the particular wavelength of yellow is into the thing that you call yellow. It's literally your mind. Everything you're seeing is your mind. That's just the way it is. But what happens is we start thinking it's not our mind. There's a me and a you. There's an outside me and an inside me. Even though this is 100% not the case, there is probably something outside of you, but that's not what you're seeing. Incredible symphony of neurotransmitters that are all harmonizing in a way that produces your reality. So when you see an enemy or a friend, when you see someone you love and someone you hate, all your mind, the feeling of love, your mind, the feeling of hate, your mind. So when you get really fucking confused, not realizing this is all my mind, you start picking shit out. This person, that person, this thing, that thing. And you would start attaching to it. You start attaching to it to try to feel better. So you're like, if I can make this person like me, I'm going to feel better. Now I'm going to feel good again or something's going to make me feel better. And this is what you're talking about. This is where you begin. The never ending cycle in Buddhism called some sara where it's just a never ending attempt to rearrange your mind into some way that is going to give you a sense of like, okay, everything's fine now. Never ending. Never ending. Not only never ending in this life, but literally zillions of incarnations. You've been doing the same fucking thing over and over again in different ways. And so the moment you realize this is my mind, this is all my mind, then all of a sudden, that's when you can, that's when shit gets really interesting because now you, you might begin to change the way you start trying to get shit out of your mind, out of like, you know, getting the thing you desire, pushing away, you stop defending as much too. You're defending against your own fucking mind. I mean, you know what I mean? Like so many people are super defensive all the time. They're trying to keep themselves from being hurt, which is really smart. But what they're defending themselves from is words, perceived opinions, real like high-level social animal shit. They're not defending themselves against bear attacks, lions, arrows. They're defending themselves against like psychic impacts. You know what I mean? So it's not even a danger. Like when someone says some shitty thing to you and you get triggered and then you react to that shitty thing, like experiment with not reacting. Like see what happens if you don't get revenge when the person does the thing to you, they always do that you get revenge for. You just don't get revenge. You just don't do the thing that you thought you had to do or they're going to do it again. Watch what happens. Nothing. You're fine. Nothing happens. You don't need the aggression, the defense. So yeah, man, that's really interesting to me. It's just your mind and you're at war with your own fucking mind. All day long for the rest of your life. All day long for the rest of your life every day. A raging war against yourself. I mean, again, I'm not saying that you don't need from time to time to step boundaries and tell someone don't fucking do that. But at least for me personally, a lot of the time, the stuff that like I was like getting all bristly about. It really was just my own. It was my own bullshit. There wasn't really anything to get bristly about or to defend against there. And when you start doing that kind of like internal piecework, man, all of a sudden, shit around you starts changing because it's your mind. The idea is if this is all your mind, then if your mind calm down, maybe all this stuff around you would calm down too. Yeah. That's the idea. It might actually be the same thing. So if you start getting calm, if you start getting a little space between you and your thoughts, just maybe just maybe that your enemies won't seem quite like enemies anymore. The people that you have been waking up in the middle of the night thinking about pouring acid in their mouth. Maybe you realize it's like the example that gets direct and then I'll shut the fuck up. I'm sorry, everybody. The example that I read was it's like someone shoots an arrow at you and they miss. It lands at your feet. This is when someone says something shitty to you or you get upset about something someone's doing. You don't see that person for weeks maybe. But the example is the arrow lands at your feet and you pick it up and you start stabbing yourself with the arrow going, why did they shoot me with this arrow? I can't believe they did that every time you bring them to your mind. Every time you wake up thinking about them, every time you have that fake conversation when you see him and you're going to one up him, that's just you going, yeah, why did they shoot me with this arrow? You're just massacring yourself with your own mind. You don't have to do that. You actually can stop. You don't have to constantly be stabbing yourself. Yeah, that's great advice. No, no, no, it really is great advice. And that's the problem with the human mind. It doesn't come with an owners manual and they all different. Again, some of them are lawnmowers, some of them are Ferraris. Well, I mean, we don't come with a fucking owners manual. Nothing. Yeah, and you're sorting out some of the most complex things. You're sorting out languages that are different, emotions that are different, cultures that are different, genders that are different, all these fucking different things being sorted out in real time why we melt the earth. Why the fucking oceans filled up with our garbage and the temperature keeps rising and everyone's like, don't worry. It's fine. Buy this Miami beachfront condo. Oh my God. Oh my God. Yeah, that's so sad. But the thing is like, but you know, there's too many variables. I don't think we have a mind that's designed for the variables that exist in modern society. There's too many variables because you're getting news from the entire world. So you're getting everything catastrophic that happens among seven point whatever billion people. exist in modern society. There's too many variables because you're getting news from the entire world. So you're getting everything catastrophic that happens among seven point whatever billion people. That's too much data. Okay. And you're interacting with people that are nowhere near you primarily. Most of your human interactions are coming via cyber world, which is fucking bizarre to accept. And then on top of that, you're probably having to sit through traffic and you're probably stacked on top of a bunch of people in an apartment building. Yeah. And you're probably annoyed that there's so many fucking people around you. Well, it's an unnatural state. Yeah. For most people, right, most people. And it's it's all rapidly changing while we remain the same. So it's all putting these new demands on us. Yeah. Why we remain the same biological entity that existed when the railroad was a big freak out. Yeah. So trains are going to kill people. They go too fast. That's what they thought. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think like 35 miles an hour or 25 after 35. You're dead. Fucking meat. People are just going to kill. It was the same thing we did with 5G. They were doing that with trains. And they're like, well, they might be real though, they might be getting us right now. 5G. Yeah. Is that happiness? You know what someone said to me about 5G? What? They said that 5G is eventually going to evolve to the point where it could be implemented as like a radar system in someone's home. I said that. Is that you? Yeah. I read that. Tell me what you said. Oh, damn it, Joe. You know, man. Again, let me just we're in clown suits. You know what? We're in fucking clowns. I'm sorry for God. It was you the toll. So no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, I don't care. Here's the thing. Whatever I say after this, it's probably wrong. But I did because I go on really weird rabbit holes in the internet. And the problems I don't remember where I get the data from. Okay. Jamie will find the data. Okay. But what was the premise of it? Primis is that potentially 5G could be used as some kind of radar system that like it's so powerful that you could theoretically see people moving inside of buildings using 5G somehow. There might be a way to like look at the way the 5G is being like, I don't know. But doesn't that make sense though that like ultimately that's going to happen. And if we have phones and everybody carries a phone with them. Right. So you know where you're unless you're one of those really rebellious ultra marathon runners who puts this fucking phone in his desk drawer when he gets in a work and just leaves it there. Okay. Most people have their phone on them. So there's proximity tracking, right? Yeah. You know where you are at all points in time. And if you have some sort of a thing that's just like, you know, the misinformation and mal information boards are requiring that we install these and all chips. And all that is doing is utilizing 5G to get a sense of everything that's in the space. Right. It would be, I don't know if it's possible with today's technology, but that doesn't seem outrageous at all. But they would, it's just the fact that you can send a fucking video instantaneously to your friend and Italy like that. Like that. You send a video, they get it on their I message. Oh shit, that looks cool. That is wild. The idea that it could track your movements and know the 3D space around it, that doesn't even seem outrageous. It's not that outrageous. I mean, yeah, I don't think people really like to deal with how surveilled we already are in because the surveillance is being is broken up among a fast computers 5G networks and radar that passes through walls are bringing X ray vision closer to reality. It's real. Yeah, it makes there you go. So there it is. So that was ideas like because I got it's real. Well, I mean, we would have cut it out. Yeah. We don't want to get in trouble with the new information. That would do that information. That would be, that would be misinformation. Let's even worse than malformation. Dude, imagine if like the shit got in your house. That's where it gets really creepy. Like somehow the fact you're like, all right, well, it's, it's just the ministry of truth on Twitter, whatever dude, Twitter's dumb. I don't care anyways. Just the ministry of truth on Facebook or instead I don't care. That's what TikTok is. Who TikTok, whatever. I don't fucking care. You really don't care. It's like, but imagine if it was just on screens in your house, right? Like hanging in your house. There was, I don't know, just a light that if someone starts speaking misinformation, it starts glowing red or something. And you're like, Oh, shit. Who's that thing you just said? It's like the light's blinking. So it's bullshit. It would be, it would be fucking horrible. It would be scary. But somehow because it's like, we still externalize the social media as like an outside space, even though it's in our house, it's in our pockets right next to us all the time. Yeah. It seems like, all right, you know, the whatever that is, it's just on the outside. It's not on the inside yet. But it's really it's, it's kind of is you turn on the TV. I don't care what you're fucking watching man. I mean, it's like, okay, it's fucked up that everybody knows that most of our politicians in some way, shape or form are making money from various. How much do you think they make? Like how much do you think Obama's worth? Let's take it. And calculus. Let's take a guess. A billion a billion? How much do you think he's worth, Jamie? Cool Price is right. 500 million sounds like a good number. I go with, I'll go lower. I'll go three. Three. Three's good. Three's reasonable. He's a reasonable man. Let's see. Well, those numbers are wrong. The how much is someone's worth? Maybe. No, I think that'd probably be pretty public. It's like a new lot in must type deal. When I type with everything saying 70, 70 million, that's it. Well, again, we're talking about like the way this gets quantified quantification mechanism is like what's it worth? What's the value of it? Yeah, billions. Yeah, you can. You like it's like they have shit. We will never even hear about Twitter for 44 billion. What do you think it's worth to be the president? You know, that should put it into perspective right? Twitter's worth 44 billion. What's it worth to be the president in the United States? It's gotta be worth 20. Yeah, I'm also seeing Michelle's worth at least 70 also. How long? It's a lot of money. Congratulations. Look, he was a great president. I have out all the presidents that would speak. I would like to just see him speak. He was really good at giving speeches. He's a fantastic statesman. You know, whatever whether or not, you know, he, you know, I don't know the fuck knows what it's like to be the president. But as far as like a representative of the United States, I think he was the best ever. The best ever. We've got that wonderful interview he did. I don't remember what show he was on, where they asked him about UFOs. And he like really did a kind of micro pause or something like you up in the UFO boards. It always pops up every once in a while. It's like this weird moment where he's like, I can't talk about that. But it's like on his face, you kind of see this like thing that if you're in a UFO is you're like, Oh, fuck, he's like, bummed that he can't talk about it. But you know something. I'm sure they know something. I don't know how much the president gets to know because the problem is a guy like Trump, like what would keep him from blabbing? If they told him, I mean, he was on a show once and they asked him about UFOs too. And he said something about he knows some things, but he can't talk about him. Yeah, there's a lot of it. That saying that is that means the real. If you say you know some things, you can't talk about him. You're essentially saying the real. Because if it's like, it's all nonsense, wouldn't you tell the people it's all nonsense? Tell us it's nonsense. Sir, make me sleep well at night. Yeah, you're the president. Yeah. You say this of things I know and I can't talk about him. I mean, I think that's I think that's basically what he said. But we're, aren't we post thinking UFOs are fake now? Like I like now, if you know, if you believe UFOs are bullshit, you're in a minority now because you're talking about the US government is doing like hearings where they are saying, yeah, some of this stuff we don't know, but we've picked it up. So it's the phenomenon is real. It's no longer just swamp gas. Like the question is how many of them are drones? How many of them are super sophisticated drones from other countries? How many of them are drones that we have that are top secret, just like the blackbird and stealth bomber and all these different things they've worked on? How many of those are top secret drones? And then is there anything that's not like that tiktik one that commander David Freaver found off the coast of San Diego in 2004? That's the craziest one because there's multiple jets watch this thing. They got it on radar. They got it. They got visual. They got a video of it taken off at an insane rate of speed. They don't know what the fuck that thing was. No visible heat signature moving at speeds that are impossible to describe how fast it is going from 50,000 feet to 50 in a second. Yeah, because that's how they said it just appeared there. You know, because I think a radar blip is at a second. How long does the rate is? I would say like continuous now. How do they work? Do they work the same way they used to work in those old movies? Remember like closing counters? You see the things in the radar? Oh, I mean, it's like now it's just like it's looking at ripples or something. Like it's there's no space in between. It's just instantaneously. You could see whatever the fuck it is. So whatever the fuck this thing was, they tracked this and this thing moved it away that is indescribable. Look, they can't they can't imagine some way using the methods that we know about propulsion systems and applying it to this craft and getting it to move the way it did. We, we've said this, I've said this on I feel like we said everything once on your podcast by now, but like coral reef, some blind creatures start developing an optic nerve. And all of a sudden, one day after billions of years or millions of years evolution, the eye opens. You see the coral reef instead of just having to like sense movement and the fucking coral reef. Yeah. That's going to be a crazy moment for the first thing to see that when all it's been feeling are these like weird shifts and movements. So probably whatever this technology is and if you like go like, Terrence McKenna and look at technology as some kind of, you know, a pindage of the planet, some new like sensory apparatus that's appearing out of the collective, then probably we're just getting the ability to see what's really out there. And what's really out there is probably what people have been saying for thousands of years, people who spent life times meditating in the forest and went through all this weird shit and they started seeing it too. What's out there is innumerable forms of life and intelligence that aren't locked into the classic idea of what life looks like, carbon based life or just starting to see the gods. That's what they used to call them the gods, angels, whatever. There's David's or Jen. And that's what our technology is. It's starting to pick it up. Yeah, enabling us to see something that's always been here. Always just living with us like we're and we're gonna have to deal with that. It's gonna make sense that we've been colonized a long time ago and they just go in and out of the ocean. Do as they please move in ways that we can't track. We don't understand. And it wasn't until really, really recently that they even be able to use radar to detect them. When was the invention of radar? Right. Yeah. What's that 150 years? No idea. When did they figure out radar? Imagine before radar. What would you see? Yeah. You don't have a video. There's no video yet. No video. Video didn't even start happen until the 1800s, right? So what point of time? Well, they're supposed to like have like an accurate it would be so easy to spy on us. You had to be laughing into a pyramid if you stop. You had to take a chance. Oh, and that's Mike. He's full of shit. He's always talking about being visited by gods. You're carving a UFO into the pyramid again. Stop it. Stop riding on the pyramid. You know, when you discuss ancient civilizations and you look at the great pyramids of Egypt and all the structures there's so magnificent that you have to wonder like what was that society like? What was that culture like when those things were up and running? What was that like, man? Yeah, because I am I mean, I'm absolutely not an archaeologist or a historian. But when I look at those structures and someone says that those things are 5,000 years old and you think about how long ago that was, how fucking smart were those people? Very smart. What how what how did they know all that? How did they do it? What was it like living amongst them? What the fuck man? The great period of Jesus like 2,300,000 stones. Yeah, they're monstrous. They're so the way it's engineered is so beyond imagination that 5,000 years ago people could do but obviously they did. So what were they like, man? And what happened? What is I think it's the Graham Hancock Randall Carlson idea? Yeah, for sure. I think that we at human beings had reached a very high level of sophistication and we got fucking flatlined again by comet impacts. Yeah, that's the younger dryest impact theory and it makes a fuckload of sense when you see things like the pyramids. When you see things like all these old structures, especially one thing can't really date that well. Like that's the dirty secret about that carbon dating stuff. You got to date carbon. You're not going to date rocks. Right. So you have to find like organic material in between the rocks stuff that's around the rocks. Right. You don't really know when everybody cut it. You just make a really good assessment based on the carbon based data. You know, but the thing is like you can't you don't know when they cut that when they move that right. When did how many thousands of years did it take to set up the civilization? Where the fuck did it come from? Right. How did they get these stones that were many tons from a quarry that was 500 miles away? How did they do that? Like I think that's the story of some of the stones in the Kings chamber? They figured see if this is correct. I think they figured out that some of the stones in the Kings chamber were from 500 miles away. The Kings chamber is the one that looks like a factory or something. Like it's weird. Like the one that's like in the what is the chamber? The Kings chamber they I don't know why they call the Kings chamber. I think it might have to do with just the size of the stones and that magnificent of it. Yeah. Whatever the fuck that was. I don't know why that why do they call the Kings chamber? So anyway, see if you if you find the Kings chamber, the stones for the Kings chamber were cut from a quarry 500 miles away. Google that. See if that's correct. Because I think that was one of the big mysteries. Like how the fuck are they moving this stuff? It's not even that it was like right next to it and they slowly rolled them in the place. They took it from 500 miles away. Archaeologists uncover the scariest. Yeah, look at that. The pyramid stones were known to be transported from over 500 miles away. But archaeologists do not agree on how the ancient Egyptians, I guess it probably says pulled that off. That's just the headline. How the fuck could they do it? There's a new article on construction. That's from 2017. Oh, super new. But all of it is just guessing. The bottom line is those there's so many stones. I think the numbers that I had a bit on it. If you cut in place 10 stones a day at 664 years for one pyramid. So they think they pulled them on ropes and pulleys and shit. But dude, they're they're cut so perfectly. You can't get a razor blade in between them. I mean, that's why it's what's funny is like we to try to understand stuff. We obviously we try to use a precedent like our own technology. So we use the height of our technology and then try to think about how they did it. But before talking about, I mean, it's possible that we only exist. Well, we exist in more than one reality like that we're in that we're in time space right now. But there's aspects of us that are outside of time space. There's aspects of us that we call our solar, whatever. It's some hyper dimensional formation that like flowers with each incarnation like when a flower blooms, that's your life and then it dies and another flower blooms. That's your next life and another flower blooms. So if that's what's going on and some civilization figured that out so that instead of being unconscious about the greater whatever the fuck it is, the the hyper dimensional tree that we're all like fruiting on, then God knows what you could do in that point. You could just make the tree grow a pyramid maybe, you know, like in the same way it grew you. You know, you could just make it like like bring stones from who knows, you know, we think we're so advanced. Like I'm sure that however cognizant a monkey is like when it's like using a tool or showing its friends how to use a tool or its kids how to like break open a nut or how to use the stick to get the ants out. I'm sure it's like we're very advanced like this is a very advanced thing it's doing. It probably thinks it's like advanced if it could think that. Similarly, we think we're so fucking advanced with our internet and all that stuff. It just might be that like we're the same way we're just putting a stick and a ants nest. But Jamie just pulled up there is what the pyramid originally looked like. That gold capstone. It had a gold capstone. It was covered I think it was in limestone. Is that what it was covered with? Yeah, this is the thing I have pulled up says then 13 0380. There's an earthquake that loosened up some of it and I guess that's when it took it all. And then the people start stealing it and they use it to build stuff. Of course, which is so dumb. Imagine, imagine they stole pieces of rock from one of the greatest constructions human beings have ever known to build whatever shitty thing there we go. Probably a toilet. There's probably someone shitting in the fucking stones of the pyramid. You build by the great masters. A hundred percent. Go up to the pyramid find a stone that you like in your bidet. I'm going to build a sauna. Yeah, outside of the pyramid. No one's using the pyramid anymore. Just grab some rocks from there. I want my whole house built with it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the whole thing with stone. They stole all of it. Yeah. That's what's so nuts. I mean, to me, that's what's really I love that stuff because it's like, what did that look like? Such a mystery and it's so interesting to get born into a civilization and to have this sense of like knowing shit. Like that's a big part of being alive right now. I was like, we all think we're so fucking we think we know everything. Like because you can Google it and you just think even if you don't know it, you think the answer is out there somewhere. Sure. When you you live in this crazy world where you think everything's been figured out, it's all been worth the cutting edge or the cutting edge of like even though throughout history, doctors have in a lot of ways been consistently wrong. You know what I mean? Like the whole bleeding and leaching and then before that, whatever the weird medieval like ways people would treat disease, you know, like craze like take a rag horse piss and wrap it around their head and then like put them above a fire for three days. It'll cure their pox and everyone believes in their life. Oh yeah, that'll work. But now we're all like, no, no, no. Now we figured out medical technology for sure. Like we a hundred percent know everything about the way the human body works, which is why when you go into a doctor, you know, depending on who the doctor is, you mentioned some other possible therapy, they'll laugh you out of the room. They're like, get the fuck out of here. That's quackery. And sometimes they're right. But sometimes they're prior to wrong. I mean, my point is, it's just funny because you have to live in a world where you are surrounded by people who think in one way or really leaning into the idea that we've all kind of worked the thing. We figured out humanity. We figured out the planet. We know what the climate is. We know what medical sciences and how the body works. We understand germs, viruses, diseases and history. We fucking know how the pyramids were built. Will you please stop saying they, we instead it. It was people taking it from quarries. We figured it out. So don't you don't need to look into that anymore because we figured it out when probably we really haven't figured out much of anything. Probably what's really going on is so astounding that if you actually saw what it was, you might die. You might just blip out of reality or cease to exist. It's so wild. Whatever It's an alternative version of history. And the alternative version is that there's actual evidence that the earth was assaulted by comet impacts around 12,000 years ago. And there's also actual evidence of construction that's almost impossible to do today. Certainly in a lifetime, like to make the great pyramid of geese. If you had one lifetime, do you really think they could move that many stones cut in place along with all of the fucking extraction of the stones from the quarries and all the engineering involved. Making sure that how much time was it going to take to make something with 2,600,000 stones from a quarry 500 miles away. I have to imagine it's going to take a long fucking time. So we know for sure that someone a long fucking time ago had that kind of engineering and genius. And then we also know that human beings, even in America, just a couple hundred years ago, were living like stone age folks at the exact same time. Yeah, the Comanche were using, they were using bows and arrows and riding horses. You mean when the pyramids were thousands of years later, thousands of years later, humans are hunting buffalo on horseback with sticks, different humans, different parts of the world. That's nuts. It's nuts. I think if you think about how quickly people went from that, like the riding horses and shooting things off a horseback, which was like, you know, obviously the the bulls, that's how they did war. So that's the 1200s, right? So like that's not that long. That's 800 years ago. If you think about the pyramids being 5000 years ago from 800 years ago to now, from 800 years ago to horseback, drinking horse milk with blood mixed in, because that's how you're going to stay alive when you're on this long campaign. Crazy to get in a train and it goes 500 miles an hour to get on a plane, you fly to another country. That's only 800 years. Imagine if they had achieved that the way like the Mongols were, but they did it like at 4000 BC, right, 6000 BC. And we have thousands of years of people figuring things out in a different way than we have, right? They're using stone. What did they, what did they have electricity? What kind of knowledge did they have about life? What did they have universities? How did they, how did they figure out all the things? They know how did they figure out all this design and construction and stuff. How many thousands of years imagine if we had an uninterrupted history with no catastrophes and no wars, an accurate historical representation by the people that lived here at the time from every fucking year, 9,000 years ago, right? 17,000 years ago. When did it start? That would be so cool. You can look at tweets from 17,000 years ago. God, that would be funniest. Fuck, you know what? It made people calm down a little bit, wouldn't it? Like if you could go back and look at tweets from the from 700 BC and like realize how insignificant you are in that vast scope of time, that would be a really good for us, man. I think that's part of the problem is that those big gaps in what we know about civilization have created this like really terrible. I don't know what you would call it like some kind of like societal narcissism or some kind of like crazy idea that like, no, no, you're your life. Like right this life that you're in right now, this 70 years span in the midst of this ocean of time, no, no, no, for sure it's the most important life. Definitely. Like out of the stacks of bones, like bones, definitely you could make like a bridge of bones that would probably what go all the way to Mars. Like if you took all the people who lived on the world and had their bones, I bet you could do a bridge of bones to Mars. Some Mars. Ask to wear a belt of bones. A boat just yeah, right exactly, but your life is definitely super the most important life. No, for sure. Like really like you really need to be all up in everybody's shit because it's so like right now. This is it. The most important. No, this is it for real. This is it. It produces this crazy hyper active way of living. Like you know what? Like people don't you know, people don't say they're happy anymore. You know what they say instead of happy? I'm excited. You don't even say happy anymore. It's like excited as the means you're happy. I'm excited. But like being excited. It doesn't feel that good. Like you really look at it. It's like kind of getting bolted by electricity. You know, like being excited. It's okay. But if you really look at the feeling. I would be happy too. I prefer happy and peaceful too. Yeah. Excited. Excited. I'm excited to watch Terafire two tonight. You know what I mean? I've got like a little hook in me. Right. But when you went to see Roger Waters, weren't you excited? Yeah, of course. I mean, I'm not saying it. That's what I mean. I'm not saying it's bad. I'm just I like being excited. I mean, fuck, I love being excited. It's fun. But it's it's it doesn't be like the for me. I don't want that to be the number one thing I'm going for. Like the other you know that that you know that thing that happens after like I don't know day six of a successful vacation. You know what I mean? Like you're like, you know what I mean? Like, you know what I was Yeah. That's not excited. Like I wouldn't call that excited. I like that too. That's a nice thing. That's my favorite. The best. I used to hate vacations because I used to freak out and say, I've got to work. I should be working. I'm not working. This is stupid. I'm getting behind. So dumb. So dumb. You got you need a break off of stuff. You need a some, even if it's like a little break, like a yoga class, something. You need a break where you're not thinking about the something takes you out of it where you're not in the day to day grind all the time. Yeah. And you can find things. You know, for some people, it's the fucking a game they play. Maybe they play tennis with their friend. They get together every Tuesday. That fucking Tuesday. Look forward to it so much. Yeah. Maybe they're playing darts or pool or whatever the fuck it is. You need a break. That's why those activities exist. They don't exist because people are like fucking fruitless and lazy and they don't want to be productive. No, they exist because like people have always found merit in things that allow you to put yourself in a different state of mind and whether it's hypnosis or exercise or a fucking game of chess, whatever it is, like we value those things. Sure. Those are important. Aren't they the most important? Not well. I don't know most, but they're super fucking important. And I think we think of them frivolously. The problem was like things like video games because video games can be an incidiously addictive because in many ways are more stimulating than real life. Like you and I both had like major problems with video games. Oh my god. Major problems. Oh my god. So addicted to world warcraft unbelievably. Hearthstone got me to I have managed though to only play video games for like seven hours a day now. No, I'm in control of it. I've gotten it down to like maybe like an hour and a half maybe if I but also lately I've just sort of got like it doesn't interest me as much. Like I do you have this a weird thing I'm noticing is like do you ever like when you when you break an addiction to video games or whatever you don't miss the video game or whatever you're addicted to but you miss the addiction itself. You know what I'm talking to where you're like I kind of liked being addicted. Yeah, I like being stuck. It was like kind of cool to be as you know what you have to do. You got to play. Got to play. Got to play. Got to make that. You know what you have to do. You're going to play that day. It gives you secure. When I get home, I'm going to play. Yes. Yes. Yeah. And when that's gone, now what are you going to do? And guys who have shit jobs, jobs have jobs they hate but a really good internet connection. Oh, can't wait to get home. Yeah, and when that's gone now, what are you gonna do and guys who have shit jobs jobs guys have jobs? They hate but a really good internet connection. Oh Can't wait to get home fire up some fucking World of Warcraft fire up some what do they play what's the big one they play online? All these combat ones right yeah, isn't it like it's not call a duty play that it's just a big Jamie New one just came out that fucking that kind of shit is so addictive to people because it's so thrilling and You get no consequences when you get killed other than you feel like shit fuck you got me They're so realistic My god, so good. They look so good. I've been tricked by racing ones when I see a racing video I obviously they're just like on my phone, but I think I look at it I go my god that looks real if I saw it on the screen it probably looked fake But some of them look fucking real. Oh my god. They're incredible dude I you know, I pull up one of the racing video games Yeah, you see on a big screen see how good it looks because they it looks like real fucking cars if you're in that thing in That state of mind like constantly That's so thrilling thrilling so thrilling. Yeah, I mean people build like simulators Mmm my my front Peter has one. Yeah. He's like a serious driver though. He drives. Yeah. So he's training. Yes He's actually training. Yeah. Look at this. Oh my god. Look at these guys on motorcycle These guys are riding motorcycles in the fucking rain and they're racing. This is so insane Oh my god. This is so fucking insane. Oh Jesus and they're wiped out. Oh my god. I made it What game is this? Moto GP this seems so real dude the water on the windshield I'm getting this game as soon as I'm so real Obviously, I don't know shit about racing motorcycles, but the way it looks it looks like this is actually happening It's real man. I race a lot. It's definitely exactly what it's like. Do they race in the rain like this? I don't know they must that's crazy dude I Mean isn't it crazy enough to already be racing a motorcycle, but the dude in the fucking rain. Holy shit Look at that You know how fucking thrilling that must be though bump into each other and shit fuck that that game's too realistic It's too realistic dude What game is this so this is on the dry like okay? Slightly less realistic for some reason. Yeah, there are Reflections help there. Yeah, I think also the the water like dropping onto the screen I think that fucking really brings you into it. Like oh my god. This is really happening. We're getting wet Man, it's crazy where it's going Joe. It's just nuts. Do they really race in the rain like that? I'm gonna check race motorcycle That seems so insane that they would do that. Oh my god Do they do okay? Oh my god. This is insane so wet Put your foot down Just trying to balance Dude, this is so crazy. Oh my god. They bump it into each other. You're allowed to bump No, man, you know allowed but if it happens to happen yeah, you kind of just say whoops or yeah, bro When you get warning this is not this is less realistic. Oh my god You like he like fist pumped while he's wiping. It's like cuz he's saying he's okay. Oh my god He's gonna get back on it Got to be careful in that wet grass. He's okay. She's how good are these motorcycles? You can fucking wipe out in them. Oh shit Oh my god And he just lied. It's probably fun. I don't know. Well That's a good feeling that fell like a champion I would have fallen head foot head foot head foot Broken ankle broken arms to fucked up neck. This is where like I kick her out of the idea that Upon death it may just be that man. It might just be that like the whole fucking thing People watch us like we watch like video games. They're like look look at the way he died Can you fucking believe it? Did you see how he would he fell out of a building splattered all over the ground? That was nuts look he's getting back up going back in the game It's like I think that could really be what's going on man is is this shit Just keeps getting in this whatever this little bubble we're in it always gets more advanced it always gets more hypnotic It always gets more spectacular We die we take a break then we pop back in what game is that? This is that they're showing off the new Video credits trying to show you this something like this. Oh my god. This is incredible. Yeah, the lighting is well Look this is these are great games. This might not even be a game. This is really probably just a demo So these are like little tiny toy cars that you're racing It's showing off this four thousand series video card which is about to come out Oh my god very soon and that was making that and video does they always make the best ones right look at that The 49 D is what it's called but then the RTX is the ray tracing which ray tracing is what you want. It's the flicking scene Dude if you've seen Joe, if you see this is amazing Have you seen the Virtual react okay, so like I know you've seen cuz I've seen it probably sent you too many eclipse of weird AI shit Like AI animation okay, have you seen the AI animation that? Is in VR so it's the same shit. I'm sending you except the VR itself is being generated Do you want to can I show you one of these? Jamie would you mind going on? I think it's deformed on Twitter and then scroll down and somewhere he's posted Really like at the very top of his tweets. It says like AI virtual reality. It's both the name of his account deformed DE D forum like forum but with D yeah, that's it D F OR you I think deformed I've got to stay with a fusion VR real-time Stay yeah check this shit out So it's in VR the AI is generating the space in VR so it's really fucking trippy looking oh Yeah, that's it Yeah, dude It's just like building it inside the virtual react so it's building these structures in VR and they're changing and morphing as you're walking around This VR Exactly tripping ball probably with prompts. It's like start it's like you know just shifting and changing the AI is Just generating new environments instantaneously growing them. That's that moment where it's probably it's like in the beginning process of generating a new environment New environment and then it's like and that's gonna get faster and faster. So it's like happens instantaneously Isn't that wild? Oh my god, dude Yeah, you know kind of crazy horror games. They're gonna be able to make with these things Well, dude, it's I can't even imagine like it's you know immersive That's gonna be and how fucking addictive that's gonna be Yeah, man I mean and also that you're gonna be wearing augmented reality goggles or glasses that are doing the same thing to your environment in real time so like you're you know this this stable to future shit, man You can give it a like an mp4 just a video clip and it'll take every frame and then Generate like a new image based on the image. It's not deep-faking you could like you know I took a video Johnny Pemberton and like It's like Johnny Pemberton wrapping in studio shirtless gold chains and you know he's wearing a shirt, but it took That video and over each clip no shirt goal change Made a music studio around him that kind of undulates in and out like over eat so it's like this to me man This is like gonna check this is gonna change everything It's like once it's wearable and you can just decide you know today Can you put me in a prime-worthy or forest so like wherever I go? everything's just like trees and dinosaurs and stuff and that's the reality that you see that's what you're gonna See it's gonna take in real time all the shit around you and then put over it whatever the fuck you want It's gonna be able to wear it on your face and that's when that's when the that's the apocalypse I mean that's like where we are all living in different realities you'll be hanging out in anywhere in a mall and Everyone in the mall is gonna be experiencing a different version of the fucking mall some people are gonna be in a castle Some people are gonna be walking through a pyramid or you know in some kind of like space station That's where we're headed. I mean that's proof of it man. I mean that's right now That's seems slow in the sense you have to watch it fill itself in There would probably be a selling point of some malls that our escalators are designed to enhance your AR experience Yeah, for sure. So we we have fully compatible AR escalators so you ask later becomes a moat yeah man to walk across a drawbridge Think of cults in the age of AR where the cult leader gives you special These are like our special prototypes you wear these and you will see the world as father sees it See you put the vibe you know what I mean you put the vibe and you're seeing like a world that is Created by the co-leader or Imagine dude fucking like a tyrannical government that like forces the citizens to wear the goggles that project They live it's they live in reverse. I guess yeah Yeah, they live they live except they force you to wear the goggles. So if you're not wearing or like You wear goggles that are the color of whatever like political part of you align with so like you know I mean you see somebody wearing blue goggles and you're like oh fuck Yeah, right. Look, you know that stupid world. They're seeing too much plastic actually gets recycled Yeah, they're goggles show carbon emissions. Yeah, yeah, show the names of homeless people so they like make them human whereas like some other goggles They just turn like homeless people into like beautiful floral displays or something You know, I mean like it's gonna be like it's gonna be like that It's gonna be like that You know you want to be surrounded You want everyone that you're around to be like the most beautiful naked Woman then that's what it's gonna be. It's like you want that. That's what you're gonna get with the people running these Simulations and these AR are they gonna be in trance with it too? Are they gonna be the people that are creating these? Or are we just gonna give it up to AI? Like we're gonna give up to power to AI or people gonna be curating these experiences for people curate I mean it's gonna I think it's gonna come to a point in time where they can't do that anymore I think it'll be like well You know like when I've been doing this text to art shit You actually it takes time To figure out the right prompts to get it to make the thing you want it to make like like a mid-journey Which is this incredible text to RDA? You kind of part of the fun is you sit there like You know trying to like think of like what is the what is it that we want this thing to make like And it's fun you can kind of do it like one night. I was like With like Justin Royland a bunch of these other artists. We're all trying to do different versions of like bill cosbee Eating beautiful sausages and like just trying to type in different versions of it on mid-journey to like make it like like To dial in whatever the fuck Bill Cosby on a roller coaster made a human baby me You know shit like that just to see what you can make but you really do have to figure out the prompts So I think initially it's definitely gonna be curated by people who know how to generate the prompts and make it make whatever the fuck it is but Gradually it's gonna get better at better at understanding what it is you're wanting and then at that point It'll probably be like you know You'll be more in control of what you're seeing on your screen at first and then in VR and then in AR I would say and then who knows you knows man I mean, I'm sure there's like gonna be popular like in the way there's popular Instagram videos, right? There's gonna be popular worlds where you upload your world experience to some new version of Instagram and You know our TikTok or whatever. It's like oh, yeah, I'm gonna try I'm gonna put on that dude's fucking world experience. It's Awesome, you know it probably it'll be more like that curated VR or AR world experiences. There'll be people who are really good at making them and then you know There's gonna be people who are like You know Become like the Steven Spielberg of Augmented reality like reality replaced wouldn't be curated shit become like the NBC CBS ABC version and then there's gonna be a blockchain version of AI where everybody agrees to have no centralized power and it just all gets created and curated and adjusted by the people That work inside the system. That's the forum. That's the ability you dude when I was I was I was I You know I'm saying like that would like eliminate cults. That's the ability AI dude. That's the people making this shit I'm like they are like I couldn't find who made it. I had to like dig deep Just to find who is like making this technology Available I couldn't find it because they're making it open source and their whole thing is what you're talking about It's all Collaborative AI by the people for yeah, dude. Yeah, okay, and it was hard to find like this technology is the most mind-blowing shit out there And it was hard to find who's behind it that might be this concept behind this and the idea behind that that might be the cure If this is the way that humanity Interacts and exchange information from here on out imagine if that becomes the norm. Yeah That could be the norm and if that's the norm that might be our way out of this if there's a way where you can get out of Centralize power and the way is that it's almost impossible to avoid just like it's impossible to not have a cell phone now You know it's impossible. I mean you can do it people have done it. Yeah, people wear flip phones You can be a renegade you can but most people don't Right what if it becomes like that with this and what if it becomes like that with Decentralized AI and if we all agree that this is the best way to and there's no Manipulation there's no coercion for you to opt in to a corporate control day are right like why would I do that? I want to do that. I'm gonna what why would I only watch the big bang theory when I want to watch Game of Thrones Right I watch Game of Thrones fuck you and it's gonna be like that with the way you interact with reality Yeah, people are gonna gravitate towards these ones that aren't controlling the be a bunch of fake ones that are controlled by Russia Right when people get sucked into these ones and those ones be manipulative, but I think ultimately just like what the internet is doing for the exchange of information It's kind of like putting it in the hands of people that really never would have gotten into that position if they were involved in the corporate system Maybe it would be like that with AI as well. I mean The stuff is most certainly being like at least you know that stuff is open source you when you Are working with it you like it's like man. I'm telling you it's like wizard It's like going into a wizard's library or something you're having to like pull out these weird tombs called Collabs these weird things on github like shit. I don't know. It's so fucking arcane and like You know like going on YouTube channels like profit of the singularity to like The name of the huge channels profit of the singularity to get tutorials on how to make the shit work And it's all just people sharing information. That's what I love about it Just people like okay I figured out how to do this and then I figured out how to do that all going on in the background Just like what you were saying earlier while we're all at each other's fucking throats the midterm Elections are coming at the fate of the bakras allies in your vote in the background these Well, I don't know who they are wizard Transhumanist AI people are just tapping coach Okay, we're gonna make that a smarter. We're gonna make it a little smarter. I think you may as smart here Let's make it smarter there. Can we make it understand language better? Yeah, we can let's see if we can make it translate really bad audio and Perfectly clear speech. Okay, we can do that. Let's just keep doing all that going on in the background And where it gets interesting is like they're sharing their information here you go We figured it out here you go and then some other wizard gets it and I'm like, okay I can make that better and then it gets a little better and a little better and then the AI Starts making it better on its own. It's like, oh, maybe I'll analyze this the things my master has created And then let's see if I can make myself better That's that's how you get to McKenna Singularity. It's open source Collaboration between these geniuses and they don't honestly. I don't think they give a fuck who it is working on it like anybody can like Participate it's really cool man. It's really badass. I feel so excited to stumble upon it because that's amazing It's amazing that I thought that maybe the future and then it's a real thing that's happening right now tuned in to it you which is why I was like it's stability. I cuz like I just discovered that it's like real punk rock man It's real. Yeah. Well, I think that's what we need right once. I'm coffee. I love some kids No, you got a So hard to see you here. I already blind as a back. No, no, no, no, what's up? Cannals are getting a little dark. Yeah, thanks Jamie. Thanks for hearing us old man. Yeah, but we are going blind There's no if and there but I've managed to put a halt to most of it It's a supplement and I don't know. I wonder if Sonna use has a factor in the cold plunge as a factor But diet has a factor. We talked about Paul Saladino sent me some data on Seed oils and they're connecting seed oils and consumption of seed oils, which is in fucking everything To macular degeneration to some some people's vision issues. See those that was that what it was Make sure that that's correct seed oils. Yeah, seed oils like what seeds like grape seed oil and industrial seed oils that were originally industrial lubricants so macular degeneration vegetable oils transphats including soybean canola corn and cotton seed oils as well as had Raj needed and partially oh click on that because we Broad the sun before do you have macular degeneration? Yeah, it's old people's eyes don't work that's when it gets darker and like when you're driving It seems really dark. Mm-hmm. So this is what we so this is the what it says here in this article on What is it nutritional weight and wellness? and it's bringing up Trishnipsot board certified epitheologist featured fascinating discussions on the important nutrition connections to age related macular degeneration That's what we have You may be surprised to learn that AMD is leading cause of irreversible vision loss and blindness in the developed world Inflammation and reduced blood oxygen flow causes damage to the photo receptors Rods and cones and the blood vessels the macula of the retina symptoms of a and d including In include blurred vision got it blind spots. I'll have that yet difficulty seeing in dim light Yep, I got that and difficulty switching to night vision all which will only get worse over time great the retina the eye Okay here it is the soil vegetable oils and transphats include soybean canola corn and cotton seed oils as well as hydrogenated And partially hydrogenated oils undergo extensive heat and chemical processing by the end of that process they're oxidized damaged and cause inflammation to all the tissues in our bodies including our eyes That insult injury these types of fats also make their way into most man-made and high sugar foods such as cakes pastries fried food salad dressings dips margarine coffee creamers cooking oils and more That's literally on my right or a double whammy of inflammation for our eyes Yeah, well, this is a lugevir right I'm saying it right max lugevir and I talked about that on the podcast recently And where he's discussing the the nutritional benefits of olive oil how good olive oil is for you It's like a super food it's the opposite of what these things are these things are bad for you They cause inflammation all the oils actually good for you dude. Can you believe that shit like all those things? They just listed our Poison killing you And like no one really like understands that like it's making you go blind Well, they didn't know when they first started selling them You know, so the problem is they're already selling them like when they they used to think that saturated fat like butter Was the culprit and that you know You know the study about the sugar study where they paid scientists off to say that sugar was causing all these hard issues When they did that they created a narrative that everybody sort of bought into and that narrative is you want to Get away from saturated fat. So what's the what's the substitute? Oh, well you get these vegetable oils perfect vegetables are good for you Right vegetables are good for you right? So if it will vegetable oil must be better for you Right, but then you find out about the processing involved and the oxidation that it's they're damaged and that it causes inflammation and Dude, I feel like shit when I have a salad and it's got like some shitty salad dressing on it. It's always like My stomach feels gross. Yeah, right But when I have a salad with like olive oil and like balsamic vinegarette, it's fucking great I love it like I was I used to think that I didn't like eating salads that made me feel gross And I realized no it's the fucking dressing Because I'm a dope and if I had like a nice Italian dressing a zesty I'll pour that shit all it's like you're pouring all these weird fucking oils all over your food Dude, that's so fucked up man like we all do it though. It's like my god You think you can be in hot as dressing. I will fucking dump it. I'll Sell it into a soup But you're being good. It's good. I'm eating a salad. I'm edgy super healthy Oh, meanwhile, it's not and then you get all puffed, but if you do it with olive oil, it is healthy That's the rub and I think a lot of like what these people are connecting like a lot of these people are talking about like Damages that vegetables do you maybe maybe it's the way you're putting on them too It could be that I mean how many people are cooking their vegetables in these These kind of oils a lot of people man a lot and they think they're doing it. No, lard is different lard is okay rendered fat Yeah, that's what beef tallow is it's rendered fat good news. Yeah rendered fat is actually good for you Which is crazy because you would say there's no way but actually that's like that's a fat that tolerates high heat's better It's a it doesn't you know like when you're cooking in high heats you are Good for you beef tallow is very good for it's just beef fat but like Chris go not good for you Is that what's in there though? What's in Chris go is lard well if lard means I think the old-school old-timey method That's what I'm using not process lard. I'm using like rendered pig fat these do use rendered bare fat bare fat was like super popular for a long time in this country Bears were very valued for their fat believe it or not I believe in this beef tallow Okay, so this is Chris vegetable vegetable oil. Oh shit originally cotton seed oil. I don't eat it I just for some reason thought that was lard It sounds like it's lard. That's why But see that's not good for you look what it says on all vegetable. Yeah. Oh, it must be good for you Vegetable it's got to be good for like eaten broccoli So we got duped by these fucking scientists in whatever was it like the 50s of 60s whenever they did that They pay these guys like 50 grand. It wasn't even a lot of money and they fucked up our entire food pyramid They they screwed up people's ideas of what's healthy and what's not healthy and they did it for fucking Be bribed Wow by the sugar industry. How many other things? Oh, but that's a nutty one dude because it still persists this day When you tell people that you only eat mostly meat yeah 50 years ago sugar industry quietly paid scientists to point the blame to fat Wow I mean it is a bonkers story So well there was a rise I think and what was it? arterial sclerosis what was a rise in specifically there was like some sort of a Health epidemic or rock coronary heart disease so this coronary heart disease rise started happening people were getting fatter And they were having artifacts. Yeah, and so they were like we got to figure out a way to not kill this fucking gravy Trame Ron we're on the state they have these internal documents that were clearly pointing to sugar-beated fucking dare before you See a bribe scientist. I can't believe that. It's amazing. I you know are we just you know idiots No, we just naive idiots that we are like astounded that humans could be that fucking evil to To to warp reality in a way to poison people for money like to me Right now it's crazy to me absolutely still happening right now. That's see that's where Work we get hacked right? Yeah, that's where the hacking happens because we want to feel safe You want to believe Why don't we've got to figure it out now and you want to believe that that there aren't people like that literal Warlocks like literal evil wizards making bad potions and Dispensing them to the people poisoning them and then trying to tell them that it's medicine well We'll go even further than that what people are capable of fentanyl people are capable of bringing fentanyl into the country Actually, that's actually misconception. It's really it's Actually Jimmy Kimmel had a monologue joke I mean fentanyl is scary and I know it's become a right versus left issue But this speaks to what we were talking about before Jimmy Kimmel had a monologue where he was talking about right-wing people Being scared of fentanyl coming into the border in the form of candy during Halloween. Oh Right, you know this is like that joke that keeps popping up What is it like nobody's got us give their fentanyl away? That's the joke right? There's like a million versions of it out there like who's gonna give their drugs away we broke this down with dr. Phil the problem is not that they're bringing candy in And dosing it with fentanyl the problem is the fentanyl that they're making could be misconstrued as candy by kids Some of it is like these little brightly colored pills and if you're a kid and You're for and you see that that looks like candy You're just gonna take it and put in your mouth kids put everything in their mouth You know that they stuck things up their nose. Yeah, dude. Yeah, that's what they do. So if that's laying around That's a concern That's a real concern. Is it a concern that people gonna like come across the border and give kids poison candy? Not I don't think that's the concern But to make light of this idea that the fentanyl issue is not a giant terrifying issue That's killing somewhere like a hundred thousand people of are dying of this drug every day and There was is there some dispute about that it's the number one killer of kids 18 to 45 I mean dude, it's in all the drugs. You said there was like some dispute right? It was the number one killer and like most people is Was like cancer and heart disease the number one killer of all people yeah that includes 18 to 49 Correct, so what is that's and then I would that's what it was digging into the article was like blaming an infant No, it was a little tough not that it was necessarily inaccurate, but it's not no one's keeping track of fentanyl deaths They don't even write it on a I think the deaths certificate that way. It's just opiate. Yeah, okay So let's just say opioid deaths. Let's not even say fentanyl I think that was what they were saying. I don't necessarily they were saying it was all fentanyl poisoning But you know, fentanyl is just the most potent form of opiate. Yeah, so what's the number one opioid is that the number one killer People 18 to 49 would be but is that what I'm saying is if if it's not fentanyl That's the number one killer is it opioids that are the number one killer people 18 to 49 Isn't fentanyl cheaper than heroin? That's the part. Well, it's way more potent if you could a tiny tiny tiny amount Can kill you like if you look at it in Relationship to a penny. It's like the tiniest part of a penny You know, there's a the political fact says heart disease cancer and covert outrank opioid Overdoses as leading causes of death among all American adults right the problem with COVID is if you are dying of opioids and you catch COVID and Then you die from COVID. That's a COVID death. You know of death among all American adults. Right. The problem with COVID is if you are dying of opioids and you catch COVID and then you die from COVID, that's a COVID death. You know what's funny, dude. So many people listening to your fucking podcast. There's probably someone making fentanyl right now listening to this shit. Like, come on, it's not that bad. A study by an advocacy group says that fentanyl is the leading cause of death for people ages 18 to 45 compared with other major causes of death such as automobile accidents, cancer and suicide. Heart disease, cancer and COVID-19 out-rack, out-rank opioid overdoses as leading causes of death among all American adults. I wonder though, we do, and I'm not discrediting the fact that people died from COVID, but we do know that a lot of people who died from COVID were already dying and they listed them as COVID deaths, including people with cancer. If you're taking opioids and your immune system is fucking destroyed and you're on your way out the door and you catch COVID, you're probably not going to make it. Did COVID kill you or were you already dying? Yeah. I mean, dude, or what's the actual number then? You know what I'm saying? Like, if you found that number and you tax it on. Wait, didn't Jamie scroll up, didn't it say 100,000 people a year? So right there, it said 56,000. Yeah, yeah. So it said there, it said in 2020, more than 56,000 people, but that is two years ago and it has gotten worse. 2021, nearly 70 million, 70,000. So CDC's online mortality database, 2021, nearly 70,000 people, 18 and older died. So that is a shy of 100, but still fucking crazy. Dude, that makes Jones town look like nothing. That's a large number of people. Think of that, man. Think of that. Like, if we could see like all those dead bodies, like, you know the videos of Jones town when they're all scattered around. Which is imagine a Super Bowl. It's a Super Bowl. The stadium filled with dead people. Yeah, in a year, every year, every year from over dose Holy fuck, man, that is crazy. That's crazy. That's a way to look at it. That really puts it in perspective. God damn, that shit must feel good. I've never done it, man. It must just be like, it must be the it must be an incredible. Well, I think it's just, it's probably amazing. But there's also the problem that they give it to you when you get hurt. And so it's hard to get off of. I know a bunch of people that have gotten injured and then they got on something. And then whatever that painkiller was, it had a really hard time getting off. Dude, I've flirted with that shit for a second and then something changed in my brain. I used to like it. I used to like taking like a viket in and like, I like the buzz, but then it's the weirdest thing, man. Just one day, it'd been a long time since I'd taken any of them. I took it and I just got really sick. Like, like, made me feel like losing. I didn't like the eye at all. I just got lucky. But some people, yeah, man, they take it and they're like, I've come home. This is home. This is where I want to be. This is, you know, like, it's, it's like warming your hands on a chemical fire. Remember the old night, Will? The one that really got you fucked up. Oh, yeah. I remember I took that old night, Will in the 90s and I was sick one day and I took it and I was sitting in my bed watching TV and I couldn't have felt more loved. Yeah. I was like, the whole world's just full of love. Yeah. It's love, love, love. I was like, oh, no wonder why people love this stuff. Yeah. I didn't know that it was that you could buy over the counter. What is it? Was it coding? Is that what it was? I think it was coding. Dude, it felt magical. I don't know if it was a NyQuil though. Coding was a NyQuil. Whatever it was that I took. It was some nasty stuff that you took a shot of. I thought it was NyQuil. Probably like some cough syrup, some kind of like cough syrup that I coding in it because I do know that was over the kind. I think it was over the counter. At one point in time was NyQuil did NyQuil have coding yet or something like that in it? NyQuil had some shit definitely that would make you kind of trip. But what you're describing sounds like an opioid or something. It felt like that. It felt like just pure love. I remember feeling how good it felt to the rest of my head on the pillow. He was like, ah, it was wonderful. And I was like, oh my god, this stuff is great. I was like, I keep this shit away from me. I don't have a kind of self-control. It's an average chicken NyQuil every night. Dude, that would be so weird if you were secretly addicted to NyQuil. Well, I know people who have been. I know there was a comedy. I cool. Yeah. And there's a comic used to make the staff pick them up NyQuil and drop it off in his green room. Did you see the shit? That's so weird. It's not weird, man. I'm telling you. If you you, I don't know. I mean, what year was it? I want to say it was when I got sick that I had the NyQuil. I want to say it was late 90s. Wasn't it a TikTok thing that just happened where their kids were cooking chicken and NyQuil. And like they had to say to stop doing that. Like they, they had to get the island boys. Parents be more careful. Kind of food you're cooking. No, nobody was. I don't think anyone was eating the chicken and the NyQuil. It was just, I think some weirdo poured NyQuil in a frying pan and threw chicken in it and then it set off like a TikTok challenge. And then of course someone eventually was like, what happens with with the chicken? Tell me that's not China. Tell me that is not China fucking with America. That's where you need some ministry of truth to stop the NyQuil chicken crazes. You hire this dude who's like, you know, the acting world's not really working out that well for him. But we have a job for you in China to do just some information videos. How to handle risky internet trends like TikTok's NyQuil chicken challenge. Oh my god. They really cooked NyQuil, cooked chicken and NyQuil. Yeah. I'm not surprised. These kids are fucking crazy. Um, is it when what year did NyQuil have something psychoactive in it and did it change? It used to have up to 25% alcohol at least and it looks like the in 1991 around the time as maybe when it changed. What did it change it to? I'm looking like a, because no one might dumbass. I might have had a jug sitting around from 91. Very long ago about it. A long article the whole timeline of like every year of NyQuil and how popular it was and all the ads about it. And I think it's changed multiple times. That's kind of fine. Like I didn't say there was coding in it specifically, but. Hmm. NyQuil tastes like shit man. I don't understand. Truly like it's so telling you dude. This was this one time when I was sick and I didn't experience this ever again. And there was one other time where I was on morphine when I got my knee reconstructed. They had a morphine drip on me. And, uh, I'm pretty positive. They told me that when I pressed the button, you would get more morphine because it's like connected to this thing. Wow. And then if you felt bad, you could press the button and get more of it. So I was hammering that fucking thing. But someone told me it's regulated. Oh, I think it's give you the impression you're in control of it. You're in my life in 93. I mean, you would get in 1993. They're not going to let you dial in your own morphine because the more morphine you get, the higher you get. And then you forget, like you're like, when did I press the button last? It's probably been 20 minutes. It's been a couple of seconds. That's how you OD. That's how people OD is they get high and they forget they took the pill and then they go back and take the pill. Right. But what if it only gives like one milligram a hammer? Yeah. Stroke a scopic hit. When it's like 300 milligrams will kill you. Yeah. It's 300 easy clicks to paradise. Do you know what Peter was he told me about Tylenol? He said, if you take 20 times, the recommended dose, it'll kill you. That's how dangerous Tylenol is. You see the benefit. He said, it's he the benefit poisoning is like very high rate of poisoning. I heard that's the people that don't want to read the labels. You go to the hospital. You've decided to commit suicide with Tylenol. You've changed your mind. Oh my God. You go there thinking you're going to get like something. They're going to give you something to make you better. And they're like, your liver's gone like that it's already eaten or liver up or something. I don't know if this is just like some horror story I heard, but I heard that's how it works is once you're going to be alive a little bit. You're going to survive a little bit longer than after your liver is like kind of liquefied or something. And then so it's a terrible OD. It's a terrible OD. Fuck that. See the benefit eats you up. That's why I get in so bad because it's the seat of benefit mixed with the opioid. And it goes really well with what one read. I was on a plane once. There was a lady next to me in first class and she was fucking hilarious. And she was like some business lady. And she she said, let me tell you something. A Xanax and a glass of wine. And I don't give a fuck what happens to this plane. She was hilarious. I think we were flying like overseas. So I think it was like an England flight or something like that. That's so funny. And this lady was just taking Xanax and drinking wine. She didn't give a fuck. And it was it was just like that combination for her in that moment was hilarious. Like I would imagine there would be super unmanageable. I know people that have had problems with Xanax, especially like mixed Xanax. I know a comic that was mixed in Xanax with alcohol a lot. I mean, you're not supposed to do. No, you're not. But that lady seems so happy. Well, you are. You're fucking happy till you're not till you fucking come down. I got addicted to Xanax. It was fucking horrible man. I went on tour in Australia. My dad had given me these sleeping pills that were the best fucking sleeping pills of all time, Joe. And I'm so dumb. I didn't what was in it. You know, and then there was a benzo on it. Now someone else has given me benzos. Anyway, the point is like I didn't realize how many benzos I was taking. So I get you're taking them every night to go sleep. And before a flight. And so I end up getting home. And you know, I'm done with it. Like I feel like one flew over the fucking cuckoo's now. It's like I don't want to take this shit anymore. It's horrible. I feel gross. It's like awful. So I stop taking and you're not supposed to do that when you're addicted to Xanax. So I stopped taking it. I'm standing in line at a pharmacy, not to get more Xanax to get cold. No, I don't know why I matter. It's Advil or something. So I'm standing in line. And all of a sudden I get this weird fucking headache. It feels like electricity is like, I don't know how I explain it. Like my hand twitched or something. And I'm like, I just started feeling bad. Went home, gotten to bed, worst headache of my fucking life. I was closing my eyes. I was seeing like bad trip images and stuff. I couldn't sleep. And I'm thinking, you know, man, if you go take Xanax right now, I guarantee this headache is going to go away because this is some kind of withdrawal for sure. And I'm like, if my fucking go take Xanax, that's how you get addicted to Xanax is like. So I just rode it out. White knuckle did. Oh my God. And you didn't know you're not supposed to do that. I did not care. I think I just realized like, I don't think I knew you could die. I think I just in my mind, I was like, and I don't think I was close to. I don't think I was the people who who died. They're like just drinking glasses of fucking Xanax there. But you know, from your experience, the grip. Oh, yeah. I mean, the it's not just, I mean, like with a lot of things, vaping, like the basic little addictions, coffee, you know what I mean? Like coffee's a rough one though. Generally though, you don't get like a sledgehammer effect when you stop it. You know, you just feel irritable. You've got a little, yeah, with Xanax with the opiates, the opiates. The opiates. The Xanax and alcohol, the only ones that can actually kill you if you get off of them too quick. Yeah, delirium trimmons, right? With alcohol, you see spiders and shit. You have the worst trippy your fucking life. And this is why people like can't quit because they could die. And then, you know, also, I mean, I think we got to kind of look at civilization, society, modern society, and like think about like, well, why are people taking these opiates? You know what I mean? It's not like everyone who gets addicted to fucking pills and some kind of miscreant junkie. In fact, most of them are really good people. They just, they kind of feel like whatever this shit is, reality, life, minus the drugs is sort of raw deal. You know what I mean? They're kind of like, why? Why? Why do I need to be sober in like according to your definition of sober? You know, a lot of people they're like, here's what sober is and they're not even fucking sober. They're on coffee, they smoke cigarettes. They're on pharmaceutical medications. But yeah, I think a lot like probably a lot of people who are on pills as awful as they are. And man, I'll tell you, man, I'm very close to someone who's like related to someone. And it's the work who has a opioid addict in their scary. Dude, it is awful. It's a wrecking ball of the families. It destroys families. It just in a way, it's like the way it fucks up the family unit is so crazy. You could only compare it to demon possession. It's like this used to be your brother. This used to be your son. It's a thing now that if it can, it's going to steal your wallet. It's going to break into your house. It's going to like wreck your car. But it looks like the person that you love, but it keeps lying and robbing and doing awful shit. Dude, it fucks up families, not just like direct families that goes out and ripples. So when you see 70,000 people died of opioid overdoses, that's just the people who died. You're not seeing like all the people who are close to death or the walking dead. In the way, that's like impacting families and their shame attached to it. So people don't talk about it. People don't know what to do. The state isn't sophisticated enough to step in and deal with it. Man, it's so fucking depressing. It's so horrible. It really is. It's a fucking plague. I mean, I know so many people who've been like just ruined by it. And I'm sure you do too, man. A hundred percent. I know many people that have been ruined by it. And we know that it all came from pharmaceutical companies lying. They lied about it being addictive. They lied. They just were that family, the fentanyl family. Was that family? Jamie, it's scary that people are willing to do stuff like that for profit. And then once it happens and once you get that profit, you want to keep that profit roll it in so you keep selling it. And you keep finding ways to prescribe it for people and people keep getting addicted. Sacklers. The Sackler family. The fucking Sacklers, dude, that's great. That's nuts. They made it so much money selling that stuff. And people, the thing is like if heroin was legal, like real regular heroin, and people could snort it and you get pure heroin, would all that stuff even exist anymore? Probably not. Right? Because it was regulated. Because they're not how it's cheap to produce. It probably doesn't kill you as easy either. Like snorting heroin. It's probably doesn't kill you as easy. As fentanyl, as pills. I have no idea, man. It's somehow I avoided heroin, like all the drugs. I really have no idea. I wonder, like I think when people die from heroin overdose, are they dying from snorting it, or are they dying from injecting it? And if you made it legal, would people just start injecting it everywhere? My guess is, you could, it doesn't matter. Are you getting your bloodstream? Once you get to a certain amount, your respiratory system shuts down, or you uh, what's the word when you suffocate on your own puke? Jesus Christ. You uh, yeah, you suffocate. You just like you go to sleep, but then you throw up. Oh God. And then you suffocate that you drowned in puke. No, no, no. And the drugs supposedly went out? Yeah, I think so. I mean, it's like, that's how you go out, go out, is by drowning in puke. It's a hell death. It's like... You know, it's like a crazy conspiracy theory connected to Hendrix. What? That his manager had him whacked, because he was going to leave his manager, like some guy who was like a security guy or something like that wrote a book about it. Really? Yeah, and it's, there's a lot of weird stuff to it. Like Hendrix is a girl afterwards threw herself off a roof, and they were trying to say that they silenced her. They took her to a fucking roof and threw her off of it. They put in there. You know, that, that's very, I don't know the story. I don't know whether it's correct or not. I used to say, I bet that's what happened. But now I'm like, who the fuck knows? But for sure, or organized crime was involved in music for sure. Yeah, right? Why would they not be? They were involved in everything. Yeah. The mom back in the day was involved in any fucking thing that was profitable. You know, I think one of the coolest things the mob has done lately. He's gotten people to go to the mob back in the day. You know what I'd be like, they're so smart, because they're like, oh, yeah, they got a PR person out there. They're like, yeah, back in the day, the mob was doing all kinds of crazy stuff. But the mob, it's mostly gone now. There's no more mob. It's really cool. Like, at the smart move they did. I like that. It's like when Vincent the Chin, you know, he used to walk around New York City with like a bathrobe on slippers and that crazy. Yeah. And meanwhile, he was like giving everybody information. Come on, come on. We're gonna walk. This is what we're gonna do. The fucking mom got his thing to get us on this. Yeah. We're gonna take them out of the fucking news. That's how we're gonna do it. So he's laying out what needs to be done, managing all the business of all the families. And along the way, the FBI bugged the cars. So they knew his route that he would take. And so they just bugged the hubcaps of all these cars. They parked a bunch of cars there. I think that's the story that's connected to that, right? Isn't that how they got him? Or am I conflating two mob stories? They might have used that on more than one mobster, that technique. Well, that's what they got him. God was just acting crazy. Dude, it's so funny to me. Like when you know, the thing is like, again, I don't mean to be cynical. I mean, I'm an old man now. I'm older now. And I like, I have gotten to the point where I recognize that the government isn't evil. The gut, it's like it's trying to do something. And that thing it's trying to do is really fucking hard. Like it's trying to create a democracy a place where you could like raise your kids, not have kids, whatever, but live a relatively free life. Be healthy, happy. It's trying to do that. That's the machine is trying to do that. And it's failing a lot is trying, but, but it's, it's gotten infiltrated. So within it, there's chunks of like really nefarious bad shit. But it's like at some point you look at like the wars between governments and like mob, mafia, organized crime. And it's like really what's the, like it, which one, like they're both resorting to really brutal tactics. Yeah. They both are okay with killing people. They both wage war. Like, I mean, like strategically when you look at it, like if you took the, you know, you take like any classic drug dealer, like any like mid level drug dealer, make them like 500 times more powerful. And they become a pharmaceutical company, right? Like at some point you go from like selling illegal drugs to just starting a company, making fentanyl, and then legally selling synthetic care when I'm being protected by the police while you sell the drugs. That's the only difference, right? Like if like the idea is like you get organized crime, the organized crime, if it gets to a certain level, it gets on the radar. And then it gets shut down. But if it manages to like jump through that level, then usually it just gets an apology, right? And then it just becomes part of the government, right? Like that's the ultimate place you want to be. Like you want to go from succumbing to laws to controlling the laws. That's like victory, right? When you get to make the laws. So I don't know. It seems like I don't know. I always think it's funny when you're hearing about them bugging their hubcaps and stuff. And it's like shit man. It seems like it's just another covert mob war. Like it's you know, they're not calling themselves the mob. They're calling themselves the government. Right. But it's still kind of a mosh. It's just one very, very powerful mob fighting. You got to be careful about mal information Duncan. Did I do mal information? No, we have to be careful. That's why we need this organization protecting us. I think mal information. If you're wearing a clown suit on a podcast, you're allowed to do mal information. But you have to wear a stupid fucking clown suit. You know, that's maybe that's the answer. It's just like, look, make them wear something really dumb and then they can mal inform. Maybe that's what the president should be. Maybe you could be the president, but you have to dress out your clown. That's one of our new rules. Funny. You can't like that. Yeah, you can't dress up. You have to dress out your clown. Wait, didn't Biden dress like the Easter Bunny though? No, Ted Cruz. What someone did? Yeah, Jamie. I'm sorry. We looked that up. It wasn't. I think it was it was like the first lady. You know that video of like the bunny like directing Biden. Like that was some who is that? You haven't seen this Easter bunny or inner like like the rabbit kind of like made him move on. The rabbit made Biden move on. So there's Biden waves to the rabbit. Joe Biden quickly interrupted by Easter bunny after he's talking about Afghanistan. Oh my god. So the Easter bunny came in while Hey, it's Easter. It's Easter. It's Easter. It's President. Oh my god. He stepped right in front of the president while he's making that speech about Afghanistan. Yeah. He moved him along. That is insane. It's fucking wild. It's like the shining. What a genius organization we have watching over our best interest because that's a great way to do it. Yeah. Like this the only way you can do it and get away with it. Yeah. He walked away. Easter bunny's like, sir, Mr. President. Sure. Probably got a gun to his back. Sir. It's not a finger. I would pay a lot of money to have a fucking Easter bunny follow me around do that whenever I was about to say something shit. Like a rabbit's like, come on, let's go. Let's go. We don't know the podcast. We're talking about something. We don't know what the fuck we're talking about. A rabbit shows us. He comes out of the curtain. I don't know. The animation AI rabbit that looks like Coraline's mother. Look at that. Yeah. The rabbits pushed him around. Yeah. Go. The rabbit's guiding him. Yeah, man. What in the fuck, dude? Who was the rabbit? Exactly. Who was in the suit? Farries are secretly controlling the government. It's not lizard people. Oh my fucking god. They misread the great scrolls. Holy shit. Dude, it could have been an alien in the suit. I'm bad shit. It could have been anything in the suit. That's what it is. That's what it is. It's it's it's imagine it gets in there and takes off the top and it's a fucking gray alien. Yeah. It's been communicating with the White House this whole time. No, no, no, no, don't say that. That's spooky man. I mean, it is that's like remember that scene in the shining. It's real quick where they open the door and it's like a furry like sucking a guy's dick. Yeah, yeah. It's like guy with a mask or something like that. Yeah, it's creepy. It's like it's like anything like that where you're like, because whoever's under that, whoever's in that suit, it's not like they heard him talking. It's that someone like told them, hey, seven, nine, eight, go interrupt the president. He's about to say something about Afghanistan. He's talking about Afghanistan. Move, move, move, go, go. Do we have any Easter bunny near the president? Okay, good. Interrupt now. Oh my god. That's so wild. It's so wild that he just can't let him talk. And it's so wild that Twitter is fact checking him now. Twitter fact checks Biden's tweets. Look, man, if we're going to do fact checking, it's got to be for everybody. It's got to be for everybody. Everybody. And that's good for everybody. Yeah, you can't have such a lazy game. Your propaganda game can't be that lazy. How about no fucking propaganda game? Wouldn't that be nice? It'd be nice to not be sick. Like always constantly getting blasted by some weird fucking propaganda. I would love that. I mean, again, it is our fault or the ones like turning on our propaganda rectangles and like letting it hypnotize us. That's true. It's consensual propaganda. It's not like people are standing in front of our houses with megafones, but it also has real world consequences. We're seeing these people and we're seeing like some of the attitudes that they're adopting and some of the things that they're pushing to just stay in control of government. It's like you guys are stirring up the bullshit. You're starting, you're misrepresenting people, you're doing it to cause conflict and you're doing it to shore up your party and you're doing it wantonly. You're doing it on purpose. We could see it. It's real obvious. Why do you even, you know, like sometimes I watch Game of Thrones or the new one, which is badass house of dragons. And you're like, everybody wants to be fucking king. Why? It's a managerial job. It's like everyone's fighting for just to sit now. Why? It's what we're talking about before that that desire to be the head of the clan. The desire to be the head of the tribe is instilled in all of us. It became from these, we were in these little tribal groups for most of what the time that we were humans. For thousands of years, we lived like that until they figured out transportation, until they figured out how to ride animals, until they figured out how to branch out. We were, that's until they figured out boats. That's how humans lived. That's how we developed into humans. But you know, it survived. You don't want to be president. No, but it's instilled in the DNA. You're a logical person. But I would imagine if you weren't. And if it was also instilled upon you as a small child, that's the best job in the world. And you can't sing any content. You're not good at writing books. You can be the fucking president. Like, do you fit the right criteria? Are you trustworthy? Can you speak in a way? You don't even have to be extraordinary in your accomplishments as an intellectual, as an artist, as anything. All you have to do is be this person that talks and a lot of them are lawyers, right? And they learn how to talk in a certain way and they're convincing enough. And they got enough people to cover up their dirty secrets that they can get into a position of extreme power. And the only way out of that is people realizing how dumb that is and people not wanting to do it anymore. And to get a smaller and smaller group of people that are running and a less and less interesting and charismatic group of people that are running because nobody wants that fucking eye of sore on on you. Nobody wants that microscope and your fucking your life and all of your details of it. And you want to be the president of what you are, you're fucking mind. You don't want that. You don't want that. So the only people that do want that are the people that are like so deeply entrenched in that game. And we're seeing like with Biden and with Trump, it's people that have been around a long time with Trump, maybe not politics, but around politics a long time. And with Biden in politics forever, they're like wrapped up in that system. If you're a fucking motocross writer, you want to be the guy who wins the race. It's a fucking game. It's your whole day, all day, 12 hours of fucking day. That's your, you want to get what you put in that bill through. You want to talk to your constituents. You want to push your narrative. You want to do this. You want to do it's a winner of death and destruction. Death and disease, illness and death. This is like you're guiding the zeitgeist of the population. Fuck that. Isn't that why horrible, why annoying and real, but that's real. That's really actually happening. That's really actually happening. It's just so it's so fucked up, man. Like it'll be so cool if we just evolved to the point where at some point, nobody wants to be president like no one will run. What would they do then? What if everybody was just like now, we're not interested in the job? The moment is always going to be militarys. There's always going to be people that are in charge of the militarys. If you're in charge of the biggest military and you're the biggest might, you have a real significant advantage over everybody else is talking shit and trying to do things. Maybe you're interfering in these countries. Maybe you're fucking finagling behind the scenes and sewing the seeds of resentment and hate around the world because of your policies. Maybe that's actually happening. Maybe you don't want to lose that power. Also, maybe you just really probably by being in the government, you get security clearance. Once you get the security clearance, you start seeing what's really going on. Once you start seeing what's really going on, you probably stop talking shit as much as we do. Oh, that's a percentage. You're probably like, oh, I get it now. Well, the counter-argument, the counter-argument is you need that because there's so much fucked up. you're probably like oh, I get it now. Well, the counter argument, the counter argument is you need that because there's so much fucked up shit going on the world and if we didn't do that, it would be way worse for us. That's the counter argument and there's a lot of arguments against the counter argument because there's a lot of money involved. There's a lot of defense spending, the defense spending is crazy numbers. It's more than a trillion dollars a year or something like that. Yeah, it's so much money. So you got to think about there's a lot of business. You know, that's the Eisenhower speech where you're talking about the military industrial complex. There's a business attached to it too, but there's also the argument that you need it. So it's like the argument is not hippie utopia. Let's look at the world through rose colored glasses. The argument is like how much are we contributing to the problems of the world and how much are we fixing them. And if the government is not good at anything, there's not one thing like they fucking nailed that. It's not one thing. Hold on, wait, I'll think of something. There's got to be stuff. Post office is probably the best thing that everybody does. Post office post office is pretty fucking incredible. People shit on the post office. It's the only way you're allowed to transport live chicks. So if you want to raise chickens, you get live chicks, you have to get them transported by the post office. No way. Yeah, they know how to do it. The post, so we got the post office. There's got to be something else. Libraries. Libraries. Yeah, they do a pretty good job library of Congress. Because people that are involved in libraries are dedicated to giving people books because they know how valuable information is. That's the purest example of like wanting to help people. Vietnam. Phenomenal went perfectly. Yeah, that was a really, that was a good one. We learned a lot. We learned a lot. Yeah. We learned a lot from Vietnam. Was it perfect now, but we look, but yeah, when you look at like the bigger picture, the many, many mistakes that have happened, you know, it is curious to be there. Like we do live in a time now where it seems like there, like if you just, it seems like there's almost like a pro, people don't want you to say like, maybe we shouldn't go to war. You know what I'd be like, if you start saying that, you get aligned with one side or the other. Well, the thing is Russia invaded Ukraine, Russia, they connected Trump, Trump is bad. Trump, collude, Russia, that was a narrative for so long, right? So it's it whether you believe it or not, whether it's been refuted or not, I think mostly it has, but at the end of the day, they really were successful in connecting Trump to Russia. Like there's like the, there's the feeling you get when you feel about Russia, you're, you're an anti-Trump guy and then Russia invades Ukraine. Okay, this is a horrible act of war. Clearly there's one party that has escalated this to the point of violence and it should be. Yeah, it's the worst thing that could ever happen in the world when a neighboring country invades a neighbor of fucking Jesus Christ, the world has to sit back and watch this. Horrible. There's no if ands or buts about that. So everybody is like pushing to arm Ukraine. And I don't see a lot of people clamoring for some sort of a peace agreement or at least conversations about it. I know they've had some conversations as a lens key. He wants like Putin to resign. You know, like if you've seen that, like that he wants Putin to step down. Like that's one of the things that didn't he say that? He said he would talk to Russia, but he wouldn't talk to the president of Russia or something like that. He definitely wants him to step down. He wants him to step down. It's like the, the, like, you know, I, I'll be saying that is that the only thing that'll accept is that what he said? The best analysis of it I saw was on Russian state TV where the some of the people on Russian state TV are starting to say, wait a minute. And this guy was like, look, you have, Ukraine is we're not, I don't remember the words that you used. Well, I don't speak Russian. They were translating it, but he's essentially saying like, look, you're not, you're not, they, you was saying, these are the people, these are Russians. They survived this or that. I can't remember the exact thing they're talking about, the siege of, uh, I don't know what it's called. I'm sorry, man. I'm terrible at history. But like he's like, these are Russians. They survived all this. You're not going to starve them out. You're not going to freeze them out. They're not backing down. You don't have their minds. They're, you're not going to get them to surrender. So where is the out? Like the idea was quick invasion. You, right, they're going to surrender right away. And then, he's going to like take a chunk of Ukraine and then everything, everything like ends, but it sucks because still, yeah, whatever. But it's like, it's not working. So even there's no way to like say, like, all right, well, let's concede this, the dumb boss or whatever to Russia because you crazy like fuck that. We're taking Crimea back. Like we're taking all of it back because they're starting to win. And they're winning because the largest military on earth has been giving them God knows what we only God knows what like what kind of data they're getting from like satellites. We don't even know or Russia's threatened to shoot down satellites now. Well, that's why because like the, I'm sure we're giving the giving them like hardcore data about everything. So it's like, man, this is what's so scary about it, isn't it? It's like where is the concession that has to happen for a war to end? Where's the thing where Russia, where Putin can like successfully withdraw all the troops, right? And why isn't this the conversation? Like that you're seeing amongst most people online, shouldn't most people online be saying that instead of like just blindly supporting one side or the other, shouldn't they be going, we got to stop this in its fucking tracks? Well, yeah, the, what I feel like what should be happening is a massive public like demand for there to be talks between everybody like to like in Russia, they should be like fucking talk to Zelensky here. We should be like fucking Biden talk to fucking Putin. You know, not just about what's her name? Pretty grind. Not just about her, but let's let's let's grow test. Because it might be to sit down and try to negotiate with people who thought it was a good idea to just fucking invade another country and kill a bunch of people. It's preferable to nuclear Holocaust. Yes. So let's just fucking it's gross. No one wants to do it. Like, you know, that whole thing there was a period. I don't know if you did that, but for a while you start like watching like documentaries on Putin and you catch that weird aspect up when you're like, there's something kind of cool about him, right? There was like this weird cool thing. That's gone. We all think he's a fucking like tyrannical asshole. Fuck him. We get it. Nobody likes him. He's horrible. He killed countless kids in his own soldiers. He's fucking awful. But like, we need a solution to this that that doesn't end in a nuclear Holocaust like or something worse. Like, those motherfuckers have smallpox too. They don't just have nuclear weapons. Like, they can all kinds of shit over there that that, you know, lots of stuff just like we do. So God, damn, man. I mean, I feel like such a stupid hippie because it's like, I don't know anything. I've I'm sure if I was a Ukrainian and my children have been blown up, I would be like, yeah, let the fucking nuclear bomb come because I don't have anything else to live for. I don't give a fuck. Let's destroy them. Let's kill them. That's what war is. You get a froth. Like, so it's like an even saying like God, I wish they could talk. Who might have fucking say I live in a in fucking Austin. Yeah. You know, I ride one of those petty calves around sometimes from music festivals. I don't know what the smell of burning. Show, I don't never smelled burning children. The people there fucking have right now at the same time that you're here in Austin. That's happening. Yes. That's what's insane about the world. Fuck in horrible, but it's like, how do you how do you, how do you get like, logic or like human reasoning to appear in the most illogical, unreasonable thing, which is fucking war. How do you get into it? How do you summon the spirit of rationality in a place where people for just for like living had their children's playground blown blown out? People had to watch people were at a playground and fucking rush a shot missiles into it. How do you fucking make that work after that? You don't. You don't. And then it's like, okay, well, we're going to stop giving them weapons because we don't want there to be a nuclear all across. So it's like, really, you don't want to push back against this massive empire that just decided to encroach upon another country. You think they're going to stop or they're going to stop? It's, I don't know the solution, man. What's the fucking solution? You know, it's like we need our presidents to have that thing. The, the chest dude had up his ass. You know, some things that five, like violence. Yeah, for me. Give us all the data. No, the most hopeful version for me of this alien things that they're monitoring all this. And they realize there's a point civilization. Just like there's a point in the evolution of every, yeah, anything that's competitive, right? It's like they're trying to like succeed and squash out all the things that are against them. And if they have the capability of literally destroying thousands of people and they do it at on a regular basis. Yeah. So thousands of people is pretty normal, right? Thousands of people in Ukraine is thousands of people are dead. Right. How many people are going to kill by drones all told? It's got to be a thousand, right? How many of you have been there? Let's just, let's take a guess. How many people do you think have been ever killed by drones in warfare? Oh my God. We think it is. It's got to be like, it's got to be over a hundred thousand people, right? I'm going to guess Yeah, I'm going to guess like 80,000 people. How many people have been killed by drones ever? I'm just guessing. No idea what it would be. What is it? I'm trying to find the answer and mix it a bunch of stuff together once. Oh, you want to know what I said to shit? Well, no, no, I'm just on Google. I feel like military. How many people have asked the US military killed in general? Oh, my drone. Oh, I googled drones. How about just a number of deaths by drone per year? I got a counting drone drone death strikes. They haven't bought it out. They haven't bought it out. The estimates are incomplete. Like whatever, whatever. Compage and shut up. Do you ever see that art installation that like anytime a drone strike happened at like lit a match? It was just it would sit there and then when it got somehow was connected to like whatever that is. So it like whenever there's a drone strike, it like a match or something would light and it would just drop it on the ground or it would like burn a piece of paper to drop it on the ground. The scariest thing about the drones is the number of people that are innocent. They're killed. US airstrikes killed at least 22,000 civilians since 9-11. Way lower than we thought way lower figures based on reported numbers of US airstrikes highlight the human cost of the 20 year war on terror. So, but that's airstrikes. That could be missiles launched out of jets, right? Couldn't it be other things other than just drones? I mean, why are more people are dying from fentanyl than fuel? US drone and airstrikes. So it's combined. That's what it is. It's both of those things. So drone and airstrikes as perhaps as many as 48,000. Wow. That's a lot of people. So they've killed at least 22,000 and perhaps as many as 48,000 since 9-11 terror attacks. The analysis based on US military's own assertion is that it had as conducted almost 100,000 airstrikes since 2001. Holy shit, dude. It represents an attempt to estimate the number of civilian deaths across the multiple conflicts that have comprised aspects of the war on terror. Holy shit, dude. Just I want you to just think about 100,000 airstrikes. Imagine watching that video. It'd be a long video. That's a long video. Wow. Super sad. Potentially as high as 48,308 civilians killed. The number's nuts too. It's like mostly the wrong people. Man, I don't know. I just really hope that like somehow by some fucking miracle somehow somehow like just like it's a me to me. It's really it's caught me, man. Like the the the the the war has caught me. I look at it every night. I'm always like checking it out because you know, I got kids now. It's terrifying for everybody. For loved ones. For society as we know it. It's terrifying for everything about everything about life. And it's like like it's what's really I think the most like the thing that freaks me out the most is like truly all all that has to happen is one dude has to go. You know what? I fucked up. You're probably my you're gonna kill me. I'm gonna get arrested. I fucked up and just bring all the troops out and it's done. Like that's it. That's the thing that's like so. I think it's that easy, man. You don't think you don't think you don't think some balances in place. Who do I think it just feel like let's I fucked up. I don't think he's ever gonna say that. I don't think you can say that when you want to be running a strong country like Russia. I literally don't think that's like in the way they ever communicate. Well, I know. I know. But it's weird. Right? Like it's almost like you're asking him to blow guys on TV. Look, it's not going to happen. You know, it's like he's he's such an old school leader in the weirdest sense of like the peeling to that one alpha that runs the tribe. He's so old school in that regard. It's like a figure of history, right? The man that controls this entire country. That's a common figure in history. And that's what he is now. And we just forget that that's how humans are kind of hardwired. And I really I mean, obviously, yeah, not anthropologist, but I would assume that that has something to do with the way we developed in tribes. And we still we can't get away from it with that guy. We can't get away from with the Trump lovers with with everything. Everybody wants some person that's our solution to all this things. Carrie Lakes going to take us home. You know, everybody's got this thing in their head that they think is going to be the solution to all the problems. And I'm not saying that those people aren't individual solutions to problems that are happening locally around me. I think they are. And I think that's maybe that makes sense even more than a president. But at the end of the day, when all said and done, it's fucking strange. It's fucking strange. There's all this unnecessary conflict that's consistently going on all around us. And we don't question it. We don't go like, what kind of nonsense world are we living in? We don't have much time kids. We should be a lot nicer to each other. It's not that hard. Right. Yeah, man. I mean, I doubt it. Like it, it all goes back to that. It's like, all right, well, get off. I'm talking to myself here. This is by the way, I've here's my shit. Here's my spirit, shitty spiritual advice. This is what I discover. I'm telling you, man, it's changed my life. Any time, instead of the old days when I blither and blather and ear beat people with some spiritual fucking advice for their lives, any time I'm about to do that, I don't. And I apply it to myself. So it's like, if I'm about to like suggest to someone that maybe exercise is going to make a feel better, I exercise. Or if I'm like, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right. Maybe you should meditate. That's when I'm meditate. Instead of saying it, I just start applying it to myself, holy shit, man, it's really fucking good advice for me. You're taking your own advice for me. Not for anyone because it's easy to get someone else to exercise and to get you to exercise meditate So it's like It's like what I'm doing right now, and I'm not recommending this for anybody else is I'm just trying to calm the fuck down Just calm down Stop getting so fucking frustrated stop being like Wobbly or or like unstable try to maintain stability in an honest way Around my family and friends for as much as I can that's why I quit drinking and It's working wonders. It's working wonders. So it's like you know with this stuff It's so frustrating because it's like what the fuck are we gonna do? What I guarantee Putin is it gonna listen to this podcast and be like you know what maybe instead of the war I will start blowing dudes That's not gonna happen. You're right, but it's like Yeah, so that's frustrating. There's a very limited realm of control we have out there So if it's like all right, what do you have control or what do you have control over and It's like that thing you are talking about when we went out to eat or like you got to put that monster in a box Yeah, I think whatever your particular monster may be figure out a way if you burn the box Eventually you can actually melt it down like it doesn't even have to be a monster anymore They say that you could actually over time The thing becomes less and less and less and less of a monster We were talking about mental illness that applies to obsessing on things. Yeah, which is why we can't fuck with video games That's what the monster was for us the monster is this like desire to like get Immersed in things and it's very it's fucking creepy it takes people at gamblers They're there possessed by demons like hardcore gamblers that you see uncut gems No, it's amazing. It's an Adam Sandler movie. It's not a comedy at all It's it's a fucking great It's probably when the best movie about gambling if not the best ever made. It's really good. It'll give you anxiety You'd be like oh my god Jesus fucking Christ when you're watching this movie like oh my god It's all about a gambling junking Adam Sandler plays it perfectly and the movie is all about these rushes that these people get from gambling and it just takes over Every aspect of their life just like a fucking video game just like anything else man Things can take over your life. Yeah, that's it. That's it. That's it So it's like learning that and where you've been taken over and then seeing if you can lessen your addiction to whatever the thing may be Yeah, and not like B There's a you know that thing like someone's got a Difficult personality yes, and they hurt people a lot but instead of Recognizing oh shit. I've got a difficult personality and I'm hurting people a lot They're like that's who I am. I'm that person who does the crazy thing all the time That's just me. It's like don't be that person Recognize like you can you should stop hurting people right like it's not an an I speak as someone who like a lot would rationalize really bad Traits is like you know man. That's what I'm like and it's like no it doesn't have that I don't need to be that way I don't need to be like a shit talker a Gossip I don't need to be someone who's like always mad at some certain person I definitely don't need to be a person who like is passive aggressive or punishes people with anger You know what? I mean I don't have to be that way of course You know what I mean like I don't have to be that way all I have to do is start blowing dudes I'm talking to me It's funny though that you said that because it like get the vision like stuck it by head It was weird, but you know what I mean man. It's like that That that that's all we have control over is like look at your own crazy fucking Tyrant being right like look at your own Monsterous thing that you've been pretending that's just me man. That's what I'm like. That's me And play around the idea. Maybe that's not you Maybe that's just something you're addicted to being and you could actually Stop being that way not and it's not easy. I'm not saying it's easy Have it's a really hard to break man This is one of the real problems that psychedelics being outlawed right is that people aren't allowed to have these sort of Transcendent moments in those psychedelic experiences because some people truly can't handle it some people it's not for them That's absolutely true. I agree But for a lot of people it is and you can't say it doesn't benefit a lot of people and I know so many fucking people who've benefited from it Including me and to deny that To people to deny that keep that from people. I think is a real travesty the travest It's a travesty in our cultural development our development is a community It would help us develop as a community if people had some experience with Regenerating their view of the world. Yes, and that could be Available to everybody but it's being withheld from you by people who haven't experienced it Right, it takes no fucking sense The people that are trying to keep you from doing mushrooms for sure aren't doing mushrooms Because if they were they would realize that the thing to do would be to spread these to everybody and to give people the chance to recognize that maybe they're under the the hypnotism the maybe they're under the spell A certain frequency that's not the only way to live you can live in a different frequency You can you get established a different frequency amongst the people you love you can establish a different frequency with yourself It's possible and to deny that from people just because you're afraid of it or because of Propaganda it's like it's very anti-science because there's a lot of science that points to it helping people with all sorts of things End of life crises. That's a giant one with people right have taken so Simon It's it's allowed them to really relax and think about Existence and look at it in a completely different way and I don't think that's available through just some someone sit next to you and Ask you questions and having a counseling session. I'm sure that's great I'm sure that that counseling of end of life is great. You know, it's better five grams of mushrooms That's way better. Yeah, and it's it's not gonna kill you It's not it mean if especially if we figure out a way to grow it legally where it's Shickets inspected. It's gonna be good for you. Dude are that five grams of mushrooms is more intense than death Like whatever that experience is right makes like when you're dying when you're actually dying you're like fuck Man, this is like so much nicer than that. I did five grams of mushrooms. Maybe it's the same thing Maybe it's the same thing, but that's the DMT feeling right don't you get that feeling? That's the next door. Yeah. That's like you open up the door and you're like oh, this is life Yes, I mean that that's That is I mean I think that's what's really going on here It's like what happens is you get all constrict you know like when you're a kid and you tie a rubber banner on your finger Yeah, you've done that Except it's not your finger It's some appendage connecting you to infinity and you've figured out a way You feel like your beliefs and habits the tie of tourniquet around that and it sucks remember it was cool when you're in School you'd watch your finger term purple and you're like wow look at that. That's crazy. Look how it's going blue It's like when you see a Significant asshole That's really what you're looking at you're just looking at someone who's really tight in the fucking tourniquet between them and infinity To the point where they're just like filling up with their own ego and like the shit of this world They get really Puffed and mean and cruel and defensive and scared because why wouldn't you be scared? You're you think you're a balloon. What's more vulnerable than a fucking balloon? You know you you the your balloon looks like your body But really it's just a balloon. It's like a balloon that's definitely gonna run out of air eventually But luckily you're more than the balloon, but if you think you're just the fucking balloon You're gonna freak the fuck out like anyway. There's might be a way to psychedelics meditation whatever the fuck it is to sort of realize oh no I'm Much more than this little thing that is currently parading around with my name Much more than that and then you didn't really calm down Like that's when you're really gonna calm down because it's not quite the same anymore and then when you just that little bit of calming down It's gonna make other people around you calm down. I'm telling you man the conversation Should be should not doesn't have to be around politics It should be eventually around politics because that's what shapes laws and everything like that But it needs to start with this fundamental truth which is Humans can suffer less you as an individual don't have to suffer as much as you're suffering There's ways for you to reduce your suffering in a real way that don't involve fentanyl Doesn't involve opioids doesn't involve the nitrous hit of power or winning at gambling. There's an actual way that you can like Well, you know one of the words for enlightenment and Buddhism translates to extinguish Blow out the candle So it's like permanently blow out the candle of your suffering. There's a way to do it You can actually do it in this life That's exciting to me because it's not just a larp It's not larping like all the mystics of the world and whatever religion there and they're not larping They're not playing a role-playing game. They're actually like many people have figured out a way not to suffer as much and And that's exciting to me man. That's fucking cool. We as human beings can do that that transcends culture It transcends countries. It transcends language. It's you know what I mean? It's like we it's like the way fish can swim We can reduce suffering in our own lives. I mean it's harder for animals can't do that You know what I mean a squirrel's gonna fucking squirrel But a squirrel's gonna fucking squirrel Squirrel's gonna squirrel But a human a human can like doesn't have to be act like a squirrel You know some humans act like squirrels are always hiding their fucking nuts I already know You don't have to be like that right that's exciting to me and that it that definitely Has nothing to do with politics It's something that connects all of this like the most profound asshole. We've ever met in your life Is suffering you could be certain that certain certain that they are in hell They're in fucking hell. Yeah, so that's why they're assholes. That's why they're assholes When people are having a great time and life is beautiful. You want you want everyone around you feel good It's the suffering and then then the pattern that you were talking about earlier is really important that people get addicted to behaving that way Because that's the pattern that they know that they've become accustomed to that's the roller coaster of life You know up and down and up and down and drinking and driving and gambling you're fortunate away. It's all distractions It's all that it's all just the great distraction. Dude. I watched you Become increasingly stable. It's a wildest thing to watch. I watch you go through like a weird I don't know what but I just watch you go through all these fit not that when we met you're already pretty like Calm and cool, but not quite as calm and cool as you are now like you started like it was weird watching it happen Like you found a way. I still get upset sometimes unfortunately me too. I always feel bad after I got upset But I'm way more calm and way more rational about who I am now than I used to be Yeah, it's great and it and it radiates out. That's the thing. It's like You know it radiates out. That's the main thing. It's contagious. It's like it's the one Anti-virus that we actually have is that you know like being nice Yeah, and having a bunch of people around you that feel good everyone having a good time It's that's that's what real community is supposed to be about right all of us together everybody. That's what it's supposed to be about That was the dream that was the idea But I think for everybody it's like and you too like we all do work on ourselves, right? So as you're getting older and experiences you have that are negative you learn from them and positive you enforce those and you just You learn to get better at being you You know yeah, and the thing about podcast is your force to be you in front of the fucking world and you're Oh, yeah, and you forget you're on there on it Yeah, you get you're under the spell of an ancient plant that has manipulated creativity for thousands and thousands of years and is also illegal Which is the dumbest fucking thing on earth? That's the dumbest one because this legal in so many places now But it's still federally illegal. You know how many people Biden released pretty amazing, right? When they said that he was going to release all the people that were in federal prison for marijuana possession How many people there's zero what because there's no one in federal prison for marijuana possession? They're all growers They're all dealers. They're all people who are doing other shit and also marijuana possession. I fell Florida I was so excited me too. I posted it. I respect All dealers. They're all people who are doing other shit and also marijuana possession. I fell for it. How client is there. I was so excited. Me too. I posted it. I responded to it. I like posted an applause meme under his tweet. Then there was effective propaganda. God dammit, man. I just I can't even imagine any things. I mean, here it is. Last week, President Joe Biden announced the largest act of clemency in a generation, a mass pardon for people convicted of federal marijuana possession as far as bold acts of mass. Demancy, clemency go to it won't lead to many people getting out of prison. In fact, it will lead to none. Zero people. But okay, let me let me just say this. Let me speak in defense of it. Here's the thing. No, I don't mean I'm saying like, I'm thinking of like my friends who are like marijuana activists. I know you have them too. Yes. Or even psychedelic advocates when shit just gets on the ballot, they celebrate because they're like, okay, we got it on the ballot. Right. So I think there is something that's exciting, even though that's sad. What you told me earlier and just showed, there's something really fucking cool that the president has finally at least. Talked about it. Admitted that like this bullshit, people are going to jail for possession of marijuana. Now, obviously there is political reasons for that. And there's all kinds of other dark stuff wrapped up in it. But long term, good sign, long term, good sign. Right. We just want progress quicker. We want progress and we want it quicker, but that's progress. So in a lot of people, a lot of people dedicated their lives to getting just that far with it. You know, so I think there's something to be said for it. I get it, man. Nothing happens. It influences the cultural narrative. It influences the cultural narrative. And it could potentially cause like a shift in views around like marijuana consumption, long term. And then, but you know, yeah, it's dark. The real that no one's actually getting out that it was just a fucking it's a ruse. A ruse that I felt for Joe. I felt for so many bruises and Twitter will now fact check those ruses, which is hilarious. Which is fucking important. The people that don't want that, come on kids. Even wanting fact checks for so long. Every time someone brings up the, you know, whether it's the election theft or this or that, like everybody come on fact checks are probably good. If the president's not doing it truth, then it's really easy to find the real data. Probably that's good kids. Listen, I'm fine with like universal non biased fact checking. In fact, I would like that for myself. Like it would be I want to know what I'm saying. It's like I would love it. Imagine if you could scan yourself. Oh my God. For like how much of your like ideas of what's really this bullshit. Oh my God. I would that would be a scary scan. And it would probably hurt when you're like, Oh God, I'm 100% like it's all bullshit or 99% but long term. That'd be a really good thing for you. Like I'm for I don't have anything against like this is probably not real. Because it helps me as someone who gets sucked into everything. Like I go on Reddit conspiracy and it's like, I don't like you know what I mean? I'll go to bad being like maybe there are deep underground military bunkers all across the United States, Phil. It's kind of weird like predatory alien that lives in pits. The janitors fall into like I wake up being like I don't really believe that. But I'm just saying I did recently. I would tell her a rabbit of Reddit rabbit hole. Deep underground military bunk. No, it wasn't military one. It was a pedophile ring one. P to gay. It was one of those pettin not not necessarily that one, but a prominent one. We'll talk later. Dude, that one freaked me out. I don't know your freck me out. Holy fucking shit. Freaked me out because there's so much in those emails and things that were trans. Listen, anyone who has like a fan, it's a fan of drugs knows what it's like when you like send your shitty coated texts to your friend, to your friends about drugs. You don't have to be real clear. I'm not saying pizza. It's true. Nor am I. And I'm absolutely not saying there's a fucking dungeon in that pizza place. They're crazy dude went in shock. And I'm not saying the cleanse are responsible for any murders. What else are we not saying? What just we're just saying that that is one of there's another case that happened in like the 1980s or something. There's been a few of those weird cases where you like you got to think that throughout history, there have been people that have traffic children. Oh my God. When you take any long trip, you ever think about that? Yeah, you're going to be wrong trip that you take. How many fucking you hauls going by? Have people locked up in him? Probably like statistically one or two. Probably like you've been at a rest stop next to a fucking new hall that was filled with drugged people waiting to get taken to some God knows where lab. I mean, it's a don't they say human trafficking is like the number one, one of the number one industries in the world. Human trafficking is real and it's happening right now. And there was, you know, there's been studies on it where they try to figure out what the numbers are. But how do you know who's been trafficked? They're missing. And how many I wonder what the actual number is, but apparently it's a terrifying number. And that's happening right now. Like people are snatching people. People, there's more slaves today than there were when slavery was legal. That's not true. Yes. There's more slaves in the world today than there were when slavery was legal in America. Obviously there's more people fucking creepy. Obviously there's more people. But this idea that slavery went away when they abolished slavery in 1865. That's not really true. It's only true here. Jesus fucking Christ, Joe. Yeah. Man, I like, that's why you're like two more minutes. I gotta do how we in my kids. I don't want to end on human trafficking. But it's, it's what it's kind of a part of what we're talking about. Like that someone could be that it could be possibly in their fucking wheelhouse to do that to another person. Right. Right. There's people that are that predatory out there that fucked up that are that fucked up that there's levels to fucked up just like there's levels to everything. Look man. I mean, oh God, it's just we, especially people like us. Look, I'm going to, I've set up before on this podcast on quote and jack cornfield here tend to the part of the garden you can touch. Yeah. That's what you can do. Like what's the most effective thing you can do. That's it. As far as like the other stuff goes, it's like if you can help, if you're, if you're a human trafficker right now listening to this, driving your fucking you all across the country, filled with freight that you're going to make, stop. Pull over, let him out. Just stop. Obviously no one's going to do that. But most people it's like, you know, I'm going to deal with that. You're really just having to deal with the fact that when you wake up in a bad mood, you think it makes sense for the rest of the day to be a dick to other people. Cause you feel like you're in a bad mood. You don't have to do that. You it sounds so dumb, so dumb, so obvious. But really that is kind of the, I heard the Dolly llama say it. Do if this is what he said, if you can help, help, if you can't help, don't hurt. That's the EMC squared of it all. It's like, that's it. That's what it all boils down to. Look, maybe you're not in a position right now where you can help anybody. But for sure you don't have to say the shitty thing you're about to say to somebody because you're mad that you could stop. Like you could stop that. And that's a big deal, man. Like if you're someone who's been an act like saying mean things to people, you're alive. Woo, you know, they say in a, I read this thing in a yogi's life for a yogi, the greatest moment is when they were going to react with anger and they didn't. That's a huge moment, man. That's a huge moment when you manage to like rain in that fucking thing. Just once it's a big deal. But you know, if you keep doing it, that's when you start multi traveling through the multi first because everything around you gets completely different quick. You know, it's just that one little thing. I speak as like someone who's had real anger shit and like as do I. Yeah. Yeah. It's a, it's a thing, you know, that I constantly struggle with. It's a, you know, you get upset about things and you have to keep them under control. And it's hard to like, it's hard to have a balance perspective. You know, it's, it's hard when someone cuts you off in traffic, it's just to let it go. And not say, fuck you. Yeah. You know, it's like, he can't even hear you. And you're still like, fuck you, man. That was such a douche move. Yeah. But you're not going to change him. No. Like that, that's who he is at this moment and he's cutting people off in the highway. And you just got to adjust and adapt and don't get into one of those fucking things or people break check each other and get in front of each other. Oh, so scary, man. You ever see people doing on the highway and you're like, Oh my God, what are you doing? Don't fucking do that. It's so, so. Don't do it. It's so scary. Like you kill a bunch of people. Oh my God. People, I've seen so many videos of people doing that swerving into another lane and then the cars flip onto other cars. Yeah. Fuck, man. Yeah. There was a fucking one flooring recently. These guys started doing that to each other and they shot each other. They shot each other's daughters. Dude, they just like randomly shot into the car and there was a fucking passage that was a young girl in both cars. Do they kill them? No. I think they, they both live. But one of them is hit real bad. It was in critical condition. The collapse long. See, that's it. That's it. That's it. So see what happened there. What happened is those people because they didn't get a hold of the fucking dragon. Because of it. Most of the time they got away with it. Those obviously whoever those people are, that's not the first time they got angry. They're rage. Oh, looks. They're always mad. They were getting mad all the time. All the signs were there. And nobody likes it. Like, you know, whenever I've been caught up in that, it's fucking scary. It's like dying. Like you become something else for a second. And it's you become an animal. And you know why happens in the highway? Why? Because people are so ramped up because it's dangerous. So you're going so fast. You have to have your senses on high. And then any little thing that comes along, you're already at a seven. Right. That's what it is. That's what it is. That's what it is. Mother fucker. Yeah. Because you're already ramped up. Because even though you're being calm, you're driving, you're on alert. So when you're on alert, it's a predatory thing. It's a thing that's like it's wired into our DNA to like, if you're on alert, you're worried about something that's going to attack you. You're worried about something coming out. You're ready. Right? You have to be scared. Yeah. So it's we're not designed to drive fucking cars 65 miles an hour next to other cars. And everyone's just choosing when they change lanes. The amount of freedom you have when you're behind a wheel to be an asshole is extraordinary. Dude, you got it. And this is what the fucking internet is doing. It's making us all feel like we're driving on the fucking highway. Oh, they lost. Exactly. That's what it is. That's what it is. That's what it is. That's what it is. All day long, we're not even on the highway. We're walking around our backyard. We're like, oh, fucking contorted and feeling. Cut each other off. Yeah, just fucking cutting trees off. You're just like, you know, we're all like wrapped up. It went like things are just fine. Most of the time. Most of the time. Like, yeah, most of the time, like in the moment right now, right now, no problem. In the moment, most of the time, no problem. Everything's fighting. Something's looming for sure. Problems will come. But in this moment, everything's okay. That's interesting, right? Because you realize like, oh my God, then why do I feel so scared? Why do I feel so stressed out when right now in this moment? Pretty good. In this moment, pretty good. Yeah. It's a strange thing, the management of the mind as you move through life. And also the management of all the other shit around you. What you consume, how much you freak out about Ukraine, how much you freak out about dirty bombs, how much you freak out about fentanyl, how much you freak out about everything, how much you freak out about every fucking social issue that ever comes up, whether it's the environment or, you know, pronouns. Who the fuck knows? There's just a constant stream of shit that we're not used to, just like we're not used to driving fast on the highway. Tame your mind. Shanti Davis, way of the body, Satsha says, the mind is like a wild elephant. Think about that, dude. That's fucking, that's a crazy thing. You ever see a wild elephant like charging somebody? That's your mind. But what's cool about that is that that's a powerful thing. It is a powerful thing. And being able to have more control over it is a great feeling. Because it makes you feel like you can do a lot of different stuff on top of that. If you can like, as I've matured and gotten better at managing my own brain, I've also become much more productive. Right. Because I don't have as much bullshit to weigh me down, you know. And I think that if you're running through life, making the same mistakes over and over again, whenever I'm doing that, that's when I'm the most unproductive. Absolutely. Because I'm just like, what am I doing? The fuck am I doing? My life. Why don't I keep screwing up? You're always doing cleanup. Yeah. You're always doing cleaning. You're like, you're like someone who's like a clean up crew for your own fucking destruction. Like you're like always following your past around past decisions around cleaning up broken glass and old fucking like bits of concrete from the last crater you put in your life. It's like, man, it's exhausting. It's exhausting. A lot of work. It's a lot of work. And that's, you know, again, we go back to the human mind doesn't come with the operator manual. It's one of the most complex things that anybody could ever use. And it doesn't come with directions. And you learn from the people that are around you and it's hard to unlearn shit that's stupid. But I think he's as chaotic as this time is it's the most promising. Because it's the most interesting in terms of the way ideas get assaulted and reworked and thought up and debated. And even though we're there's suppression of information, there's definitely suppression of free speech and certain platforms. There's still more exchange of thoughts than like ever in a tumultuous way where people just wanted to end. They want one side to be right. The other side, the other side, the other side, the other side, the other are sides right. Fuck you. Fuck you about fentanyl. Fuck you about the border. Fuck you. But you're on the wrong side of history and fucking Roe v Wade. But it's just nuts with it, man. Just fucking nuts with it. And that's what we see around us all the time. And we imitate our atmosphere. That's it. And that's what we do. And that atmosphere imitates us and the atmosphere. And we are the atmosphere. It's reflective. We are the climate. That's it, dude. The climate. Yeah. And you could be like truly it's like, you know what? The one thing that I don't think anyone's going to get mad at you for. Put on any side of political spectrum is if you stop hurting people. Like truly that is like that's it. So it's just a little less aggression. You can even still hurt people. Just hurt them less. You can't stop hurting people. Just hurt them less. You can do that. You know, even if that person is yourself, I say again, I'm sorry. You're not that person is yourself. I turn this on myself as speed. I'm talking to myself right now. All y'all are I'm sure a million times more stable and calm than I am. But Joe, I gotta go. I gotta go trigger two with a kid. You're the fucking man. You're the man. I love you to death. I love you. I always love doing these. I got a lot of this one. This is a good one. Me too. It's very much. Thank you. Thanks for having me on there. Happy Halloween. Bye. Bye, buddy.