Are you getting to the point where no idea is to outlandish for a joke? Uh... Well, I mean, I guess part of the problem is some of these ideas are at two outlandish for a joke, but they do actually happen in real life so people don't realize they're a joke, you know? So you have these things, we'll publish a joke that's clearly a satirical joke that everybody thinks it's true, and they share it as if it's true, because they're so used to seeing almost satirical headlines in the real news. Yes. So reality isn't fault for that. It's not that our jokes are too believable. How? If that's facts, if reality's too close to satire. Oh, we get fact checked all the time. We've been fact checked dozens of times. Snopes is fact checked us at least 20 times. 20 plus times. Do they know that you're a parody site? They do. When they used to attribute nefarious motives to us, they used to say that we were like misleading people on purpose with these jokes, because they were believable and people were sharing them as if they were true. Again, not our fault. I think that's the fault of reality being too close to satire. Yes. But they would fact check them regular, ridiculous jokes, like, you know, AOC goes on the prices right, guess is everything is free or, you know, Ninth Circuit Court overturns death of Ruth Bader Ginsburg. You know, these are, they're silly jokes, they're funny jokes, but sometimes people believe that it's true because you could actually see somebody doing this. Who came up with those two? I don't know. We don't actually put the name of the author on the article, so I'd have to go back and go back and go. They're clever stuff. Yeah. We have a very, very sharp writing team. They're very good at this. Super good at this. I think one of my, honestly, one of my favorites that got fact checked was our joke about Trump saying that he had done more for Christianity than Jesus himself. And that was your headline. That was the headline. Trump, I have done more for Christianity than Jesus. And said that at some point, didn't he? Well, yeah, so we made that joke in 2019. It got fact checked shortly thereafter because it went crazy viral. And then in 2021, I think it was 2021 or 2022, he said he'd done more for Christianity and religion in general than any other person in the history. So it's hard to tell sometimes are people reading our website and getting ideas for what to say and what to do. I don't know, but that one was kind of. So how do you respond? When someone fact checks a joke, AOC on prices right, Trump's better for Christianity than Jesus, how do you respond to that? Well, when they fact check it, I think it's hysterical when they fact check it. What I don't like, what I don't like is when the fact check says they've managed to pull off this ruse before they're tricking people. The reason your grandma shared that joke on Facebook is because the Babylon be tricked her into believing it was true. That kind of stuff is ridiculous. We actually threatened to sue snopes because they were literally maligning us and suggesting that we were misinforming people on purpose. And then Facebook was saying that they were going to demonetize and deplatform. Because we were being fact checked by snopes. So saying you can't spread fake news on our platform like it's satire. So what I assume snopes is run by the CIA or I mean, I don't have evidence of that, but I like Wikipedia. I seems obvious. But what do you know about snopes? There was a couple that started it and that they were running it for a long time. I think the guy's name, I might mess it up. It was David Mickel Center, something like that, or Michael Sin. I may be getting that wrong. But anyway, it changed hands recently. Somebody else took it over. Oh, so they actually reached out to us and said, I know we've had a rough past, but we want to put that behind us and move forward. I mean, in your experience, do the fact checkers, which are, again, clearly at the very least influenced by the intelligencies. Yeah. Do they play any constructive role in our public conversation? No. No. I mean, well, first of all, they're spending their time fact checking satire. The joke about Ruth Bader Ginsburg that her death being overturned by the Ninth Circuit Board. Can you ever turn someone's death by the way? It happened with what happened once. It happened once. I don't think it happened with Ruth Bader Ginsburg. But USA Today fact check that one and they cited 15 sources in their fact check. Like they were taking it so seriously. They checked the Ninth Circuit Court website. They placed phone calls. It's like just look at the website that published it. So you're the Babylon being the same, right? Yeah. So I always think that behind every ludicrous event like that is a person who spent his day doing that thing. So imagine if he went home at night and your wife says, you know, like, what's that what you do today? What you accomplished. And you're like, well, I fact checked each other. 15 sources like the respect level for your wife has to plummet, right? The fact that it got fact checked is funnier than the joke itself. Yes. Like the one. So I had spoken with you about this one before CNN purchasing an industrial size washing machine to spin the news and before publishing it. That's ridiculous joke. It's silly. It's a CNN bias joke. And that got fact checked in rate of false tips. They're spending their time on stories that aren't even didn't actually purchase some industrial size. Never happened. They never did. They never slapped their logo on a washing machine and spun the news in it before it never happened. And it was a joke. But the joke is that they fact check it. They took it seriously. But no fact checking. So the way that I look at it is fact checking is a it's an arm. It's one of the methods that's employed by the lovers of censorship to guard the narrative not the truth. Yes. And so what they're doing with fact checking is they're very selective. First of all, they're super selective about what they fact check. And then the fact checks themselves often get the facts wrong on purpose. And so they're not guarding the truth and saying, okay, there's this problem of misinformation and we're going to prevent it spread. And we're going to do that by having objective people look at what the facts are. It's all narrative driven. It's all about protecting the popular narrative. And I think we mean lie. The lie. Yeah, whatever the popular lie is that they want you to believe. Yes, that that the claims are on that you have the press secretary for the current administration saying that Biden has done more to secure the border than any other person. That's a straight face claim from the press secretary. Fat checkers haven't touched it. It has not been rated false. No, no, no, no. Governor Abbott in Texas, Governor Abbott in Texas had was talking about how this administration currently has basically an open border policy and that got fact checked on rate of false. So you know that the challenges to the narrative are fact checked on rate of false, the narrative itself, which isn't true, is allowed to go unchecked. So normally we wouldn't care what the fact checkers say because they're obviously discredited. I mean, they're disgusting by their nature, but we have to care because they are the triggers that set into motion the censorship apparatus at the social media companies. Correct. Right. So they use the fact checkers are the way of them getting out of the way and saying, well, we're not the ones determining we're not the arbiters of truth. Facebook could go could punt to snopes or whoever else USA today, whoever is doing the fact checking and say, we're not censoring you. We're not removing your content based on arbitrary rules. We have third party fact checkers that are objective and they're the ones deciding what's true and what's false and what can stay and what goes. So they just they fit in as a piece that allows them to basically have like plausible the liability that they're involved in censorship. But the USA today fact check on Ruth Bader Ginsburg's death, that was funded by grants from Facebook. So Facebook paid USA today. So y'all hear people say this news is full of wine and kind of these motor games.