The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night That sound is a sweetie, so I'll try sound if my baker let me see God Hey, though, good to see you buddy. What's happening? Good to be seen good to be seen that Yeah, no not much going on these times of ours I'm very excited to talk to you because I had a guy on Jamie Metzle yesterday scientist just scared the shit out of me talking about China Talking about China we were talking about China a massing naval power China's taking over tech companies and how how huge they're getting and how much influence they have over their people as opposed to the way we do it Well, it's not wrong. No, yeah, I can't spot the lion and what what you just said, but I mean look that I mean there's so much we can we can talk about but If you think about it just in the past handful of months There was this solar winds hack right by the Russians So the Russians go in they hack into a company called solar winds. There is an IT management software company that happens to be fairly deep into government organizations agencies treasury and a variety of others throughout the US government and They're also into parts of the Intel community defense department in a lot of commercial sectors So anyway the Russians figure this out now route about December or January Microsoft you know identified this is a problem and and I think was the head of Microsoft said it looks like the most sophisticated attack We've ever seen so this is December January timeframe and they're still trying to figure out the depth of this hack by Russians at the same time and going back months and months and months and months before the Chinese had been engaged in a more sophisticated attack that While everyone is focused on what's going on and so fully aware that we got problems, right from from nation states out there who don't like us Everybody's talking about solar winds and now it's you know, they've just now released information about the Chinese attack against Microsoft exchange servers Running the exchange email systems and this thing is enormous and so the Chinese yeah, I mean We've been so focused for four years on the Russians, you know and there You know, they they're out there to cause us also. It's a problem. So we should be focused on them But it's China. That's the biggest problem and so this guy is absolutely right Jamie's right It was terrifying. Yeah, listen to what he was talking about the way he was explaining how they You know they have this plan I think he said 2049 to be the global superpower of the world and essentially be Take the place of what America used to be Yeah, they would their way and do it their way which means We're gonna bypass all the costs and the heavy lift of research and development over the years And which could steal everything and they've been doing it for decades So people think oh China. It's a problem. It's a problem We've talked about this before you know this idea that perhaps this is just something relatively new or it's popped up during the previous administration of Trump and Honest gas truth is it's been going on for decades and they decided that that's how they're going to get to the top of the food chain It's by stealing ship because it's a lot easier to hoover up everything and then reverse engineer it and The technology has made it even easier right? It used to be old school. They'd go out and recruit somebody They'd find some Chinese American working for a company here in the States They'd appeal to sort of you know you got to help the motherland and and they would That was the old school way of doing it, but you know Cyber theft is it's incredible what they're able to do and this latest attack Well, they they're still trying to sort out the mess right so when they do this so if they get into this email server Are they targeting anything specific is there specific companies are they just like throwing a net out there and seeing what they catch? Yes is the answer to both of those it's It looks like what happened here was that Their their initial point of attack or their initial focus was intelligence right so then it branched out and it branched out very very quickly Right to hit everything small companies medium-sized companies and That's kind of the MO for the Chinese the Chinese regime right the and the their Intel operations They've got this long vision and They've also got the resources and they've got the desire to hoover up everything and that's sorted out later We take as as as a country we take a very sort of targeted approach All right, we say okay This is a piece of information that's a priority tasking for the US for our national security We're gonna go out we're gonna figure out who has access to it. We're gonna develop a very sort of surgical strike to figure out How do we get to somebody who's got this piece of information? That's typically how? We or some of our allies would operate The Russians the Chinese have always had a different approach. I mean the Russians is less elegant The Russians are just throw shit at the wall and see what sticks right but the Chinese They've got this long view and they've also got this ability and they'll so in this particular attack that they're still trying to assess That was perpetrated by You know Chinese state sponsored hackers based in China They They're just gonna take everything and then they'll sift through it they'll figure out what they got a lot of it's gonna be just You know, chafe not not of interest But they're gonna find a lot of gold in there too And they're willing to do that because they've got the patience to do it They all they'll develop a target they'll develop a potential recruit for years and years and years or they'll they'll infiltrate a society or an organization right they'll put a student out here who's actually working for the PLA for their intel operations and They'll put them out as an undergrad and they'll go to school and they'll get good grades and they'll go to a grad school And they'll get a job they'll get another job and then 30 years down the line it may pay off, but they're willing to make that investment All right, so we should be scared well We shouldn't be scared, but we said yeah, we I don't think we should be scared But I think what we should be is is pragmatic and understand why For instance, I mean there was a lot of you know, you know, you would cry over the past four years I can't believe I just said he wouldn't cry I Like the cats, but you have us it's so You know four years of Trump and sort of as an antagonistic relationship with China and people were all ringing their hands and watching DC, you know that sort of the the think tankers and the traditional pundits and the diplomats of of The US you know the long-term people there. Oh my god. We've got this average area relationship with China Well, you know what we better right so that's not a bad thing So I'm hoping the current administration maintains to some degree and we'll see what happens They still haven't responded to the solo wins to the Russian attack right? They're talking about it now They're saying they're gonna they're gonna engage in several clandestine Retaliatory acts. Well, it's not that clandestine because they've announced that they're gonna do it and so You know, but but I'm hoping that they will take serious action against the the solo wins Russian act, but they've got to with China They've got to maintain this posture. We've got to Make it clear and understood to the Chinese regime that we're not gonna put up with this shit They're gonna keep doing it, but we got to make it painful for them. So how do you make it painful? Well, you know, it's the old word sanctions You gotta go with the sanctions because there's not much else trade wars You know, I don't everybody hates a trade war not everybody, but you've you've you've got to fight away because the problem with with cyber shenanigans is that there's no real clear definition right? We know if we if a country fires a ballistic missile off You know, we know what the retore of tally or retaliatory act is we know what appropriate responses in Cyberspace when you're talking about warfare Coming up with the definition is very difficult and hasn't been done yet We've got cyber command right and we're still trying to sort out what are appropriate responses because they can escalate quickly Right next thing you know, they get shut down our infrastructure right well, that's what I wanted to talk to you about Supposedly what they did in India So if you could explain that to people they shut down the power grid in India Allegedly they said they didn't do it, but apparently there was some sort of a warning about the power going out right yeah They've done it. I mean the Russians did it famously in the Ukraine right I mean not that long ago and China's ability to interfere in Infrastructure here in the US or in India or with our allies It's because for years now they've been probing there's been testing going on. You know there we we we we talk about It's a good example We talk about how In the US we have three grids and I think people were stunned to find out that Texas has its own power grid Well, yeah But it's not so much people were like oh my god look at Texas They're terrible because you know they wanted to make it a political thing They wanted to make it sound like the reason why it's so terrible is because it's Republicans and they've got they want their own Independence well No, all three grids are fucked right the East and the West and the Texas grids are all cobbled together over the years So it's a very so it's like a patchwork quilt and they were never built to withstand Physical attacks. I mean you could drive by any substation right you could get close enough to pee on it and there's They certainly were never designed to withstand a cyber attack so Over the years what goes on is essentially a mapping exercise Right where whether it's the Russians whether it's the Chinese whether it's the North Koreans using Chinese Capabilities whether it's the Iranians whomever They're in their probing and trying to understand the weaknesses and they're drawing up a map now the reason why they're doing that is to have a game plan Right and I guarantee you sitting on the desk somewhere not too far from you know Jeez office is a playbook that says if this thing escalates here's what we're going to do and If you think like it was bad in Texas, you know a couple weeks ago when you know the power was out and it was bad but think about that lasting for 8 10 12 weeks around the country Power grids shut down what happens you can't transport shit right you can't get cash Fuel doesn't get to the gas stations food doesn't get to the stores This you know depending on the time of year heat issues obviously water supplies And that's where the next big battle is going to be fought right they're going to bring it to the homeland And we will do the same thing right it's not like we're not doing it because people always say when I say something Well the US does it too. I think well fuck yeah, the US does it we better we better hope we're we're we're We're perfect is that fresh you frustrate you when people say that? Of us does it too. Yeah, it doesn't a sense because and this is where I think You know that now personal opinion comes into it. Look I spent most of my my adult life overseas and I'd like to think that I've got a fairly pragmatic view on things I do admit that I you know obviously look I look at the US and I like to think and I have seen on occasions We do a lot of things for for the right reasons sometimes we don't do it properly right we make mistakes of course We make mistakes But we try to self correct I Guarantee you if we're talking about the major powers out there if we're talking about China and us if we're talking The Chinese regime I'm talking about obviously if we're talking about the Russians the Iranians with Koreans We better hope that we stay up there right and are able to exert influence and leverage and control the top right because if it's if it's I And again, I maybe I brought here, but the Chinese don't view anything in an altruistic manner the Chinese regime right it's all about self-interest and Sometimes I tell you what's frustrating sometimes is we seem to be the only country out there that apologizes right for that sort of thing and So when we act in our own best interest and we go well, we're really sorry about that We're kind of acting in our bum best interest well every other nation does it and they don't give a fuck Yeah, but shouldn't we be the moral high ground for the world? I think we should I think it's nice if we do all the same shit They do we say sorry Yes It doesn't cost it to say sorry Think we're setting it tone. Yeah, I guess that's true as long as we're as long as we're also then at the same time Acting at our own best it's because we have to be again We have to be pragmatic if we think that somehow you know look at climate change That's obviously it's back on the table. It's as a big issue as a major policy direction Hey fine great who doesn't want clean energy, but you know to to act as if China's not the you know the number one polluter out there is insane That's that's where it gets weird. Yeah. It does get it gets a little weird giant difference between the amount of Particulates the amount of pollution the amount of CO2 You know, I think they've they've tried hard to mitigate that over the last few years in particular But you remember when they had the Beijing Olympics? Yes, and they had to shut everything down because the air quality was so bad The athletes, you know, would it would actually be dangerous for the athletes to to perform and to compete With those conditions. I'm pretty much lighted up. Maybe Don't worry about it. It's um, I'm not allowed this I'm not allowed the smokes of guys at the house because Because you know, I don't want to sit a bad example for scooter and sluggo and mugsie But well, I'm allowed to in the house, but I get yelled at by the kids Do you have air handlers in any part of your house? No, I have a thing one of those Purifiers of fear things it sucked things out. Yeah, and I have some spray that I bought on Amazon Kill this parade for breeze. Yeah, and in my office. I just I open I have a little window thing I open the windows and get the air out. It's old school. That's good. Yeah, it works I live with all women man. I've it's all women in my fucking house So it's women in there. I like being a man every now and then we get the fights on I smoke Cuz the guard put my feet up. I feel like man again dude my banker. No, I know I know I look I got a different situation My wife is completely outnumbered right even with the pets except for we got a Siberian hamster as a female we think I got a man. Oh, yeah, it go. Yeah, how's he doing? Marshall is awesome. Marshall right? He's the best. Yeah, yeah Dogs oh my god dogs are great But so yeah, the Chinese is it I hate it, you know, I hate it I think sometimes I people say I quit kicking the Chinese in the ass But the regime really does Have a plan as you pointed out they would like to accelerate that plans to before 2049 and It's everything. It's it's the aggression in the in the South Pacific seas. It's it's they're build up of their military particular their Navy It's it's primarily the part that is most frustrating is the theft of intellectual property and I mean look this this this hack that I just talked about earlier with with Microsoft with the exchange We're getting screwed right so they're out there. We don't we don't know the extent We know it's huge. We don't know the extent yet of this attack but Do you think that's gonna stop is Microsoft gonna stop doing business in China? No absolutely not no All right, then what if your Facebook is banned, you know, you know, what's not banned? Microsoft right LinkedIn right Bing right so Cool fuck uses Bing. I know big. I know I know we still exist I have a windows laptop Want to pull up bang sometimes. I'm like what are you doing? I know I'm here being But it's at that point being is it how bad is Bing is it bad is it it's not bad bad a bank It's just no one's using it right I Use duck.go That's what I like because duck.go gives me uncurated information Where it's like that's good, you know, and it doesn't duct. Go doesn't save your information It's not it's not trying to like use your data and it just gives you a search Do you know what it is you wherever shit? No, no look at me. I you know, I I? I know how to do a couple of things on my laptop one of them is send emails I've looked for things on Google and I couldn't find them page after page I looked on duck.go and I find them instantly Duck.go does not censor or curate any of the information it just tries to search out Keywords that you're looking for so like here's a perfect example. How do you know? It's not curated though well the difference is the way I try to find things on Google and try to find things on duck.go So this is a good example There was a doctor in Florida who died immediately after the COVID vaccination Whether it's causation or correlation or just random Bad luck like this guy was in this 50s. He's helped relatively healthy as far as you know the article says Takes a COVID vaccination dies So I'm trying to find out what this is because somebody sent it to me and then I Google it I cannot find it two three four pages in can't find it duck.go First page right away. I'm like well something's happening. I think Google is trying to They're you know look I think they're doing it for altruistic purposes I think they think that they're being Good citizens and good human beings trying to encourage people to get vaccinated and they they want to they want to discourage Anti-vax propaganda if you have 320 million people that get vaccinated You're gonna have a hundred two hundred a thousand two thousand horror stories. Yeah, that's just yeah That's if you give it you give 320 million people Tyler naw you're gonna have 2,000 horror stories, right agreed. Yeah, yeah, I remember the Tyler naw scale That was different. That was someone was poisoned exactly Yeah, but I mean if you just give them I mean Tyler naw might not be the best example But there's a lot of medication. Yeah, but if you give people they some people for whatever reason Like I'm not allergic to dogs, but my wife's allergic dogs, you know like I'm not You know some people like my friend Brian his mom if she even licks a Brazil nut She's dead. Yeah, you know my wife's like that with Hazelness I don't know what the fuck that is Yeah, but this is also the case with virtually anything that gets introduced to the human body We vary so much biologically that if you have a wide swath of people if you have an enormous number 330 plus million That you're gonna have a few horrible cases now that doesn't mean that people shouldn't get vaccinated Doesn't mean people shouldn't eat Brazil nuts. It just means you should kind of have access to all the information But we also should should have unbiased objective reporting of these things and someone stated that way and I try to do that is duck duck go as that spelled is it Just actually it's just a little duck. It's an app. It's an app. I'm not my spelling duck. Yeah. It's like no Okay, or you know Clever thing actually is a duck and the logos a duck ducks or do I like it we're getting a farm duck. Oh No, there are eggs tastes like shit though Have you ever done duck eggs now? Which is I have a dog bottle fucking dozen duck eggs I gave him to my dog. What'd you get duck eggs from just local fucking weirdo market? Yeah, yeah Yeah, I'm just even market. Yeah, so weirdo market sort of in duck. They suck there in fear They're slimy which is what just getting the duck it is the farm duck for for entertainment purposes They leave like a On your mouth Well, that's good to know that I tell my boys don't don't like if you blew Donald duck It's matter star. We know about that would be daisy quail eggs though or delicious Delicious I quit like last night. Did you I did it fancy. I know it's sitting on top of some tuna tartar Do that sorry Well, let me just adjust my ask Parsley all yeah, I believe they might have been foam on the plate. Oh, remember that was a big thing foam We're gonna put foam on it. I put foam on my people do that drizzle Put a little bit. They go scrape the crisp. Yeah. No, it's What's I gonna say something about the other Russians you talk about the Inability again information so you talk about vaccines so just some popped in my head The Russians are added again, right? So they did the solo wins. They know that retaliation is ever Hard time that we're I do fuck it hell. What's the pro-elyation retaliation retaliation? That's good. It's not you know even from you're kind of from another country But it's England. Mm-hmm, right? You're born in England. Yeah, aluminium. Yeah, that's a weird one. It's tires with a Y Yeah, we want to put we want to put but extra, but you're American basically. Oh sure Yeah, first and foremost what when were you born there? Well you lived there to how long? My childhood and then I moved Australia. What year did you move to America? I did my final year of high school in America You can't be trusted. Of course. I can be you're basically a part of your trust with a person I feel like he's a foreign agent working for the CIA like right Jamie. Don't you feel this way? Don't say don't say yes I know it's pressure to say Australians are basically I feel like Stoy is a great. Yeah say nothing bad about us. No, I fucking love Australia Yeah, if I was gonna live anywhere outside the United States in Canada, I would live in Australia 100% Yeah, more New Zealand. It was stealing spewing. I never even been New Zealand, but I love New Zealanders. I'm surprised at that Yeah, I mean that's a beautiful day. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's it's a long ways away You know people say people say it's a great place to write out the pandemic It's not better than I know I know it's a great place to write at the pandemic But it's a lot colder than New Zealand motherfucker. Yeah. No, that's it's not incorrect Hobbitland, but it'll be a bit the Russian somebody tell about what the Russians are to now Having just on the heels of the solar winds hack which was very successful for them and they've we still don't know how much Intel they've pulled and it's probably a great deal But now you know what they're doing is they are engaged in a covert action campaign a covert basically a propaganda campaign Against us vaccines Pfizer in particular Against them. Yes basically they're what they're doing is they're using social media and they're seeding Information about wow this Pfizer vaccine. I don't know if it's really legit Right because the Russians created their own vaccine. This is this is basically a monetary decision for them. They're trying to sell their Sputnik vaccine It's called Sputnik. Yeah, they never got over that space racing So they they call it Sputnik. They're trying to sell it to every country that'll buy it And so what they're trying to do is trying to to try to push down They're trying to create a lack of credibility in the Pfizer vaccine in particular you at us made vaccines in general And so they're seeding stories out there in the old days before before the internet What you would do is you would pay off journalists and you would you would get you would get stories planted in the newspapers really when people read newspaper and That's how you would influence to some degree public opinion you do other things the Russians You know, they're very good at this But that was one of the old days the ways that you would do it now as we know from the elections in the past They're using that same methodology that they did during the elections of sort of like you know put in this idea that Our electoral system is incredible that there's problems with it That's in their benefit But they're also now doing it as far as the vaccines go and primarily the driver there is is a monetary issue right there just want to sell Sputnik and It's really called Sputnik. It's the Sputnik. Yeah, by the way My friend who's a doctor took the Russian vaccine He got a hold of the Russian vaccine a few months ago. He said zero side effects. He said He's doing as an experiment or did he do it because it was the only vaccine he could get he can get whatever he wants Yeah, I think well, he's a really fucking smart guy. He's one of the smartest people. I know and he just Smart people so yeah, he's a genius like a legitimate genius and he decided that he wanted to take the Russian vaccine I haven't talked to him about it in depth But he said based on the research that he did on the vaccine. He said it's as legit as any of them He had access to it. Is it an MRI and a virus the same or vaccine rather is the same as Pfizer and more? Yeah, I think it's using the same Technology and the development of it was the was kind of the same I think but but they just but they raised it out there Right so and they what what they don't have to do is it's like a lot of other things overseas They don't necessarily have the FDA, you know, breathe down the next thing. These are the sort of clinical trials You've got to go through these are the sort of approvals you need so part of the problem that they've been facing with Sputnik is like you got this out here pretty quick right and so They probably tested it on like pussy riot and Oh Yeah, yeah Yeah, I got all their albums No, I have a t-shirt back in my LA house. I need to bring it over here. It's pretty pussy riot. I was wearing on Haven't you sold the LA house? I have two LA houses. I sold one of them. Oh, listen to you. You know Me Yeah, I'm big Yeah, he slipped up there didn't you hear me? Yeah, he might have slipped up a little bit I didn't slip up no sometimes you want to see the fact that you know there's a piece of information floating out there You put it the sidebar conversation, but so anyway So yeah, the rest of the bottom line is look I don't want to sound like one of those people with but we just have to be pragmatic Yes, and so to go back to that question you had which I think is very interesting Do I get frustrated by people saying well the US you know does it too? Fuck yeah, it's a hostile world out there whether you want to believe it or not It's it's not a happy place out there and there's a lot of people that would would like to see us You know at the bottom of the food chain and so you know all those people and say well the US does it too Yes, we do and you know what you're sitting here in the US and you're using the benefits of being here in the US So you probably want to add an occasion just on occasion maybe root for the home team I think it's a natural thing that people do when one country is the most innovative the most militarily successful You know, there's a lot of shit about the United States that angers people that even are a part of the United States in terms of our Interventionalist foreign policy. I mean you got guys like Ron Paul Don't think we should be anywhere Control the United States and you've got other people the thing that we should go over there and fucking kick ass and conquer The whole globe and and keep them on the straight narrow the way Legedly we are but the thing that bothers me more than anything about the United States currently is like There's a There's a unnecessary divide That I see amongst us. There's like there's a racial divide. There's a sexual orientation divide There's a I wonder how much of this is Cultivated and how much of this is curated like when I see like Even weird things that don't make sense like in Connecticut 15 of their state titles state Records for women's athletics are held by two biological males who identify as females. Tell me look yeah This is one thing This is one thing to be tolerant and to be open-minded But there's one thing to look at the whole picture and go what better way Across the board with everything to get people upset and frustrated and distracted and Constantly engaged in arguments and battle then to seed social media with nonsense and and and and and constant propaganda and And all we know from the internet research agency and Renee du rest is work and all this that they that Russia in particular and probably China and Iran are constantly Flooding social media with arguments against all sorts of policies and pro all sorts of other policies simultaneously Just to encourage argument and you wonder like how much of the racial divide in America is real for sure There's real racist in America. Yeah, but also for sure. There's a lot of like Malarky. Yeah, there's a lot of shit. That's like most of us Get along. Yeah, most of us get along most of it. I can't I can't agree with it No republicans of Democrats most don't give a shit because they're worried about their daily fucking life They're worried about their children. They're worried about the same thing. It's like that old sting song the Russians love their children too Yes, yeah, yeah, it's the yeah, I'm not that good. Yeah, I'm not saying. Yeah, quote. It's sting. I'm off-staying. Oh, the I think what's happening is the fucking The world is so filled with information and there's some players that are manipulating that information to keep people Being antagonistic against each other and the thing is like they're over there and we think oh these motherfuckers are coming after us They're doing this they're hacking this no one is together right human beings are supposed to be like you and I are right now Having a cocktail smoking a cigar sitting across from each other and yes, we all Basically want the same things we want to be healthy and successful Best for our kids. Yes. Yes. Yes. We want the best for our community. We want to be happy. We want to be happy and There's too many filters in this life between human being sitting down and communicating with each other and breaking bread with each other and talking with each other There's too many there's too many filters. Well, I will say don't eat life between human being sitting down and communicating with each other and breaking bread with each other and talking with each other. There's too many filters. Well, I will say don't, nobody should underestimate that point that you just made earlier, which is it. There is a very active covert action, uh, wing within the Russian government within Chinese intel with it. And their whole point sometimes is not to do anything other than just distrust and instability and chaos. People say, well, why would they do that? Well, they do it because it's in their best interest. Again, going back to that same thought. So is it in the, the, yeah, say the Russian best interest to kind of see the idea of, you know, what, domestic terrorism and racism, that's your top priority in the States. Of course it is. And so we feed into that, right? And we do our own part too, right? There's this desire to slice and dice the demographic, right? For political purposes, right? If I can control this block or if I can control that block, then I can win the election. Right? Yeah. Well, that's fucked up. And I, you know, I'm old enough to, to, you know, remember the riots, you know, bear, I mean, okay, I was watching TV and as a kid, but the riots of the 60s and that whole civil rights process. And I'll be honest with you, you know, up until a handful of years ago, I really thought we'd moved on. I thought, you know, it was all about who you are as a person, right? Your character is Martin Luther King used to talk about, right? I think you would be disgusted by this idea that it's all about your, your, the color of your skin. Bullshit. It is bullshit. And it's also the sexual orientation. I don't give a fuck with your sexual limitations. I don't need to celebrate it, but I don't care. Yeah, I don't care. I think it's, it's, these are, these are attack factors. They're, they're way to put it. They're ways that people can figure out a way to, the sow the seeds of dissent and, and discontent. And I think that, you know, one of the things that happened that was really, we talked about the whole situation with the power grid here. It was really sad to me to watch people on the left saying, Hey, you know, hey, Texas, you know, you still want your independence now. Like look what happened. Like man, you got babies freezing to death. You know, you got people without clean water. Like is, is, is that who you are? Because as an American, I don't give a fuck if you're a public and or a Democrat. I share ideas from both sides. I'm, I'm kind of a hybrid in a lot of ways. And yeah, I'm, I'm a big supporter of the Second Amendment. I'm a big supporter of the military. But I'm very liberal. I'm socially very liberal. Like I don't, I don't buy this idea that I have to be a part of one party or another party. I 100% support gay rights. I 100% support women's rights, civil rights, trans rights across the, across the board, but not the expense of other people. Yeah. Which is why I'm against this whole idea of, you know, trans athletes competing against biological females. But it's also why I'm, I'm, I'm also in support of the Second Amendment. Like people are some people, they're raised poorly. They're abused, they're tortured. They're, they're fucking put in foster care. They, they find their way into jouvin out the tension that they go to prison and then they're out and they have no money. And then the pandemic hits and they want to rob your house. If you don't think you should have a gun to protect yourself from bad people who just buy circumstance or buy bad fucking luck, find themselves at your doorstep. You're crazy. You're crazy. You don't love your family. If you don't think you should be able to protect you, if you're in a bad situation. And it's, you protecting people against an attack from bad people. You're out of your mind. You, you, you've never experienced bad people then. You've never experienced dangerous people. That's a good, that's a good point. I mean, a lot of people like to imagine that there's a, there's a, there's community of goodwill out there. And that if just given the opportunity, all people would be, you know, they would be inclined to go along with what's in your best interest. Look, I, you know, yeah, if you could find them as babies, yeah, and raise them, right? When you have children, and I have children too, and there's a thing you find out when you have children, when I, when I had children, it changed me as a man. It changed me as a human being. And one of the most profound ways it changed me is I stopped thinking about people as static things. I stopped thinking about a man. It's like, this is a 54 year old man. And here he is. I go, oh, this is a grown up baby. And I've really started thinking about people like that. I started thinking about people as children that grew up and by bad circumstance, by abuse, by horrible environments, they became this bad person. But I don't think people are born bad. Yeah, I, but there's something I agree with you. I don't think they are. I think, I think the environment creates, you know, I mean, and, and yeah, I mean, look, there's so many sides to this, I mean, like a criminal justice reform, of course, like we need, we need to focus on criminal justice reform. But at the same time, you know, as somebody who owns a walk-in safe, yeah, you're never going to convince me that it's not my right to protect. When you see, I say, if you mean it, gun safe, yeah, yeah, yeah, fucking gold bars in there, bro. I get catheters and gold bars. Yeah, that's what I got. No, no, I'm kidding. I just have election of Dildos from the 16th century. That's a way, you know, those things are Roman, Roman clay, Dildos. Where did that come from? But no, as a walk-in gun safe. Yeah, look, you have the right, I mean, think about a family, you know, you're raising your kids. And the legitimate police response time is 20, 30 minutes, right? Not because, you know, the police are overstretched, but even just because you're living in someplace where that's how long it's going to take. And it's like this idea of what's a good example. It's like when you're, you talk about, well, should some of the teachers in a school be armed? Well, we have an Idaho. We have schools where legitimately the sheriff getting to that school is going to take him 25 minutes because of the fucking distance, right? So yes, do I want a couple of well trained vetted responsible teachers in that public school to be armed in case there is God forbid some incident? Yeah, fuck yeah, I do. Yeah. So that just, that to me is common sense. And then you'll get people going, well, how, how is it wrong? You're protecting children. What's also the idea that people are mutually like this, these are two mutually exclusive ideas. Like someone can't be a math teacher, but also be trained in firearm use. Yes. Yeah, yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. It's a human being. If it's a human being that understands math, that guy could be good at anything else. Right. And you, and you insist that they do. And there's ways to do it. This is not a heavy lift to have someone trained up and then, you know, go through continuous training because they have to do that. I mean, the problem with a lot of people is so, you know, they'll get scared or for whatever reason they'll think, uh, they're going to take away our gun. So I better go out and buy one, right? There's huge surge in gun sales. Oh my God. The pandemic was the best thing that ever happened. It's a gun in. For the manufacturers. No, absolutely. And I'm sure the NRA too. I'm sure the NRA's membership went up too. They have the NRA said some serious problems. Well, they have a lot of problems. But there, there's not a lot of organizations that are fighting for gun rights. Yeah, that's very few. Yeah. Yeah. So, so they're important in that sense. But I think, I think that, yeah, do I think that it's important to insist that, um, but again, that's that's common sense, right? I don't want the federal government to say, you know, what you have to do, but it's, it's like the mask. I, I'll tell you this, flying into Texas, right? On an aircraft I was on, um, one of the flight, uh, attendance came up and kind of tapped me on the shoulders. We were getting rid of land and said, we'll be careful because, you know, you know, Texas has gotten rid of the mask band dates. So and, and the point was from the flight attendant was, you know, it's going to say to you. Yeah, it's going to be like the likes. Yeah, it's a wild west. It's going to be like, well, yeah, just like Mr. Pink, or you'd be careful out there because, you know, it's not like you. Yeah. And, uh, and so, but, but to put him, my wife was sitting right next to me, there was nothing on tour. It wasn't like, yeah, we were not engaged in any shenanigans, but, but the point was, was that they looked at it and they go, oh, you know, Governor Abbott said this and it's political, right? But my point of my story is I walked off the plane. Everybody was wearing a mask. Yeah, this is the thing that government out, governor rather Abbott said, he said, I encourage you to wear a mask. You should still wear a mask, but I don't want the state to tell you what to date. Right. That's what I support. And if you don't want the state to tell you what to do, you shouldn't want the federal government. Exactly. It's telling you what to do. Exactly. Exactly. But everybody I've seen in Austin wearing a mask. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, until you go to a restaurant and then you sit down and there's no mask. And I don't understand that. Well, that's all things nonsense. You have to wear a mask when you go to pee and then you don't wear a mask when you come back and get down to your table. Okay. I mean, because you know, to be fair, they've got, you know, mostly six foot distance, you know, they have and the places that I've been here in Texas, they keep the social distance. But I guess my point was like, you get this. And we talked about this earlier off before the show, but was the idea that some people just like the suffering, they suffer well. Right. They enjoy the fact that this is this is hard and bad. And that's really sad. But it's true. There's people that they enjoy being depressed. It's a hard thing to even say because you don't want it to be real. You know, you know what, there'd really be people out there that like when there's some people that when we got shut into our homes and everyone was sad and everyone was scared, they enjoyed it because that's how they live all the time. Yeah. Yeah. Or that's just it's their time to shine. Some people have have really shown during the pandemic. Yeah. And it's a, I saw this post from this, this individual who's a professional, uh, clearly from their job. And they, they posted, oh, I'm dealing with such anxiety now because of the possible return to normal and the idea that I'm going to have to travel and I won't be able to have dinner with my kids. And I'm just like, I'm thinking fuck you, you've had that it was clear from the post that they've had the luxury of working from home and not losing their job. And they could teach their kids. And it's this idea of not opening the public schools. These kids out here who don't have Wi-Fi, who don't have laptops, who have a one parent home who has to work. All those in can't afford a tutor can't make a little pod to teach their kids. You know, those people aren't doing well. Right. And those kids are suffering. And then you get like the people who can afford to set up a private pod for their kids and bring a tutor in and have strong Wi-Fi and can do all those things. I have English as a first language and they're doing just fine. And they're like, well, we should not go back to school. Fuck you. Kids have disappeared off the radar during this past year. And the schools don't even know where they are in places like New York and Chicago and other places. So it's, it's fucked up. Yeah. You know, it's, there's narratives out there. And the problem with these narratives are, it's not that they're all completely inaccurate. The problem is when you say, when you, when you espouse these narratives in a very condensed process to wear like social media, you get a bunch of people that support it, a bunch of people that argue against it. But if it's a narrative like, we should stay home. We should all wear masks. Pretty hard for people to fight against that. Right. So people, they, they, they pile on and then, and then people get addicted to like the reactions and the interactions on Twitter. And it's like, it becomes this weird fucking method of communication, the method of the discussing ideas. And they get people get really attached to whatever, whatever they believe in, whether they believe the kids should be in school to the end of time. And all, all fucking interactions should be done through Zoom or that we should all throw away our masks and achieve herd immunity. And you should take vitamin D and go out in the sun and fucking exercise and be healthier. And you can do, you can do all of it. Right. You can wear a mask because you know, okay, fine. I, who can I, my, my freedoms aren't infringed by wearing a mask. I don't give a shit. It's not that big a deal. Yeah. But at the same time, do I want my kids back in school? Do I think it's healthy for my oldest boy, Slogo to, you know, be wearing his, you know, pajamas or his sweat pants all day long and learning from distance? No. And I think that it's just, so there are, I, you know, I do agree with the idea that there are people that that suffer well, they're kind of wielding this whole thing as a sort of justice. Yeah. So well, you know, a good example, the comedy community is an interesting example because one of things that a lot of my professional comedian friends have found is that there's a lot of people that never worked. And when I say never, I'm exaggerating, but they weren't, they weren't successful. They didn't, they weren't selling out clubs and theaters. They weren't doing well. And they're so angry that some comics have decided to go on the road again because a lot of places have opened up. Texas has opened up Florida's open up. You can go and do shows. But that's a chance to do work, right? I mean, so it is. But they're angry and they want the narrative is that you're doing these super spreader events. People even got mad at me and Dave Chappelle because Dave and I were doing these shows at Stubbs, amphitheater and Austin outside. There's no evidence whatsoever that the the the virus spreads outside. And I mean, literally not. There's no evidence. And then on top of that, we test everyone in the crowd. It's expensive. It takes a long time. The people get there early. We test the entire crowd. Are you doing temperature checks? No, we're doing, we're doing, uh, antigen tests for the entire crowd. That's crazy. Yeah. I mean, that's great. But it's crazy. It's expensive, but it's the way to do it. And we had a great fucking time. And we're doing it again. And, but some comics have been mad at that. But if you go and look at the comics that are mad, they're all unsuccessful or super liberal and they're virtue signaling. They're looking to like tag on to this idea that what you're doing is bad. And then what we should do is all stay home and lock down. Like you can go outside. And by the way, most people like 99.9, whatever percent survive. There was a recent study that showed that 78% of all the people that are hospitalized from COVID are overweight. Yeah. I've seen that. Yeah. The other way is the shame that all these people are talking about fat shaming. You want to talk about the superspreters? It's people that have ignored their health. And those people need help and they need support and they need love. But there's a reality to the people that are getting sick from this. If everyone was healthy, this would almost be a non issue. Now, that's not a health shaming thing. Like we should be shaming people that are in poor health or people that are born with, you know, co-morbidity factors like diabetes and whatever. Of course. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. But we're not looking at this thing 100% objective. If we were, we would have a completely different take on it. Well, look, there's no science as an example. I'm focused because I got these three knuckleheads at home. Right. So I'm focused on like the education side of this as well. And so as are you. But there's no science. People believe science. Of course, believe science that that's one of the funniest narratives. Believe science. Well, oh, the fuck doesn't believe. I mean, that's fine. But it's a political issue. Right. So, but I think that there's no science that shows that, you know, a six foot distance in public schools for kids, right, is is is essential to their health. So in fact, the science shows three foot. That's fine. And what that does though, the importance of that is logistics, right, because it allows for you to get the schools open again. People will talk about the six foot distance. We can't get the kids back into their classrooms with six foot distance. We can't get enough of them in there. It's the little things. It's the logistics of it saying, well, get it down to three foot, which is what the science supports. And then you can get these schools. You could start opening these places back up in a responsible manner. Honest to get, we're going to look at this thing in a year or two. Maybe we won't because we're not going to be honest with ourselves. But we're if we actually did an honest hot wash of this reaction to the pandemic, our reaction has been pathetic, right, over over this past year. This has not been a shining moment for us. Don't you think part of the problem is we started out with a different idea with the viruses. We started out thinking that it was going to be like the next Spanish flu, and that it was going to kill. I mean, everyone was terrifying. Me included. I was scared of it. In the beginning, I thought that it was going to be something that kills 10% of the population. You know, and it didn't turn out to be that way, but we never made an adjustment. Yeah. No, I, yes, I think that's true. And I think also part of it is you can't negate the or minimize the political reaction, right? If Joe Biden had been president when this thing broke, I guarantee your their action would have been somewhat different. The fact that Trump was in there and created so much emotion. And there was such animosity. Thank God Trump wasn't pro vaccine. We've been far because you know, he was pro so many other therapeutics and they're like, I dropped the court. He was racist. You know, like, uh, thank God he didn't say anything about Ivermectin or vitamin D or quercetin or any of the other things that we were zinc. Yeah, but I do think that way, you know, that was a big issue was like, uh, see, he's so polarized. And we can't and we can't trust the, the vaccine is because, you know, they were developed under Trump. Right. Fuck, I believe the science, it would develop by companies that have nothing but scientists and doctors and engineers working inside them. Yeah. And so if you believe the science and you better believe that they were developing vaccines that you should have been happy about. So, you know, I guess everything you know, I don't know, it's the political nature of this country. And again, going back to what we were talking about earlier with the Russians and the Chinese, they see that and they just keep thinking, sticking the life. Right. And the more they do, the more they tear the threads of our belief in the system. And the more polarized we get and the more yelling that goes on and the more bullshit people believe when they read social media and they don't bother to say, well, who wrote this? Right. Is this actually a scientific piece of work or is this just, and what's the origin of it? What's the outlet? Right. And half the time, the outlet is overseas someplace. And then you got to dig into it. It's like an asset tracing exercise. Who owns that company? Right. Then you find out it's owned by some, you know, Russian entity that's got an operation out of Cyprus or whatever. Well, there's a weird thing when you find something like you find a meme, like a political meme or a meme that has something to do with anything that's going on in the popular culture. And then you go to the page that runs the meme. And you find out this page has this like weird address. And there are all memes and there's no quotes to the memes. There's no English. And you're like, what is going on here? And you realize like, oh my God, this is like, this is a propaganda page. This is a page that someone or some entity has set up to try to make fun of things, to try to turn things viral. And they turn them out six, seven, 10 a day. And they're just, they're just trying to make viral memes that influence the way people look at that. And the ease of doing that. Yeah, you go back to the sort of earlier days of the CIA. And you think about trying to influence opinion or actions in a particular foreign government. And again, going back to that idea that well, you didn't have that many opportunities. So what did you do? You try to influence the local media. Well, that was newspapers or radio, whatever. So you target that, you know, how do I place these articles? Right? And the ability to do that now is, I mean, I guess I wish I was still in the business now, right? Because you could change public opinion in a heartbeat compared to what it used to be like. But the Russians in particular are very, very good at this. And people would criticize as an example, voice of America. Remember the old voice of America still exists. What is it? But voice of America, VOA was, you know, it's out there. And in the early days, the idea was to to get news into the former, the Soviet Union at the time. Right? So it was, it was this broadcasting outlet that would provide news to parts of the world that were under communist influence. And was it directed in this, was it was it designed to criticize the, the regimes that were, you know, the Soviets or whoever was running there? Yes, of course it was. Was it designed to promote democracy and the idea of free think? Of course it was. Right? So is that propaganda? Is that covert action? Well, yes, it is. You know, is it designed to promote, you know, the idea of democracy and freedom? Yes. So can we, you know, is that better than the Russians trying with their covert action to criticize and so disbelief in the US manufacturer vaccines? Yeah, I think I can make a relative judgment and say one is better than the other. But again, going back to your thing about people saying what the US does it to, there's, there's degrees of what is, you know, what is acceptable and what is right and what is wrong. And, you know, it's a great world out there. There's no black and white. But I guess what I, you know, so yeah, I am fascinated by that question about, you know, does it frustrate you that people say America does it too? Yeah. And I keep going back and people say, are you, you know, I've rosecoleglasses and all that bullshit about, you know, but I've seen enough shit over there to think that yes, we do try, we try to do the right thing. Are we try to to mirror our values, right? And what are our values? Well, if you, if you think about it and we say, that's fine. I would rather have our values existing in a place like Iran in the population with two, frankly, than the theocratic regime in existence. So, and disappearing down a rabbit hole. No, this is, this is a, there's a weird narrative, a weird anti-American narrative that exists even inside of America. And that's, that's oftentimes when you have children, they, they rebel against their parents. And I don't think there's, yeah, I think there's a similar thing. Like, you know, America is not perfect. But Iran executed an Olympic gold medalist in wrestling because he protested against the government. And that's a fact. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's, yeah. And, you know, we were talking about China yesterday, what China has done in terms of, there was a, you know, that Jack Magai who disappeared for three months and came back and his, he's been, you know, whatever. He's, he's totally blind. He's just a little more compliant now. Let's put it that way. Realized that it doesn't like prison. Yeah. Well, realize they can disappear him for a few months. When was the last time anybody talked about the Uighurs? That's a fucking genocide. And, and we don't know what they're doing. Right? No, no, no, we know it's bad. Right. But, you know, it's, it's, it's Geez regime, right? Look, that guy has spent years now cementing his place. And, you know, much like Putin did. But with more subtlety, he's smarter than Putin's a very smart politician, right? He's kept himself in power in a place where it's, it's a constant, you know, Kabuki dance to try to figure out how to, you know, avoid your opponents. Putin's proved himself to be a master at that. But G has cemented his place in there. He is the most important leader of China going generations back, right? And he has done it through suppression. He's done it through, you know, the, the buildup of the security surface, the internal security services, the suppression of information, oppression of journalists. And so, yeah, do I think that, you know, so I, again, you know, every time I start off on this path, you know, I get these responses that just like, well, do you read the responses? Do you read that shit? Not really. That's part of the problem. It's raining that shit. Yeah, I know. It's probably the Russians texting him. Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. That's crazy. That's amazing. Yeah. My, my daughter worked and and lived in China for, you know, for a while. I actually speak Chinese and she's a great kid, but she would always put like dad, dad, come on. I got, I got a working live over here and I said, well, look, you know, you're, you're, you're, you know, she gets it. She got the joke, right? She understood, you know, how oppressive that place could be because she had spent time over there. I get, I get questions from companies that are doing business over there or are about to start doing business over there. And their questions are always typically in the same bucket, right? Which is, you know, how do we protect our information? Right? We're going to build a manufacturing facility over there. Or we're going to build a lab over there to whatever it might be, pharmaceuticals or technology. And the question is always, how do we, you know, how do we go about securing our information and protect and you don't see answer? Right. You build a facility over there, they're going to get it. They're going to get it through coercive means of saying, well, if you want business over here, this is what you have to sign up to, we're going to have access to to your code or whatever it may be, or they're just going to steal it. Right. So again, going back to the same thing. We just have to be pragmatic. Right. I mean, stop acting as if, you know, the rest of the world is trying to come together in some community of nations. Right. And I think actually, I think Biden gets it. Right. I mean, I don't know how long he's going to be in charge of, of the administration. But, you know, I'm worried about him. I mean, of course. Yeah, I think he's a, I think he's a, he understands that he's a pragmatic guy. He's a smart character, but he's got a lot of pressure on him politically from a variety of different angles. And so I look at, do you think he's lucid, though? Do I think he's lucid? Yes. Right. Now it's a long pause. Yeah, it's a long pause. No. No, it's a funny couple of days. He gives a speech and it goes viral. And in the, you know, the, the, the quote under the viral video is like, WTF. What does he say? Well, look, he's worried. I mean, I mean, you know, I think he should be finishing. I should have paused that I think he is. I just think that I think his, his instincts are overridden by the, the, the, the priorities of the further left portion of the party. Yeah. And so, you know, for me, why do you think that is? Do they think that that is more effective? Do they think the for, further left like that the people in the moderate left will go along with the further left, because at least it's far away from the far right? Yeah. I'd actually good, you know, they, the extremes always make the most noise. Right. They always make, whether it's the far right or the far left. Right. And so I think that they're the vocal in a sense minority, right? They're the ones who were always going to be beaten the drums in, in screaming about shit. Um, and it's like this thing that the, not to change subject and tell it, but it's like, if you look at the far right, we hadn't incident in, in, in Idaho and Boise not that long ago, a few days ago, where some parents brought their kids to the state house. And, um, they had a mask burning ceremony. Our saw the, yeah. The mask, you bring your kids in me that video. Oh, it's Jones. Look, they're taking over. Oh, like, figuring it out. You know what? America's coming back. But you know what the secret to that is none of those people, it was a small gathering, right? It made news because basically they brought their kids, right? It's kind of way, back news. You know what to make news bombing Syria. Yeah. Yeah. That didn't make news. No, both those things are happening at the same time. Yeah. This fucking ridiculous exercise of burning these cotton masks. Right. It came important. But you know what? In that crowd and that small crowd, you know how many people were from Boise? None. Right. So what you had was you guys people coming from out of town. Well, they were a lot of Chinese. Where they from? They were, mostly they were all from out of town. And none of them from a town where they had a mask mandate. It wasn't like they were forced to wear masks. They were just trying to make a point. But because it was like one of those moments where you think really did you have to come? Yeah. Yeah. Look at this. So these people are hanging over the edge throwing their girl. Get that in there. Yeah. Watch yourself. Don't do it. That's a nice job. Nice job. Nice to her. Clap clap clap. Come on. Get that. Oh, here you go. Look at that. That kid behind him was to throw his in, but he's a little awkward. Look at the guy there with a double flannel. Fucking fashion victim. That's what it is. Look at that. Sure. That guy's a fashion criminal with his double flannel. Yeah. He doesn't know who he is. You know what? Those shirt jackets that he's wearing. That's what we're very popular in the seventies. Look at that clapping. Yeah. I know. Yeah. I burned that mask. Yeah. Now get away from the fire. What does the thing say? What is the science not suffering? What does that say? Don't self suffocate. That ladies in the Westboro Baptist Church. Yeah. So she's there on vacation. So it's not like I got not a big crowd, but it made the news because and to your point, because it feeds some narrative, right? It feeds some narrative. Look at the lady, the lady in the back with the red in the lumberjack. Oh, she had a fucking old school camera. She was videoing. She doesn't even have a phone. Look at her way. You're right. That's like she's even fucking phone. Especially that one of those video cameras you'd held on your shoulder back in the other day. She's got a windows phone and it can't update. Oh, God. But, but they're it's not like those people live in a city where there's a mask man. So they come in to town. They do this thing and it got into your point. It got how much cover. That's some of a bitch guy. I heard from all sorts of people saying what the hell's happening in Idaho. That's just, you know, people get excited. They want to see say, oh my God, it's gonna go everywhere. Yeah. But it's like it's everywhere. It's, you know what? You go to Boise. You go to really most sports. I know everybody's wearing a mask. They're doing the right thing. They don't have to be told by the federal government to do the right thing. They're just doing it because what the fuck? But it's, there's... Oh, you see, you go to, really most points. I know everybody's wearing a mask. They're doing the right thing. They don't have to be told by the federal government to do the right thing. They're just doing it because what the fuck? But there's this thing going on where there's all these different arguments and there's all these different narratives and all these different people that are arguing their points. And no one knows exactly what the motives are, exactly who's doing water-wise. And you know, you're worried about the far left if you're in the far right. You're worried about the left. You know, everybody's, everybody in the right is worried about the left. Everybody in the left is worried about the right. And everybody in the center is trying to figure out where the fuck the rational people are. One of the things that I'm worried about, and this is going to sound really weird, but I'm worried that what this is really going to, what all of this descent and confusion is going to bring about is the rise of some sort of technological symbiosis where we could read each other's minds, where we can understand each other better. And it's going to make us less human than we are currently. I'm really worried about that. Now, I'm worried about these weird interfaces like Elon Musk is trying to do this neural-linked thing. And I think he's doing it because he wants to access, he wants to increase the bandwidth between human beings and information, which is a very, it's a noble concept. You're going to make people smarter, more access to information. And one of the things he said to me, you're going to be able to talk with our words. You know, I think I don't know that there's a correlation between access to more information and getting smarter. Right? This is what I think. Ultimately, there's going to be some sort of technology that literally allows people to understand people's intent and to read their thoughts and ideas. And I think it's not that far away. It might be 50 years, whatever it is, but we're moving in this direction where we're going to be less human. And that might be because of all the bullshit that's been created by social media and by these conversations, by these algorithms that encourage people to be upset about things, that they encourage outrage. We're going to move into some weird place where we're going to have to change who we are in order to recognize what are the motives behind these different programs and campaigns that are forcing people into these situations where they hate each other. Yeah. Yeah. As somebody who's taking the polygraph, I don't know. Poor, poor dozen times. I want to see if I don't mind. Yeah. Well, what I was going to say was, I mean, we used to say with a polygraph that, oh my guy, can't you just put like a like a colander on our head and just read our thoughts because that would be a lot more pleasant and easier. Have you ever, have you beaten a polygraph? Have you ever lied? No. I had a lot of inconclusive because the polygraph, the thing about the polygraph is, it's all physiological activity, right? It's blood pressure and sweat and, you know, what is it? It's like heart rate, right? Heart rate and it's an imperfect system. Yeah, because it doesn't hold up in court. Right. And it's also entirely dependent on the experience and the abilities of the examiner. And that varies because it's a human effort. So you'll get a good polygurfer. You'll get one that's got less experience. You'll get one who's had a bad day and it's just, you know, whatever. Right. And I've seen these things fail, miserably. I mean, obviously in the intel community in the agency, we've had people, uh, uh, all rich, aims, right? It's a good example. Right. He was one of our, uh, traders, right? So all the chames went to work for the enemy. Which enemy? Uh, the Russians. And sold out, caused a fair number of deaths, uh, Hanson is another good example from the FBI. Um, Edley Howard, I mean, oh my God, Jim Nicholson, all these people that, that we're able to beat the polygraph because essentially there's psychopaths, right? They don't see the difference between right and wrong. So the polygraph doesn't have any influence. If you're a Quaker, if you walk around and, and you feel bad about everything, right? Ah, God, I remember I, I took that, uh, I took that, uh, those cookies when I was a kid. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it doesn't, so what, the old toaster incident used that electricity. So I'm a bad, I'm a bad person. I shouldn't have done it. So if you carry that with you, then yeah, you're going to have a problem with the polygraph because you're going to be thinking about all these things like, and I've had, you know, what do, back in the day, you know, you take the polygraph and the exam would be like, oh my God, can we, we're going to take it again. It's inconclusive. Yeah. Look, we're just worried about how you sold secrets to the enemy. So we don't worry about any other shit, right? And yet if you get somebody who doesn't think like way, like an older James or some of these people, then yeah, they'll pass the polygraph. So in our minds, we were always thinking, well, just come up with something better. Now they're getting there, right? They're getting, they're getting to the ability to, uh, with scans, brain scans. FMR. Yeah. So yeah. So you can, you can, you're getting closer, but it's not one of those things that you're going to, you know, subject your workforce to it's costly. It's very difficult to do. It's all this. So you use it for a high value target, for instance, you know, like a, like a KSM or, you know, one of these cats from the old terrorist days. But, uh, so I, I guess my point with that is we're still relying on the old school technology of the polygraph for the most part. Um, and we know it can be beaten. And we know it can be beaten. And it can be beaten if you feel no difference between right and wrong. Right. If you're, if you just walk through life and you don't give a fuck, then the polygraph isn't much of an issue for you. So it's, but, but luckily most people aren't like that. Most people will get hooked up and they'll start reacting. Right. And that's, and that's a good thing. But what about false memories? Cause there, it's been shown that particularly through hypnotic regression that you can introduce false memories to a person. So if you say to, you know, you can create a memory in a person, you know, like, you know, whatever about seeing Bigfoot or whatever it is. And that person can really believe it. Yeah. Proven that they can do that. Yeah. Especially under hypnosis. So if you can hypnotize someone, get them to believe a false narrative and then hook them up to a polygraph and then describe that false narrative, they'll, they'll show that they believe that thing, even though that thing is not really true. Yeah. And that's true. If you, you talk to somebody who said, okay, I was kidnapped by a UFO, my aliens, um, they're gonna believe it. Right. So what do you do with the polygraph? Again, people are like, oh, we're having a lesson on the polygraph. But I mean, what you do is you, you have other information that you've developed about that individual, right? Yeah. That you use. So it's a, it's a tool in the kit bag that you use, uh, at least in the Intel community to determine credibility and it's just one tool. It's just one tool. Yeah. It's one tool. Yeah. It's one tool. Yeah. It's one tool. Yeah. It's one tool. Yeah. So, you know, and what I would like to see, I mean, I, I look at it from a counterintelligence perspective. If we can create something that can read people's minds, great, because you know what that does is that allows us to identify the trader within the group, the model a lot quicker. And counterintelligence operations are always an enormous lift. People say like, yeah, I can't believe you allowed whomever, you know, hands into operate, you know, within the, the bureau and have all those lives lost and betrays to the Russians for all those years. And my response is always, you know, it's very, I, I, I can't believe we caught him because it's a very heavy lift. It's a very difficult thing to do. So, but, but to your point, yeah, do I want us to develop that ability in general to no, I think that's inevitable. It's inevitable. Yeah. I think it's inevitable. I think it's coming whether we wanted it or not. I think if you look at the, if, if you go back in time and you go to Martin Luther and you go to the printing press and the, you know, the ability to, you know, translate the Bible into a phonetic language and the, the changes that that had on society and you move that into the future and you go to the free press and then you go to the internet and you go to social media and you go to where we are today. One of the things that's common, the thing that all shares in common is that there's a course in this path that seems to be inevitable is that there's a shrinking of the distance between human beings and information. And information is far more accessible than it's ever been before. And there is some resistance to that, right? Like there's some censorship in terms of like, will you're allowed to search and what you're not allowed to search? We talked about earlier with Google and DuckDuckGo and, you know, the things are curated and we all aware of the problems with big tech censoring certain voices on social media because they're concerned with the narrative that's going to be because they're thinking about it in short term gains and losses. But ultimately all technology is leading into there's a boundary between human beings and information that's getting smaller and smaller and smaller to the point where information is going to be instantaneously accessible, whether it is a decade from now or a month from now or a hundred years from now, whatever it is, it is inevitable in my opinion that as technology continues to progress and innovation continues to be something that people value and that is prized and that is rewarded. We're going to move to a position where you're going to be able to read people's minds. You're going to be able to understand people's intent and we're not going to trust people who aren't willing to do that. And it's going to help people in a lot of ways because lying doesn't just hurt the people that you lie to. It hurts you because you're living some bullshit life where you're trying to pretend that you're something that you're not. And I think ultimately people are going to get that. And there's going to be people that fall by the wayside and there's going to be people that rise because of it and it's going to help culture ultimately. But I think one of the big things it's going to do is going to eliminate propaganda. And that's why I think it's going to be embraced because you can't have propaganda if people can actually understand what people's intentions are in a clear, like, you know how you have like if you enable location finding on your phone and you say, hey, I'm in Russia. And you're like, no motherfucker, you're in Oklahoma. Says it on your picture. You piece of shit. This is fake. Well, who's to say Oklahoma's a little bit of a foreign destination. It depends on where you are and who you are. Yeah, it's true. Yeah, I know. I like Oklahoma. It's foreign if you live in Connecticut. Yeah. Who wants to be there anymore? Connecticut's a rough spot right now. Yeah. Didn't they just decide to open wide up? I do not know. I think they did too. I didn't name Jamie. I think Connecticut opened wide up too, which is odd. We left Connecticut to go to Idaho and I can. Connecticut is a highway. It's a highway. It's barely a, it's a bear, it's any city there's barely a city. Yeah. And it's barely a state. It's a highway between Boston and New York. See, I, I, I will disagree on the, it's going to be a benefit overall. I don't think it's going to be a benefit. I think I think we, it's going to happen. I don't disagree with that idea that it's just going to happen. But I think the quicker and the more access that we have to information is not done as any favors to date. Hasn't it though? No. People are way more educated and informed than people were a thousand years from that. Yeah. No. Okay. Yeah. I think is, I'm very conflicted. Is that, is the potential there for good? Yes. But if you look at the, the, the, the reality of it all, look how divisive we are now, right? Look how, but maybe isn't that because we don't have access to it. Is that all the information? So we're concerned? No word. Yeah. I mean, maybe part of it is how much credit you give to, to, to, to individual humans. But, um, I just think that we're, we haven't done ourselves any favors yet. Maybe we learn. And, you know, maybe yes, maybe there's one day when, you know, it's all instantaneous. And so therefore, everybody's showing their cards all at the same time. And, you know, there's no, there's no issues. I just have a feeling that that so far, um, you know, we're, we're, we're, we're so far, I don't think the internet has really, um, it's going to sound like I'm, some sort of luddite. But in terms of our children, in terms of general society and the way that we deal with each other, um, I don't know that it's done us more good than harm so far. I just, I just have this feeling that, uh, the way that we are currently, right? And people, because people, the human condition is still going to be that they're going to, they're going to go to wherever they believe, right? So the fact that I can, I, I know your intentions doesn't mean it's going to make me altruistic and understanding, right? That's not human condition. It's just going to make me hard in my opinion or figure out some way to get around the aspect of what your intentions are. But I, I, I, I'm more, maybe I'm more cynical than you. Let me push back on that. Isn't that a lot of that, like fear and a lot of that is a distrust of other people that there's a lot of the way we interact with each other. That's a lot of it is based on fear and distrust. Yeah. But I don't think that, I don't think the, the additional access to information and instantaneous understanding of all, I don't think that's going to make us somehow it's going to make the human condition better. I don't think it's going to make us more, again, more open to new ideas or others, ideas or opinions. I, I just have a feeling we're going to figure out a workaround and it may harden our positions and that, but maybe there's a workaround to the workaround. Like let's go back to the people in 1950s that were terrific. The people in 1950s that were terrified about rock and roll. I mean, they were terrified. Elvis Presley shaking his hips. You can't show it on television. It was a real argument. It was a real argument that that guy is swinging his cock on TV and his girls are screaming. Not literally. What's that? The porn. What? I like the like 30 porn. No. No. There was porn before. I mean, but like more, more and more and more. Elvis did. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was going to be soft wear and hardware issues to kind of piggyback off what he's saying that would be very hard knowing what we have seen over the past 20, 30 years. Hard to keep that out of there. Like people would be able to mask their feeling from being seen by down. For now. For now. But that's also again like location services and like a lot of other things. Like there's these little hurdles that come up that keep people from truly understanding the nature of an actual thing that you're just experiencing. Look from my perspective from an operational perspective, right? And from my business perspective. What are we doing? We involved in a lot of investigations, a lot of fraud concerns, a lot of asset tracing, all these things that my folks do. Right. Great. I'd love to be able to know immediately what somebody's intentions are. That makes the job so much easier. But I guess what I'm saying is I think it doesn't change the base nature of human characteristics. And so I don't think it's going to make us suddenly come together as a community and understand and get together. I think the what's happened is the ability to access more information has just driven us apart and created these silos where we all just sit and listen to whatever affirms our opinion. And I don't think that a neural link or anything else is going to suddenly make us better people. And I think it's going to not be I don't know. And I think what the fuck do I know? I'm not a neuroscientist. So I don't know. I'm not a psychiatrist. I don't know. What the fuck do I know to you? Yeah, what the fuck do I know? But my experience is so far have told me that oftentimes people's intentions aren't particularly good and that we have to be pragmatic and sometimes being cynical is not a bad thing. But I don't think it's a bad thing either. But I think that what we're dealing with is there's a lot of confusion and there's a lot of distrust and there's a lot of conflict. There's a lot of these things going on. And a lot of it is based on the unknown. A lot of it is like we don't know what the Russians are doing. We don't know what the far left is doing. We don't know what the far right is doing. We don't know what the Chinese are doing. And there's a problem with our own biology. It takes a long time for human beings to evolve biologically. There's not much difference between our DNA and the DNA of people that lived 10,000 years ago. But there's a massive difference in the world that we exist in. You're saying we're in any end of all this because I've heard recent things. The end of all thinking is bad. Yeah, yeah. I think that as we move forward, technology is increasing at a pace that biology can't possibly keep up with. So we are left with these tribal biological instincts that were developed and that evolved when people were in tribes worried about other tribes coming over and attacking us. We were worried about the unknown. We were worried about animals. We were worried about attacks. We were worried about the sky turning into a monster that we didn't understand. And now we know so much more, but we still have the same human reward systems. We still have the same DNA and biology that was essentially programmed to keep us alive during these ignorant situations. We didn't really know, but now we know a lot. But now we know so much we have this ability to communicate that's unprecedented and it's evolving and changing. The only way I see that we can keep up with it is if we do something to interface with the technology in a way that's unprecedented in a way that's different than just looking at a screen or looking at a phone because you're still using the same biology and you're interfacing with new information when you're using a phone. And that's also created a lot of confusion. That's part of the reasons why people isolate and insulate and get into these little bubbles of information and thought and they insulate themselves from opposing ideas. And it gives them comfort and it makes them tribal. It makes them more tribal. And I think it's not a coincidence that the more technology increases and the more access to information increases, the more likely people are to get into these weird fucking groups where they have echo chambers. I think one of the only ways it's going to move us out of that is some sort of technology that alleviates a lot of our concerns by giving us information about intent. Give us information about what people's real thoughts are and real intentions are and let people know that most of us want the same thing. Most of us really truly want the same thing and a lot of the conflict that has been exploited whether it's by social media algorithms or it's by foreign countries or bad entities. They've done so by praying upon these biological limitations. Yeah, I don't know. Maybe I don't want to live in a world where I can read peoples' intents. Because part of it is sort of like you take it down to the base level in terms of just relationships. I think part of it, part of the excitement of life is not knowing in a way. That sounds maybe stupid. Sounds like America. It sounds like America. It's like a very kind of sex. If you just sing it, we say, I was trying to think about what age do you do this if you you do it to a baby because then you could hear what your baby's thinking but also you're going to have to replace that multiple times as they grow older or their brain might not develop correctly because there is already an interference. In a fairness household. Because there's wires in the baby's brain. That's not biologically. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The wires thing is like, I think the wires thing is like a wired phone. It's like, right now we don't have to have a wire. I don't have a phone in my house. Like a wired phone. Nobody's got a landline in it. No. It's used to. You know, I think this wired thing is like a shitty technology. I don't know. We've stuck to have a, let's just get the wires and stuff. And it's still close to your brain and you have to cut the hole in the head and for now. But remember when we're talking with Jamie Messell yesterday about crisper, would if crisper gets to the point where there's some new technology that we literally develop the human mind to the point where it can access wifi. It can access some new software or some new hardware that allows people to communicate with each other without any, any no filter, no filter between us, whether it's language. I will say this. It sounds awful. What you're describing. I'm a simpleton. I have you sound like a guy in the 1950s who's a pastor. No. It's not. No. This is the end of civilization. I love, I love Elvis. But what I'm saying is I think, look, what I want to grow up as a kid today compared to what I grew up, which was we didn't have access to that news. We had like three channels for news. Everybody had a shared experience in the sense. No, am I saying I'm not somebody who looks back at the best and goes, oh my God, it was wonderful. There were problems and two, of course it was. But was there as an example, was there a benefit to having, you know, much of the country sitting down for the, whatever, the five o'clock news or the 11 o'clock news. And everybody had a shared experience. They were getting the same news, right? And they were now they were processed to differently based on their own personal life experience, right? And where they were sitting in life. But there was a shared moment in time, right? This is a small example. But I look at that and I go, you know, was there some benefit to that? And I think there was because now you don't have that. And that creates in part what we've got today with this divisiveness that exists. And everybody's sitting in their trenches. It's like, well, we're one, right? Everybody's throwing grenades. Nobody wants to come out in, it's no man's land. And then I go back to the other part of it, which is some more touchy feeling admittedly, which is, you know, I don't want to know. I don't, there's a, there's an element of life that, you know, it's sort of the, it's the unknown, right? I don't want to walk around knowing exactly what your intention is or what, what Jamie's intention is or what, it's not a concern of mine, right? Life can be pretty simple if you think about it, right? If you think, what, what am I interested in? I'm interested in trying to be a good person, raising my family so that the kids are good people and productive people. And I, the idea of getting to some point in life where we don't have to talk to communicate, right? I mean, oh, no, I'm not, I'm not a buyer on that one. Because we're ahead of me. I'm going to be in these little areas. I know. I remember that start, remember the start check? I think it was a two part episode where they all just got cured, came without talking. I got that's fucked up. I, again, I don't want to, you know, I'm not. Probably with the scenario that you're painting in these rosy, rose-coated glasses that, there was a small group of people that curated that information that was portrayed on the five o'clock news. Sure. That's the problem. Then you relied on government entities and propaganda. And you know, you could, you could have people with unscrupulous ideas. And that's what led to stuff. But, but are you saying it now? But are you saying that now it's better in terms of politics and the government and our reliance on government and the way that we have other in terms of whether or not we know the government's full of shit. Because we're way more, way more aware, way more aware. I won't disagree. I won't disagree with it. You know, part of that is, is, is an investigative responsibility, right? Part of that is, is, is the ability of, of individuals to question what's happening? That never changes, right? That's been the same now as it was during the penny press. But they know they have access to Google and Duck Duck Go and search engine. And are you an investor in Duck Duck? No, no, no. No, no. No. No. No. No. No. No. That's why I was not either in Unbius sources. There are only a few of them out there. There's like, there's things that don't, they don't. It's one of the reasons why I like Apple over androids. They don't, they don't share your information the same. Yeah. You know, I think there's real value in that because human beings have been using these things, whether it's Google or Facebook. And we always thought that that was the product that we were using these things. And that these things with Facebook as a product, Google, Google as a product. And then somewhere along the line, we realized, no, we're the product. Our data is the product and we're selling, but by using these things for free, by using whatever it is, their message services and posting on these things, we think we're getting something for free, but we're not. Because we're giving up our data, we're giving up all of our metadata and all of our information and through these algorithms, they've been able to amass insane amounts of wealth just by using our information. Well, and I, it's something that, yeah, I always laugh when people talk about the government, collecting information on you, say, that's a government, it's not the problem. It's government's not the issue. Nothing, right? It can't organize a panic in a dumb submarine. So, I mean, it's the corporations. But in these new corporations that, you know, 25 years ago didn't even exist. There was no such thing as Facebook and Google, they didn't have an influence on world ideas. They didn't have an influence on the way people express narratives. There was no, there was no influence by tech companies on other than selling you cool products. 25 years ago, all they did is sell you things that you thought would enhance your life. I guess what I'm saying is I don't disagree and it says it from, again, going back to their operational perspective. There's a lot of advantage, right, from somebody who is worried about security and national security concerns. I mean, hey, there's a lot of advantage to getting to that point. I just don't think, you know, it's going to improve the human condition necessarily. I don't think there's going to be the upside that necessarily comes from, you know, instantaneous immediate access to understanding people's plans and intentions and information. I don't think it's going to make us less tribal. This was the same argument they had about the printing press. It really is. No, you know, I don't have to say cut shorts. I can't spot the lie in what you just said. If you follow like Stephen Pinker's work and you follow like the analysis of violence and crime as it relates to the progress of civilization and humanity. There's a path and this is not to discount all the situations where people have been the victim of violence and the victim of crime. But there's less instances of it statistically if you had an overlook, if you were looking at the earth from above and you looked at a trend in terms of like the way civilization is heading as technology progresses as access to food and resources and information progress. You have less instances of violence, less instances of crime and less instances of all the undesirable things, whether it's sexual assault or racism, all the things that they occur less over time. And I think that as technology increases, this will be a trend that continues to go in that direction. This is just me guessing based on the work of other people far smarter than me that have gone over this sort of pattern and looked at it in terms of like where are we headed? We're not headed in a bad place. We're not taking concentrate on all the bad things that still do exist. Whether it's sexual harassment in the workplace or whether it's violence or whatever the thing you want to concentrate on, there's eight billion people on this planet. You can find massive amounts of data that can support your idea that this is still a problem and it's always going to be still a problem until there's no problems, until we reach You know, I've been watching YouTube'sopia and I don't know if we're ever going to reach you to it. Yeah, we're not going to. It's it's that's where I think we turn it into these like we turn it to the those guys a little genital list. Oh my God. Mind readers. By the way, we're getting ready to film a second season of Black Files to classified. Do you have any? Look at that. It took to have a lot of stuff. We do. Yeah. We're gonna have a couple of really good episodes on on that. I've been very underwhelmed lately by people who were involved in the UFO world. Yeah. I think it's going to be good. We're visiting. We're going to have a couple of good episodes on this and. We're visiting. I'm prescribed from saying the exact show map right now, but I've seen the prescribed. Well, I've seen the topics and you know, it's you know, it's I'm not allowed to talk about it. I am allowed to say that the first season of Black Files to classified is. Is. I've seen the top, it's not a lot of talk about it. I am allowed to say that the first season of Black Philosophy is available on Discovery Plus. But you're not allowed to talk about what happens. But what we're going to film in the next season? No. But that's which is fine. But I think I don't think we're heading towards utopia. I don't think that's ever going to happen. I maybe I'm too cynical about the human condition and the way that we always find a way to fight. Let me ask you this though. In your home, I bet it's pretty utopian. In terms of like, if you think about the way people lived as cavemen versus the way you live today, oh sure, you're home. You're home with your family. Yeah, the adventure that we all hope. And the adventure that toaster. I mean, it's all good stuff. Electricity, warm, hot showers. Yes. But it's pretty goddamn good. It is very, very good. What I'm saying is, continue along those same lines. Yeah, but that's different than me sitting here and reading your intent immediately. That's separate from that. Now again, if I'm concerned about finding a trader in my intel organization, I like the idea very, very much. But if I'm just some dude, right, who's interacting with people on a daily basis, do I find that less appealing? Yeah, I do. And I don't have a, there's not necessarily logic to what I'm saying. I know that. Listen, you have a handicap. You're not even American. That's part of the problem. You barely, you know what I'm saying? A couple of weeks ago. Like some fucking European house. I know you probably liked it. You liked the European Union idea. I didn't even pay attention to that. I'm too busy. Yeah. No, I know. Some people didn't like it. Hey, you mentioned, by the way, I just filed it away and I just popped up in my, my, that a big, again, Syria. You mentioned Syria. Yeah. That was it. It's a, it's a very good point. A is very little attention paid to it. Except people were paying attention to 10 crews trying to go to Cancun. Give a fuck about Syria. At what point? I what point did his chief of staff or somebody, right? Who was booking his tickets? Didn't say, you know, Ted, it's probably the optic is and look good. So maybe you shouldn't do it. Why can't he wear like a better mask? Did he wear a mask at all? Yeah. But I mean, like if you're going to wear a mask, like get someone to fucking dye your hair blue or something. Yeah, you can't hide that Ted Cruz low. He's very discernible. Shave you had shit. Where an eye patch. Yeah, come on. Come on. What's up? It's just like, you're going to go to Cancun in the middle of a deep freeze. You can also be aware that you can't say I was going to head right back when people can fucking research your ticket. Yeah. And find out you were actually coming back until Saturday. It was weird. It was strange. It was, it was a bizarrely bumbled job on, on his part and his staff's part, right? Because it most of these people are kind of controlled by their staff. How about his wife's got a bunch of friends that are fucking rats? How about that? They sold her down the river. Yeah. Oh, no. Absolutely. Well, you know, gave up our text messages, talking about how it's freezing. We're going to have, but listen, if you have the means and you are stuck in a place where there's no power and the power is not coming back on and you can just fly to Cancun. I get the optics for Ted, but his family should absolutely be allowed to do that. If they have the money, well, you shouldn't have to stay in suffer because everybody else has to stay in suffer. No, if you're going into public service, so you should, you should tell your family. No, this family should because there's no dividing line. Yeah, there's no people don't perceive the difference between Ted's wife and kids with the Cancun. They're not going to then say, but Ted's stayed here. So that's good. He's all the headlines going to be, I sent his family to Cancun. So whether he went or not, it didn't matter. And so that's why I say it was, it was a stupid, stupid political move on his part. And they very amateur. But if his family went without him, do you think it would be? I mean, I don't think anyone would even pay attention. No, if he stayed home in a fucking tent with a muck was on, beaver hat. I mean, he might as well be in a tent if you're fucking house house, I was, no, I know. Hey, look, in Connecticut where we used to live, apparently when you, when you moved to Connecticut, you signed some agreement. I don't remember signing it that said, every winter, the power is going to go out at least four or five times during the winter. And for days at a time, I mean, not just a couple of days. The first winter we were in Connecticut, because all the utilities are above ground, right? So, you know, they get a lot of storms. Trees come down. So the next thing, you know, the entire town and a bunch of other towns are without power. It is a common occurrence, but the difference is as opposed to here in Texas, you're used to it. You're prepared for it. So what happens is you, you get generators and you get food and you understand it's going to happen, right? You have a fireplace. It's going to, it's it's going to be okay. Even if the power is out for six or seven or eight days, which it is, right? It's not an uncommon occurrence. So I mean, I remember, we didn't have a generator, the first winter, right? And I remember looking outside, power was out for a few days. Other people got their lights on, right? They got, and our neighbors were great. And they'd say, come on over, you just stay at our house for a few days until, you know, and that's what we were due. And then eventually, you know, my wife, the finest person I know, you know, she said, she knows not about that handy, but she said, you're going to go get a generator for the family, right? Maybe take care of the family. So I went to a home depot to buy a, a, you just talked like a foreigner home depot. What the fuck is a depot? Oh, James, it's a depot talk to it's a depot. It's a, it's a, it's a home depot. Depot. You fucking. Jesus Christ, you go to home. What is it? What is it? Depot. You go to home depot. Yeah. Talk like a god damn American. All right. So I went there in America. And I was born here, bro. There I was in my beaver hat. And I went to the home depot with my, my buckskin jacket. And I went, and I saw, but I went there. And I remember walking and I thought I got a blind generator. And they're already bought. Well, there was like one left. Right. And, and the manager, because I approached some guy and I said, look, I look into buy a generator and the guy says, well, you know, you know, I'll show you where they are, but I don't think we have any left. And there was a fight going on over the last generator. Like, like we were about to face the zombie apocalypse. Right. There was a battle going on in this home depot where, where they were going to, they were going to come to, to, to, to, uh, as we used to say, just 50 cups. And, uh, so they, I remember standing there looking at me and you got to be shitting me. And, uh, and then I slipped the manager some money and he took, you know, took me out back and gave me the last generator. I'm a champion. And at that much compared to the cost of the generator, point being though is then I had the generator. And then I realized, uh, after running it for a while that it needs oil. Now you know that until it burned out. Oh, no. Yeah. Cause I'm not that handy. But, uh, but I guess the point being is we were used to it. Right. We didn't have a problem with it. And then you look at what happens in Texas. And I had friends on these coasters saying, oh, I have a bunch of pussies. Right. Are they all complaining? Because they don't, I said, look, it's, it's Texas. But was the the last time in a deep freeze like this, right? It's, it's all what you're used to and what you're prepared to get ready for it. So I don't know where I was going with that story. And most people around here didn't know how to drive in it. Which is really have the, yeah, of course, yeah, that's good point. They didn't have the tires for it. They didn't have four wheel drive. If they did have four wheel drive, there was a lot of guys with trucks that were, they look at, they have these pickup trucks with the two wheel drive trucks. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No. And we get that to, I mean, you know, you're actually worse than just walking way back. Yeah. You know, I just, you got to put sand back to at least 150 pounds of sand in the back and then you're good. But I mean, we got people that they move up to Idaho that, you know, particularly from California, that, you know, they get that first winter. And we don't plow the roads, right? Right. The general feeling is if you don't know how to drive in the snow, then stay home. Right. So they don't, there's nobody's plowing the roads. So it's, you know, we still get people out there that don't know how to drive. Plow the roads. No. I mean, if it's, if it's a lot, you know, in Boise, then they'll get out there and they'll give it a, an effort. Do you have like a serious vehicle up there? Yeah, we've got, we've got, we've got nothing, but I got a truck. What do you drive? It's a, it's a GMC foreign piece of shit. GMC, Denali, and we got a suburban, I got a wagon here. I got 91 wagon here. I told you that's right. Yeah. With the wood panels. Yeah, exactly. I know. I look pretty fucking good. In my beaver hat driving that wagon here. And then I just bought a, a 1965 MGB. Oh, really? From a guy in the UK from a Vicar. A little convertible one. A Vicar. Yeah. Yeah. It's a beautiful car. Oh, yeah. 1965. Wouldn't frames or something? No, no. No. That's an old car. 65. It's a, it's a, it's a brilliant, it's a brilliant piece of machinery. And this one's been, oh, yeah. Well, that's, that's a sweet little vehicle right there. Look at the wire wheels. Nice. You go go, uh, 1965 MGB. Yes. Yeah. You go. And it's, it's, uh, so I'm going to pick it up and Liverpool. Oh, look at that black one. We'll get a driver. We're literally going to go to England. Yeah. Minus that middle. Actually, no, bring it back. Actually, Jamie, I think you got my car. The green one? The green one. Yeah. Really? And look at that. That's beautiful. So I'm going to take, I'm going to take him over to England. We're going to drive it around for a while. And then I'm going to ship it back. And now, now this is not a car you drive in the winter in Idaho. But in the summertime, it's going to be great. And slugo, my middle boy has already claimed it. He said, when you guys die, he talks like that all the time. When you guys die, do I get the house? They all better have triple A for that fucking car. Yeah. Yeah. That's a British car, right? Yeah. They're not, they're not known for their reliability. Why is it, what is it about the Brits where they make ship bad cars? They're your people. They make great. They make, they make very solid cars. We made a Spitfire for you. Oh, my two, you know, great cars, but they don't have the best reliability ratings. You think about a time car? You think about Fiat. Listen, listen, I'm Italian. I'll tell you right now. I don't buy my big scar. I don't trust anybody like me to make a fucking car. But the, um, like land rover, like they make a fucking hell of a car, but they break all the time. I looked at the new defender. Have you seen a new defender? It's just yourself an old defender. That's what, that's what lasts forever. That's what lasts forever. Fuck out of here. Those things were great console. No, it's like buying it. It's a difference between buying an old land cruiser, Toyota Land Cruiser and a new land cruiser. The old ones, they, they will stay on the road forever. As long as you take care of it, you gotta take care of your good job. You're talking down to your ass. No, no, no, you just talk it up and you stepped into my realm. That's going to be the new land cruisers or virtually bulletproof. Those fucking things last forever. The old land cruisers. Anything on those things. You don't have to. They don't break the old land cruisers also virtually bulletproof. Don't you think? You can fix. There's an old saying that they used to say when you want in Australia in particular, if you want to go into the bush, you bring a Range Rover. If you want to get out of the bush, you bring a land cruiser. Yeah. Yeah. Because those Range Rover suck. They're beautiful. They look cool. They like, makes it look like you're an artist. Like you got like one of them fucking mull skin, notebooks, writing deep thoughts about your soul. You got to sell a murder mystery in a village somewhere. Yeah. That's like a 100 series. Yeah. I have an 80 series. But that's right there. Look at that. That one right there. That's sweet. That's what's going to stay on the road forever. Nice. What year is that? That's a 70 series. Right? What is that? Yep. That's a G. I know my shit. I have an 80 series. I have an 80 series. Yeah. Land cruisers. Yeah. 1995 that was, it was souped up by icons. So it's got a supercharged Corvette engine in it. Holy shit. Yeah. Yeah. I was driving around. Why everybody was freaking out about the snow. I was like, ha ha. I got locking differentials. You can find mine. Jamie, find mine in there because it's fucking souped up. And it's, it's lifted so it can go over everything. And it's got like a fucking, that's it on the far left. That's it right there. Yeah. That's my car. That's it. Yeah. That fucking thing, that fucking thing. I loved driving that thing around. Because I have it. Yes. I drove it around during, that's my buddy, Jonathan Ward. He moved out here too. I don't think he wants anybody to know too late. I'm sure it's just between you and me, nobody else knows. But that fucking thing, man, I drive that anywhere. It's awesome. I mean, it was so sturdy and sure-footed. Yeah. And it's got solid axles and, you know, front and rear. Look at that supercharged Corvette engine. Some of our places overseas. That's, I mean, Land Cruiser was all we had. For the backseat show up somewhere. And, you know, that was the sort of the fleet of vehicles that we had available to us to get around. That's why- That's why- Yeah. No, they're great vehicles. But don't be, don't be fucking with the defender. That's a great new defender. Go Google range 2021 Range Rover Defender V8. They have a new one that has 500 plus horsepower 90 series. 90 series is the one. It's a fucking beautiful car. But they have literally the worst reliability ratings that are out there. That's a fact. And I'm not gonna- Look at that. Come on. That's a beautiful goddamn car. Yeah, it is. That truck goes 0 to 60 and a little over four seconds. 518 horsepower. You can go over there and pick up a Land Rover and go through their- Yeah. Test it out right down before you even get home. When you go and get it back to the fucking factory. Well, anyway, that fucking 65 mGB is gonna be sweet. And yes, you're right. Sure. But you know what I can do with it? I can also work on it. I can check that thing up and work on it because I don't have- I don't need a computer system to figure out what's wrong with it. That's true. That's true. You know it's broken and there it goes. We're placed the engine. Mm-hmm. Well, I know what's going on. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway. They're beautiful cars. And there's some real value to the simplicity of those old cars. Like, you could work on the carburetor, you could figure out, oh, we're placed the spark plugs. You could do things to them. Yeah. I had a 67 try-off one time that- Oh. That's what we got stolen. You really are. You like those old ship-offs. I do like that. I came up. You're right. I think I could look at that. Look at that. God, that's- I drive it to go car. You're so low to the ground. So little too. Look at the little tiny ass tires. God, that's awesome. They have fun to drive, man. You know what I really love that Jaguar E-type? Long front nose like a like a fucking barracuda. No, those are- I will admit those- those are always in need of repair. Yeah. Constant. Yeah. Constant. I think they've got the new ones dialed in though. The new jack-by-ford. Yeah. But whatever reason they can't figure out the new Range Rover's. They're still there's a YouTube channel that I follow that reviews trucks and they- God, I can't remember the name of the channel. These guys I believe they're from- I don't know where they're from. But they bought the base model Range Rover Defender and they got, you know, the four-cylinder one, the cheapest one you can get with the metal wheels and it broke down almost immediately after having it and it took like more than a month for them to get it repaired. This is a brand new truck. You got that? These guys? Yeah, the fast lane. Yeah. So they're- they're fucking defender broke down. Like like right away, the guy's laughing his ass off. This guy, he's a really good reviewer on YouTube. He's got an awesome channel. It's really really informative and well thought out. But- What's called it? The fast lane. The fast lane. The fast lane and most- most of it is. So our third brand new Land Rover Defender but will it be our last because they can't break him down. These fucking things like they had a fly someone in from England to fix them. Well that's inexpensive and you know yeah because they just couldn't- and also when you got a channel that has you know millions of views on their reviews and you sell them a fucking shitty lemon and it keeps breaking down like you've made a mistake. It's not good. Yeah. They have the worst reliability ratings and it's unfortunate because the other than that like I don't know what corners are cutting where their stuff sucks because the- the engineering and everything the design is amazing. I tell you what would have been happy. Seven thousand miles. My wife drives me. My wife drives the suburban right now it's like what is it a 2019 I think and we needed something we could throw all the sports gear in for the kids right and like haul all them and the dogs and everything around and it's been amazingly reliable. I'll say that much. And I never had a suburb before but it's been probably the best vehicle we've owned in terms of just reliability right. Yeah those new GM cars are far better than the old ones. Like a perfect example is the new GM Corvette. The new Chevy Corvette is fucking incredible. That's an incredible car. It's the best value sports car you can get. It's a mid-engine American supercar and it's super reliable and really well engineered. I mean they went above and beyond for a long time to work on that goddamn thing and they made a masterpiece. That new Corvette look at that thing. Yeah. That is a masterpiece. No it's amazing. They went through a dark period. Look at that thing man. That thing's fucking gorgeous too. It's like a Ferrari. Well that's what I was going to say. They there was a period of time where yeah but again American design cars went through a period. That thing though. Come on. Remember whenever every that's beautiful. We had a we had a 69 Camaro for a while and but there was a period where Camaro's Firebirds transams all looked alike. No yeah. When they got into the 70s and 80s they were dark shit. Yeah. But that that's a magical vehicle. They really came out of and the interior was always like the big thing about go check on click on one of the photos of the interior of Jamie because that was always like the big criticism. That is very amazing. It's beautiful. Then the new one that 2022 was supposed to be even better looking than that. What's a price on that? It's not bad. I think the base model is 60,000 bucks. So yes second SUV. Yeah. For a car that looks that good and is that fast. I mean it's ridiculously fast and because it's mid engine all the weight is above the rear wheels. So it's really well balanced. It handles fantastic. I mean they have rave reviews all throughout the event and all these these different websites. They nailed it. Yeah. Now what's your favorite car you've had? I have a 1965 Corvette. It's probably my favorite. Yeah. I give them all up except for that one. Yeah. I had to give them all up. I'd keep that. I think I've seen that you had that parked one time at your old place. Yeah. A common store too. Yeah. That fucking thing is that thing is it's just yeah. It's just the perfect little car. It's like it's it's fun. But if I had to choose one car to drive if you said you can only drive one car it would be my Tesla because that's really. Oh yeah. Yeah. It's it makes other cars seem like they're foolish. Like they're dumb. Have you ever driven one? No. I've never never never actually been inclined to even think about. They're so fast. Yeah. They're so fast. You can't believe it. You can't believe it. It goes zero to 60 and 2.4 seconds. That's two seconds faster than that new Corvette. That's well one second one second faster. Yeah. New car that's under four seconds. But it's it's preposterous how fast it is. Yeah. I that's it's one area. I can't even speak books. I have not been in a Tesla. I haven't. They'll fuck with your head. Yeah. They'll fuck with your head because they they do things in a way that you go, why don't other cars? Don't you feel the same way? Mine's all back. Go show them real quick. Come back. Mine's all back too. Okay. Mine's back there too. Yeah. The V Corvette coming out. It says. Yeah. What it's going to be is a hybrid. It's going to have electrical motors in the front. And I think they're going to have still have the mid engine. But it's going to be like the acura NSX, which is like a hybrid. They have electrical motors. I try to figure out the difference. Thousand horsepower Corvette Zora is in the works. Oh Jesus, everyone's going to die. Just say a stop order on future car. Well, my boy, my boy John Hennessy already takes a regular Corvette. And I think he jacks it up to a thousand horsepower. Go to Hennessy's Corvette. I have a Hennessy Raptor. Oh, oh, yeah. That's my Texas truck. I had to get one when I moved here. Just to show them. I'm fucking committed to being a Texan. I got to have a pick up truck. I have his first pickup truck I've ever owned in my life. Really? Yeah. I will say I, you know, probably forget it. This is this is the Hennessy C8 Corvette. He's got a thousand horsepower Corvette. Watch how fast the thing comes. The fuck off. Come on. That, that to me. That's an Eagle strangling a terrorist. Yeah. That's America. Hennessy's awesome. He does some coming take it. He's got the cannon on it. Look at the first 200 mile rodeo. That's crazy. Yeah. Generation five ZL one, two and three point nine miles per hour. Yeah. He makes some wild shit. See, I'm, I'm, you know, I got, I got weird taste. I mean, I, the pickup that I've got now I really like, I, I, I've done a big fan on, and I think a pickup truck is always a great option, but ever since I was a kid, I've never, I've never owned one. I've looked at a lot of them. I'll come close to buying them, but this is going to sound weird, but the car that I've always wanted to buy is a 56 bell air. Oh, it's a beautiful car. It's a beautiful car. It's beautiful car. It's something about sort of the excess of that period of time. Right. Yeah. Where it was just like, it was all about like, melting the car design with, with, uh, airplanes and just it just that whole idea. Yeah. Oh, God. Yeah. But I've never found one that I thought, yeah, I'm going to buy this one. I saw 55 the other day that was souped up. That was at this auto shop that I get my repairs done out in Austin. And it was amazing. So such a, such a, just the boxiness, but the, the chrome bumpers and the shape. It's just, it's fantastic. It's a different world, right? It's, it's, you know, but efficient. Yeah. Yeah. Non sense. Yeah. It is nonsense. But they're so beautiful. Yeah. I don't know why, but I, I go to car shows and I'm, I'm always looking around and look at that. Yeah. Look at that. Oh, look at that. Look at that. Tell me that's not beautiful. Is that a fix 56 Jamie? Oh, God. Yeah. So pretty. That is so pretty. Everything about it. Just, just, just sort of the, the, it's just so fucking excess, but it's just gorgeous. And the, and the, and the color schemes they had back then just crazy. You know who made a, a really killer one? Who the fuck was it that made a really killer one? Somebody made one for rides. It was, um, Google 55 Corvette. No, 55, excuse me, 55 Bel Air for rides for the TV show rides. They did it. I'm trying to remember who the fuck designed it. But, um, those, those, there's a difference between a car that you have like for transportation in a car that's really just a pure. Yes. No, absolutely. Fun. And that's what that is at this point. Yeah. No, it's, it's, yeah, you've got to have something that that you know is always going to be reliable. It's not going to break down. It's always going to be there. Yeah. But then the, the, the, the, the fun of cars is, I think is in part is just sort of the quirks that each one brings, you know, and, and I will say, I keep going back to the same thing. It was just the ability to work on a car as opposed to, I got to take it in. I got to have the diagnostics figured out and I got in. I don't know. It's this, but it's, yeah. It's, I always said if I had enough money, that's kind of where all the money would go. Is that a rides car? God, that's pretty good. Look at that thing. My God, paint job on that. Really. Yeah. It's just, I mean, it's a statement, right? It's not just a car. It's like a, a love letter to American automotive engineering from the 1950s. There's something about it. Yeah. No, it's a, it's a, that's optimism, right? That's in that time that, that, that shows you what sort of the mindset was, right? Where, where, where, we're launching off to the unknown, right? We're going to the moon, we're going to, whatever it is, if there's this, this, this, this concept that says it's not just about utility, right? You know, there's, there's something more there. There's, there's a belief in what we're moving towards, but, but it was deep. I remember who had it now. Yeah, there was a new whiskey Christopher Titus, the comic he had one. Get a biller. Yeah. Yeah. I think he has a 55 that, he had made for rides. My buddy, uh, Bud Brutzman show. Is that it? Yeah. That's it. And look at that. That one is super customized. Yeah, that is. Yeah. That is some heavy work on that. I don't, yeah. That's a chip, food scar, chip, food is designed. Well, yeah. I mean, that is a goddamn growth. I believe he sold it, but that's a, that's a gorgeous car, gorgeous car. Look at that thing. Yeah. My God. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's not a key. Perfect. 55. Yeah. I'm not going to customize the buying a Camry. That's very customized. So that's very, there's a lot going on with that car that doesn't look like that thing. Oh my God. That one right there. Look at that. Oh my God. Yeah. Yeah. The retro mod industry is really, you know, come on. Big. Um, you see a lot of this in the shows nowadays. And, and sometimes it's tough. I mean, if you're looking for something that's just straight up from the numbers and, and, you know, is, is legit. It's tough to find sometimes because this is kind of where people are going that direction. But anyway, say yeah, we're going to go over to England. I probably stop at the home depot and outside of London. Pick up some duct tape. And so some extra wire and pick up the MGP, drive around, wait for it to break. Do you have someone that can inspect the car for you over there and make sure that it's okay? Yeah. I got, yeah. I got folks over there. I got an office over there. And so, you know, I get some people that happy to go up. And, but I, I had talked to these guys for a while. I've been looking for, for this particular car for a long time. Yeah. And you see a lot of crap, right? And so, but this literally had been owned by a vicar and, and garage held forever, right? And there's just not a, not a, not a bit of rust on this thing. All the lines, the seams are perfect. It's just, it's really good. But the problem has been trying to get over that. I was going to go over and, you know, towards the end of last year to pick it up. I delayed that trip several times. It sounds like a 1% problem. But, you know, it's anyway, so we'll go over. You're all vaccinated up, right? I am. Yeah. Do you get more shots? I got both shots. I did the Moderna thing. I got the second shot. Yeah, it did. It two weeks ago. And I've never had it, never had a reaction to anything, right? Any sort of flu shot or vaccine that, and the agency used to pump us full of all sorts of stuff. Take it. No be fine. Here, go downstairs. They said this down to the, the office of medical services downstairs to get some shots to go some shit hole somewhere. And you never questioned it. You know, you're always like, yeah, whatever. But I never had a reaction to anything. And the, the doc used to say, well, this might lay out for a while and be fine. So, anyway, long story short, a couple weeks ago, I get the second shot of Moderna. And I go in and they said, well, stick around for 15, 20 minutes. See if you have a reaction to whatever. And he died. Yeah, if you die, right? He gonna, you know, fall into a seizure or whatever. I didn't. So I went home and I was like, yeah, I'm fine. I'm fine. I'm fine. I got together with some friends that night because it's Idaho. So we can actually get together with outside of our bubble. And, uh, and we, we drank. And I woke up the next morning. I thought, yeah, I got a hangover, right? From the, you know, too much red wine or whatever. And, uh, and then the rest of that day, 24 hours, my fever was spiking from like 103 down to 96, right? I mean, I was going from, from, from 103 to 96 in a matter of an hour and a half or so. It was, it was very odd for 24 hours. It just laid me out. And, uh, that was it then. And after that, I was fine. No problems. Um, uh, but it's the same thing I've heard from just about everybody else that talked to that have taken that, that second shot. And so yeah, about 24 hours, you just feel like shit. What about, uh, younger folks, you know, any younger folks that got it? I'd try to socialize with younger folks. Um, I'm curious. It's like, we sound like Wilford Bradley. I was watching this video where Ben Stein was, uh, on the internet. And he was talking about how bad he got wrecked by the second shot. But Ben Stein is like 80, right? I mean, he was a writer. He's better for Nixon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Bueller. Yeah. He's better around a long time. Um, I, I'm trying to think actually, you know, I, that's not true. I do know some folks in there in their, uh, what, 40s early, fricking, they also said the same thing. In fact, uh, one of the guys, I got the shots because I was doing some work for a company that's considered to be a, uh, whatever they call it, a critical infrastructure company. And so they put me on their list of people that they wanted to have because they were given a certain number of, of, uh, vaccines. work for a company that's considered to be a, uh, whatever they call it, a critical infrastructure company. So they put me on their list of people that they wanted to have because they were given a certain number of, of, uh, vaccines. So they said, you know, can you, would you might get on the list? So that's fine. Um, but I remember some of their folks probably late 30s and early 40s, they also the same thing, which is it. Yeah, the second shot knocked them on their ass. It varied a little bit. A couple of days, maybe three days, they all had sort of the same thing, fever, chills, aches, flu symptoms, right? Basically, right. And again, I didn't think anything of it because I haven't had a reaction in the past, uh, but yeah, it was, you know, it was kind of shitty, but you know, I mean, I look, I, you know, I've got some, you know, I had a heart attack, right? Uh, I'm at cancer, right? So I was happy to get it, right? Because I don't want to, you know, you hear the stories about people, you know, get COVID and they've had other issues in the past. Okay, fine. I felt like, you know, and at my age, you know, whatever I am, 48, uh, I feel like, so I felt like I should, I'm going to get it. And it wasn't that bad, right? In the scheme of things, and I don't want to sound like a winer. It really wasn't that bad. It was 24 hours of feeling like shit big. Then the next day you're fine. Yeah. Yeah. It was fine. And then, you know, it worked out a roll afterwards. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The next day. Yeah. I felt fine. I actually felt, I feel better if I work out. In fact, I tried to work out that day when I felt like shit because you get kind of get moving, right? And you feel what it's, I mean, you know, and, you know, I went upstairs, we got a home jam and I tried to, and I tried to, and I thought, fuck that. I can't do it. You know, because it was, it's just a temperature change. It's just like really screwing with me. But, you know, it is interesting. It's, I've been surprised by the number of people who don't want to take it, right? Who are disinclined and included in that number of healthcare people, right? Who are saying, ah, I'm going to give it a pass. Yeah. So, I think that surprised a lot of people, right? The general public, and that doesn't send a good message to the general public when they see healthcare, you know, professional saying, ah, I think I'm going to give this a miss. And everybody's got to make that decision. You know, for me, it was like, fine. Fuck it. I'll take it. And, you know, again, maybe I'm too simplistic, but, you know, it's fine. You know, and my wife has got the first shot. She's going to get the second shot at some point here. I think the next couple of weeks. So, it'll be interesting to see because she's somewhat younger than I am. And then there's that Johnson Johnson one where you take one shot, but it's not as effective. Yeah. And that's interesting, because again, I think people need to go in and it's just like with everything else. Regardless of what you're reading, you need to figure out where what the outlet is, right? Because there is no doubt. I can't come back to the same thing. I sound like I'm beating the fucking dead horse. But, the FSB, the Russian Intel service is engaged in a covert action campaign right now to denigrate the US manufacturing vaccines. So, I'm not saying there's not legit information out there that says, you know, you should think about it. Maybe it's not right for you. Fine. But, at least know what the hell you're reading, right? And pay attention to what the sources of information are that you're getting. And until that day when we all can figure out what the intent is, immediately, um, yeah, I mean, pay attention to what you're doing. Whether you're reading about foreign policy or domestic politics or the vaccine, just fucking pay attention. What's weird is that they want you to take the vaccine even if you've already had COVID. And you have the antibodies. That's weird. Yeah. That doesn't make sense. Like, Jamie's got strong antibodies. Jamie got the, the he caught COVID in October. He was barely sick. He didn't even think he had COVID. He thought he had a science infection. Jamie speak for yourself. Still still standing by now strong strong strong. Strong. Like, fucking Ronnie Coleman strong. Like, we looked at his, uh, his antibodies. Fucking thick. Dick fat mom today. Today, I mean, here we are. What is it? March? What the 12th or something? What is today? It's a nice March, March, nine, five months, strong antibodies. The kids are free. Yeah. Look at him. I mean, yeah, I'm special health. Right. It's best. I mean, why would anybody tell him that he has to take a vaccine? That's a, that's a thing that keeps coming up. I'll be honest with you. I didn't know that was the advice. I thought they were saying you don't need to get in line for the vaccine if you've already had it. I didn't know that. I know they're telling people even if you've had the vaccine or if you excuse me, if you've had COVID, you should still take the vaccine. And I don't necessarily think I understand that. Yeah. I would think they'd be pushing people who have tested positive like Jamie, who, you know, now has superpowers that they would push them to the back of the line basically and say, you know what, I'm not going to prioritize you for the vaccine because that actually doesn't make sense. Look, you think about that the population in the US has had COVID already. And then you think about the numbers that have been vaccinated. And you got to think, okay, is that line shifting? That line that where we thought a year ago, we get to this number, we're approaching herd immunity, or whatever they call it. You would think we're almost there. Right. And I don't know. The thing we are approaching it, they think we're going to hit it somewhere around the end of April. I don't that fouchy guy needs to shut the fuck up. Yeah. As much as he's an expert and God bless him, but he keeps saying that one of the things he said that made me angry, he said, we're never going to shake hands again. Yeah. We're never going to fuck the shaking hands again. Yeah. I never stopped. Yeah. The fuck are you saying? Wash your hands. Yeah. It's not shaking your hands. I'm going to kill people. Stop saying things like that. He says too many things that he takes back and too many things that he said in the beginning that masks don't work. And now he's saying where two masks come on, man. I think I think he's become a little enamored of the limelight. Right. I think he's, you know, and that's a natural human thing, I think. But I think he, you know, I'm not saying that it's he's he's not, you know, he's a scientist, right? Fine. Great. Okay. You know, believe science. But I'm just saying human condition is human. The attention is has been not unattractive to him. And so then some of the things he says, and I think that's been part of the problem for the general population is the inconsistency of messaging. And I think part of that is because people are starting to realize like, look, medicine's not a fucking black and white issue, right? It's not a science. And I like it as a science, but it's not concerned. Well, it's a science. Yeah. Human writings. Right. But it's not it's not looked as there's a lot of educated guesses that go on in medicine. Yes. Right. I had a stress test. And the full workout for, for, for my heart. And they said, whatever you're doing, keep doing your great shape. God bless you in the last days. I, I, I like red meat. I'm not going to lie. I like red meat. Keep talking. Let's take the protein. Oh, yeah. Let me start talking about elk. elk porn. And so, uh, but then a week later, I have a widow maker on an airplane, right? Just drop on an airplane. What do you mean? I was in, I was, I was going to Puerto Rico to give a speech at a conference. And thank God Emily was with me. We were flying. They said, look, you're coming down to Puerto Rico. It's a really nice place. Stay for a few days afterwards. You know, so all the guy too was give a, you know, stupid talk for a little while and, you know, something boring. And they said, hang out. So, so Emily came with me. We were going to have a really great time. We passed through DFW through Dallas. We got to the airport in Dallas, waited for the connection, got on the connection, go on a Puerto Rico, get on the plane, sit there. They wind up the engines, move off to the, to the, uh, the taxi. They get to the runway. They literally pointing down to runway, winding up the engines. And I look at him and I go, I'm not feeling that, uh, and I, and that was the last thing I said, I didn't even get the word good out. And I just collapsed, right? I was done. How long ago was this? This was three years ago. And I had a week before I had a stress test where they said, everything's good, man. You, you look good. And I got a family that's got a history of heart concerns, right? So that's why I was in for the stress tests. And, and, uh, if, if my wife had been with me, I would have died on that plane because everyone would have thought, you know, how the, the engines wind up and you get ready and people fall asleep. It's, you know, it's a white noise. So, but, uh, she jumped up and said, get this fucking plane back to the gate. And one of the attendants said, uh, what he likes, the more in shoes, because I mean, she probably thought I was dying. Right. And I passed out. And, uh, and according to a couple of doctors on the plane came visit me afterwards, they said, my wife was very funny. She says, he doesn't want to fucking orange shoes. Get back to the fucking gate. So we got to the gate, luckily the Baylor, uh, the grapevine Institute, the heart Institute is like seven minutes away, right? I couldn't have been luckier. And so we get back to the gate. They get me off the plane. I wake up on, on, on, on, hospital bed staring up with a doctor who's like right there in my face, right? And then I come to it. And he says, he's very funny. But he says, you know how you can avoid this in the future? And I'm like, where the fuck am I? Is this, is this like, you know, if I gone to the afterlife, and this is what it is, I'm, you know, talking to a doctor. And he says, uh, he says, have different parents. And then he laughed. Right? That was the first thing I saw would have did. What got there? No, it was funny. He's a great guy, great doctor. Thank God he was there. But anyway, but a point being is that just what I learned from that episode and then the subsequent treatment and all the other things that go on with it. I should have known before because I am old enough to be pragmatic, but a lot of medicine is, is, is educated guesses, right? And yet the general population, right, has grown up to believe that medicine is science is definite, is black and white. Here's your answer. And that's not the way it is. And I think so. I think it's natural that with a pandemic like this, of course, there's going to be, um, it's not misinformation. It's just inconsistent messaging because we're still figuring it out. Right? So that's not, it's not medicine's fault. It's just the way it is. But that creates this distrust among the public because they're anticipating that it's all going to be clear. Right? You're going to get the exact answer that you want and it's going to be right. And it's not. So we've had this period of time over this year where people kind of wake up and you get these different sides arguing about things. We're just trying to figure the fuck out. So do the smart thing. Just try to be responsible, right? But don't expect that, you know, medicine is going to give you the answers right off the bat and it's going to be correct. Just like, don't fucking turn to the federal government. I know where I'm going with this, but don't turn to the federal government for all your answers. And you know, don't buy an MGB and expect it to work. Or a Range Rover. So when you had this heart attack, what advice they give you in terms of like how do you keep from having one again? Well, they put me on blood thinners. That was a big part of it. So guess what? Some sort of a clot or something? I did. I had my one side was entirely blocked. Right. Yeah. And so that's what they call the widow maker when you're in it just like, it just happens. But do they tell you to resume cardio or to have more cardio? Yeah. I went into, I went into some, you know, sort of very slow. It was very funny because they put me in this program where I show up and I'm basically it's an exercise program. So I would go there four days a week. And everybody in there was at least like 25 years older than I was, right? And I'm, you know, I'm not young, but they were all in there. And so they'd kind of be walking around the track. And I was like, I'm hooked up and I'm walking around this. I made some great friends, frankly, you know, so these guys were fantastic. And so you go there. I actually was looking forward to it. I go and I had coffee with Fred and Fred's, you know, 89 years old and we'd have a great time talking. And, and, but they'd be looking at me like I was 20 years old, which I kind of enjoy, right? Because I'm the youngest guy in there. But it was, so it was a lot of, you know, build back up your, your level. Now I work out just like I did before, right? And I, and, but the interesting thing is, is that they basically now, when you go in and you say it because they, there was some talk about, well, let's do the other side, meaning let's, let's get in there and clear it out, put a couple of stints on the other side and make sure you're all good. But they're like, you know, you talk to one cardiologist and they say, maybe we should and the other said, maybe we shouldn't because there's a risk if we go in there. So maybe we just wait. And then there, there answers always kind of like, well, if you start to feel anything, then, you know, let's, we'll go in there and we'll intervene. And you think, well, I didn't feel anything before. So just came out of the mirror. I'm just, but again, being fairly pragmatic, I'm thinking, well, that's, that's life, right? There's no fucking guarantees. I don't have a, I don't have a problem with that change of respect to it on. Like having a Widowmaker experience where you're almost died. Did you get out of that saying, you know, like, where you like not to be cliche, but every day is a gift, like that kind of shit. Yeah. I mean, look, I had a stretch of time with the, with that with the heart situation. I also had colon cancer, right? Because I, I, I did what a lot of guys do. I thought I put off the, the colonoscopy and I put it off. You're supposed to start when you're 50. I think it's the general advice. And I was thinking like, I have no interest in going in and getting a colonoscopy. It just doesn't, it's not the sort of thing that so I always found a reason to put it off. I put it off for like five years. And then finally, uh, my wife said, gotta go and get it done for no reason. It's just I wasn't feeling bad or anything. Shit, you gotta go get it done. So I went in, it turns out it's nothing. Right. If my one piece of advice to anybody as a dude to other guys is go get your fucking colonoscopy because you don't even know you're happening. And, you know, and it's not like some sort of prison situation. You're fine. Right. You're going to wake up. You have no idea it happened. But get it done when you turn 50. Start doing that. And why is it with guys? Like what is it about guys? I have no idea. I have no idea. I mean, I probably should have researched it afterwards. But I remember going in getting it and then I'm still doped up. Right. So I kind of wake up and I'm aware that that I'm standing there talking to the doctor who turned out to be a great doctor. She's fantastic. And they're talking, but I don't know what they're talking about. So then we go from there and I go immediately to another part of the hospital to get some tests done, some scans and everything. And then I get some more tests done. And then I go home and I'm happy as a clam. Right. Because I'm still lubed up. But I'm still just, you know, I've got the whatever anesthesia they use and I feel pretty good. And I go upstairs. I don't take a nap. I wake up from my nap a couple hours later. And I'm happy as a clam. I'm going to go outside and do some work. And I'm says, you don't have no idea what's going on to you. And I said, no, so it turns out I had cancer and they they they'd scheduled me already. I had to go in and get a what they, you know, they'd take a section of your colon out. Right. Turns out we got like six feet of everybody's got like six feet of whatever colon or again, I'm not a doctor. But they had to take out a section of it, do the surgery. And I like, yeah, I had no idea until it was explained to me. So you go in and you do all of that and then you got a period of time where you got to go through some treatment and everything. And then yeah, but again, you don't you can sit and you can think about it and you can go, oh my god, why? I don't have no history of that in my family. It just happened. Just happened as they said, it was a it was an outlier. Do you take vitamins? Do you do a sauna? Do you like do you do anything to do? Yeah, I'm a healthy guy. I mean, in the sense, I mean, I I watch, you know, okay, I read me, but I watch my diet. I mean, something before no, I exercise a lot. Um, you know, I've got to act in lifestyle. I do all those things, right? There's a lot of people that try to make correlations between red meat being bad for you. But they're all from epidemiology, studies where people are eating cheeseburgers and fries and shakes and exactly. If you're just eating steak and vegetables, that's normal human food. People have been eating meat since the beginning of people. Yeah, I haven't changed. I know what sounds weird, but after the heart attack, after the after the cancer, they haven't changed that my diet and it's I had a good diet before. Right? I wasn't anybody trying to talk to you to be in the vegan. Nobody that knows me well. Nobody. I look, I got some nieces who are very serious vegans and they're up. They're like, you know, they're like a religious zealot. There's nobody more, you know, obnoxious and somebody who's adapted of religion, right? They get sell us about it. vegans kind of can be the same way. God bless them. They want to do that. That's fine. Don't get up in my face about it. I got some I got some family. It's an interesting psychological thing. They just want to show everybody that they're doing the right thing and they really do believe in it. You know, it's it's weird. I have a friend who's a vegan who's a real asshole. He's such a shitty person to other people that aren't vegans. It's like, isn't this supposed to be all about kindness? Meanwhile, you're just a terrible person of people. It's like, but it's like a lot of other things, right? It's just like, you know, it's like wearing a mask. Fine. I don't care about wearing a mask. I'll wear a mask, but don't get up in my face about about it. Well, there's things that happen where people use those opportunities as it's a moment for them to yell at folks. Some moment for them to be righteous and, you know, yeah, never underestimate strength of the power of someone feeling righteous and smarter than anybody else. And that's and that again, but to answer your question about every day at gift and everything, you know what? I kind of felt that way before, right? I've say, you know, my, my, you know, I've seen my family go on, I've seen, you know, siblings and and good friends and so I always felt like, you know, yeah, every day is a gift, but I don't think you need some sort of life-changing moment. If you're, you know, if your priorities are right to think that. Some people that life-changing moment though is just enough of a jolt to just let you know like this is real. Because sometimes we all know we're going to die, but it's not something you dwell on. But when you almost die, yeah, don't you do want it more? For a little while, I tell you what the one reaction to the heart attack on the plane was was getting on other planes, right? And I got to travel a lot, you know, for my, for my blood work. And so there was that moment where I get on a plane because you feel like, okay, I got no choice. If I'm sitting on a, on a 13 hour flight, right? And I'm halfway through it. I'm fucked if something else happens, right? So there was that, that side of it, but otherwise no, there was, there was no, there was no come to Jesus moment where I thought, oh my God, I just, I will say this. I don't dwell on death, but I do find myself, this sounds really odd, but I find myself sometimes thinking, you know, I just want like just give me 25 more years or get me, you know, give me 30 more years or whatever, because what are you planning on doing those 30 years? Well, you know what, nothing, I just want to see my kids grow up. And you know, I'll leave them behind them. Yeah, it's like, it's like, you know, what's that old line from a, uh, butch Cassidy, the Sundance kid, butch said, you know, I always thought when I grow up, I was going to be a hero. I don't, I don't think that I'm going to be a hero when I grow up, right? But I want to see my kids grow up. That's, that to me is the driver. I want to say, I got young kids, right? I got young boys. I want to see them grow up. You know what line I thought you were going to say? What? When they're about to jump off the cliff. Yeah. When I'm going to go, I can't swim, because it doesn't matter. The fall's probably going to kill me. Yeah. So many good lines out of that movie. Yeah. I know. Great. Well, yeah. Oh my God. Yeah. I don't think, I don't think anybody under, I don't think anybody at 40 actually remembers that movie. No. It's a great movie. Oh, God. It was funny. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of those movies, man, from those days. And, you know, people, they, they told stories different back then. Yeah. Yeah. There was more character development and fewer explosions. It wasn't influenced by like, you know, these, these studies, these focus groups are trying to figure out what people tune into and what people don't tune into. They were just trying to tell a story. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and it was, and you could develop the story in a slower fashion. Yeah. Right. There wasn't in part because I go back to what we're talking about, the access to information, right? It's created shorter attention spans. Right? Yeah. Yeah. And so people want that answer right away. They want, they want, they want satisfaction right away. They want, you know, I'm going to buy something. I'm going to buy it right away. You know, I want the story to get over with. So, you know, I can move on to the next one. I'm going to binge watch something. And so yeah, I think there was something to that. I mean, there were a lot of bad movies made in the old days, but I mean, they were, yeah, you know, a lot of did allow for more dialogue, more story development, more character development. They were appreciated and respected your intelligence enough that you could sit and watch something a couple years back. It's been a couple years, but a couple years back I watched, uh, Lamont's with Stephen Queen. Yes. And the beginning of the movie, there's no dialogue for a long ass time for a long ass time. It's just setting up this, you know, this scenario. That's a great movie. Great movie. And you know, you realize like what those guys had to go through back then driving those race cars in the 1960s, those things were death traps, death traps and a lot of physical work. Oh, yeah. You were beat the hell by the time you say 24 hours. Yeah. You're driving for a full day. I mean, that's part of what the race was about was your mental endurance. Yeah. This is a good result. If all this does is get people to watch Lamont's or which gazity, that's great. That's a great. Yeah. I pay attention to China. Yeah. The going back to I did want to touch on the Syria thing because I think it is important because what is going on over there? Well, it's, it's, I think it's interesting in for a couple of reasons, but one is just I found interesting was the realization amongst a lot of people that we still had troops over in Iraq, right? That seemed to catch a lot of people off guard because what happened was there's a Eastern Syria where we did the airstrikes, just a couple of weeks ago. We struck a facility that is essentially a hub, a center for transportation of fighters, foreign fighters and and money and hardware weapons that the Iranians have set up. The Iranians have basically created a transportation system from Tehran to all the way to Beirut, right? And they're effort to try to control the region. And so you had this Eastern Syria outpost with Iranian backed militia and they were engaged in occasional attacks against US and coalition forces, right? So they were, they were lobbing missiles and, and there were a couple of incidents where we lost contractors and coalition members and so essentially what happened was the, the Biden administration, I think correctly so said, okay, look, we got to, if we got to do something, we got to send a message. So they did, they, you know, they, they struck a facility there run by some Iranian backed militia. But the news that it was because of the attacks that they were committing on US forces in Iraq, that's the interesting part because they caught people by surprise and they were going, what the fuck you, we still got people in Iraq because we've gone, we've gone well beyond that time when, you know, support our troops. I mean, you know, wounded warrior and was always, you know, the ads up there and everybody thought about it, right? But it's been, I think about how many years it's been, right? And so I think we, we've forgotten that we still have, we don't have many, but we still have troops over there. And so it raised an interesting question, which is an important one to talk about I think, which is, you know, why are we still over there? Or what are are we doing over there? What's our end game? What's our reason for being, right? And now, like 19 years, 20 years since we've been in Afghanistan, as an example, and what's that, you know, what's the point? What? And so I think that's a legitimate conversation to have regardless of where you fall on, on the answer. I think it's, it's a good question to have and we should be talking about it. But we don't because we get wrapped up in domestic politics, we get wrapped up in COVID or whatever it is. So occasionally something like that happens that causes people to shift their focus outside of their bubble and outside the US and think about what the hell else is going on in the world. And that's, from my perspective, anyway, that's a good thing, right? Because there is a lot of happening over there. But it's just shocking how little coverage there is. Yeah, because then how much coverage there is about Ted Cruz wanting to go to Campo. Right? Yeah, well, because the difference that was in the front center of the media, it was, that was the thing they were talking about the most. That was all because that's, and they know that look, most, most journalism now is on social media in a sense, right? So it's all about getting clicks on your story, which is why headlines are so sensational. Oftentimes don't line up with the actual story that, right? Because all you want to do is you want to get people clicking on it, right? Right. Or talking about it. And that's the way that the journalism gets driven forward. So that's no surprise that Ted Coon and, or Ted, Ted, Ted, Ted, Ted, Cruz and Ken, I was combining Ken Coon and Ted Cruz. I came over Ted, I'm not saying not to go with it, but so that's why that gets the attention and air strikes in Syria. You're not going to get the clicks on that, right? People are going to like go. It's outrageous to see Ted Cruz in the middle of a crisis that's happening in Texas, his state, he's a senator. He decides to leave the state and go to a resort in Mexico. Yeah, that's going to get more clicks and likes. Yeah. Yeah. So it's on it from, again, that it makes sense why certain stories drive a narrative, right? Because again, because people have sort of a very short attention span limited time in their day to gather information. They're going to go for the salacious thing. And so yeah, yeah, Cruz and Ken Coon, why not? Syria? Yeah. It's too complicated. It's too complicated. It's also so far away. It's hard for people to wrap their heads around it. Yeah, but it is, I mean, it will be very interesting to see where this administration goes. I mean, again, God bless him. I hope they do well. We should have hoped that the Trump administration did well. We should, you know, you should always hope they do well, because they do well. We do well. The problem is when people don't want them to do well. Like, I was hearing people saying that they wanted the economy to tank, so to get people to realize the Trump's a fraud, like why the fuck would you want the economy to tank? Yeah. It's like that you, even if you hate Trump, you'd want them to do well because then the country does well. Yeah, it seems like a simple equation. But you don't know the guy. It's not like you talked to him every day. Oh, this dick again. Like just stop watching CNN. Yeah, you won't be so angry. Well, the problem is access to instantaneous information. That's the problem. Isn't it weird how they're taking out hormone now? Oh, New York, although, although with New York, you're probably one more sexual harassment allegation away from opening up New York. Yeah, I see. Getting the restaurants open. And so I think they're probably hoping one more woman will show up and say, yeah, you know, he would be able to blast. He doesn't want anything to be open up. That fucking one. Yeah, it's it is. Yeah, although he's it's interesting to see the dynamic, right? With Cuomo and the Blasios, they've never seen I die. They've always been kind of going at each other and to Blasio sees us as a moment. Yeah. And I think he felt like he was probably done. Right? Nobody really wants him as mayor in New York. The people that are in New York. And so he probably sees this as a possible entrance ramp to the governor's slot. Right? He might be able to make his way. Well, I mean, everybody hates him. Everybody hates him. But look, you know, you see that video, the stranger thinks have happened in politics. So people, but he's pretty strange. Even liberals don't like the Blasio. Did you see that video that he put about about bringing the arts back to New York? Yes, do you see that with the bad dancing, the out of sync music, yeah, and the uncoordinated dancing, that was the weirdest thing ever. That was like a, that was a part of a Colin Brothers movie. That's what that was like. That was like the big little basket. Like you're watching this. You're like, what am I seeing? I just watched that again the other night. Fuck that movie's good. It's so fucking such a good movie. Good. You know what I watch the other night? One of my friends, I know I'm faced out in a muck. Dried. It's Chinaman. I don't think you're supposed to say Chinaman. It's so many good things in the movie. You know what I watched the other night? That's a great movie that I kind of forgot how good it was. Napoleon died in my, my god. That was good. My 10 year old did not understand it. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. She just, there's certain aspects to him. She's like, he's dumb. I'm like, that's the point. Yeah. The point is it's all dumb. That's a brilliant movie. My kids, I mean, get where I die to go. My kids have all why I said they love, they love that movie. Fuck that movie. It was funny. Is it an Idaho? It is. Yeah. It's a couple hours outside of Boise. And my youngest boy, Mugsie, can do the entire dance. Jameriqui, I think, did the music for that. And can't heat or whatever that song was. He can do that entire dance. He did it for a talent show at school one time, which was absolutely brilliant. But the uncle who wants to drink a machine. Yeah. I could we go once you go back in time to when he was playing football in high school. I could throw that football over that mountain. And then don't you don't you? Bout of your sense. It's just brilliant. No. Funny movie. God, that was funny. There he is. Yeah. Yeah. Afonda. Remember the father comes out. The job is to turns out to be real. Don't worry. Don't worry. Demolina. You'll find your soulmate one day. Yeah. And everyone's thinking that La Fonda's fake. Yeah. Turns out she's real and they really do love each other. Go away. I caught you with tasty bass. Yeah. God, that's a tough. No, you're right. That's a good idea. Again, there's certain movies. I had my boys watch old school the other day. Yeah. There's some movies. I think the kids at boys at a certain age should always watch. I sound like I'm sexist, but you know what I'm gonna say. But I got boys. So they should watch these movies. But yeah, old school's great, step brothers. Isn't it funny that it's sexist if you say there's movies that you think a boy should watch, but it's not sexist if you say there's movies that I think girls should watch. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. We got international women's day. Yeah. Because men are all scared. Yeah. We don't have men's day. We're scared of being called out for being Should watch yeah, yeah, yeah, it's true. We got in a world We just had an initial women's day yeah, cuz men are all scared. Yeah, we don't have men's day We're scared of being called out for being sexist. Yeah I careful. Yeah, it's be careful about everything, right? Right you gotta be in fact. That's what Emily told me she dropped me off here. She said careful. You're just yeah, rogue Don't say no, no, she loves your show, but she's like she's worried about me She's worried about me saying something stupid and so Have you taken heat from shit you said on here in the past? Yes, yes, I have And a lot of it, but that's fine. Yeah, what what's the big one? Well, you know what the big ones and sort of a general category We're we're you say that like the far right You know their full of shit and the far left's full of shit and then people get upset because they like what I get not mostly as well If you're in the middle you don't stand for anything That's ridiculous Well, that's what but that's what you hear most is because because you say something about you know how fucked up the front like the mask burning Like that's fucked up right and oh you say something stupid about it like the far left you know not seeing the irony of wanting to ban books You know and you're thinking okay Fine, but then you get called out because you you exist somewhere in the center where you're trying to see that there's smart ideas on both sides And yet people to so angry that they don't want that right and it's it's like that idea that we were talking about before where The people who are shining during the pandemic who love the suffering in a sense right Who really don't want us to return to a normal because they've they've actually found this to be a good time for them And that sounds wrong. I know that sounds wrong. I know you know a lot of people but there are some people who seem to suffer well right Yeah, and you know to somebody who they're the same people who grieve well right You know you get those people who they didn't know the person who died But you know my god they're grieving more than anybody else including immediate family and so Yeah, I probably don't want to disappear I'm I'll say something stupid and then I'll get caught out again, but what do you think it's saying that was maybe stupid Let's talk about this Capitol Hill shit. Oh, yeah That's we haven't talked about that that's happened. Yeah, I saw you. Yeah, that's you know what that's a good example of getting called out on shit I did a show on the sixth right It was a news a news segment where I was talking and I said that President Trump's reaction that day Was pathetic and that's what I said right and My point was is that a lot of what he did over his four years It was just self-inflicted wounds. It was unnecessary right and a lot of the noise was unnecessary It was because of his personality and the way that he responded right now I know his his base love that because they felt like well that's real right and they's really speaking truth to power He's not part of the swamp and all that but my point was look You can be smart enough as the president of the United States to come out in a meeting this regardless of what's going on just say Back to fuck off. Yeah, right. This is wrong. Don't do it right You can protest but not violently and get the fuck out of the Capitol bill right and He didn't do that it was sort of the same thing that he always does which is it's not a strong statement And it's a self-inflicted wound so I said that and man did I take some fucking heat right from the right side from the right side who's saying I Have a full shit what people on the right don't think that that's why that's what I understand Well, it's the people on the farthest spectrum which again, I believe in now Now they have to understand They were wrong you would think so but I think a lot of people don't a lot of people still think Look was their fraud in the election. Yes, I believe but there's fraud in every election, right? It's just it's the nature of the beast That's what I would I said was like do you think that the fraud in the election was zero? No one thinks that no. Oh, I mean how much do you think the fraud was do you think the fraud was enough to shift the election one way or the other? I don't I don't think so either but I don't know But I think that if we allow if we allow to normalize certain aspects of the electoral system I think what you're doing look I I work in fraud all the time right? That's what my guys do in my my business That's all they they work in front if you allow conditions to To create a potential for fraud then people are gonna fill that gap and they're gonna rush in and they're they're gonna engage in fraud So if you if this is the fight that I can't figure out everybody should want right right or left to allow The ability the easy access to vote for every US citizen But we should also want to not have people who aren't citizens or Whatever I mean just to not allow fraud into the system and so I have I have a hard time understanding how people can't come together and say Yeah, we want integrity in our electoral system. Do you think any other country allows for for the sort of lax? You know program that says yeah, we're not gonna check and we're just gonna we we're so keen to show how righteous We are that everybody has easy access to voting that we're not gonna check and make sure is citizen I guarantee you every other country Make sure that the people voting are citizens of that country if they're given the right to vote right? We don't do that Well what I'm saying is there's a potential if we If we just expand the ability to vote right in our design citizens, right? Well, no, I'm not even saying nonsense is what I'm saying is the way that we allow people to vote if we don't have integrity in Ensuring that the vote is coming from a legitimate citizen, right? and And then and the right and the left should want that right we should everybody you want people to be able to vote of course You want fucking people to vote. It's like believe science of course you believe science right but you want You want everybody to be able to vote and you want him to be able to do it easily But you also want to make sure that you're not opening it up in your desire to allow people to vote so that you're not you don't have the ability to check and make sure that there's no fraud So that doesn't seem to be a heavy lift allow it allow easy access to voting for every US citizen But ensure that the integrity of the system allows you to make sure that you just have US citizens voting for your country's elections That's what every other country does and again, it goes back to that thing about sometimes we apologize for it It's it's a righteous idea that you know, well You know, I don't know I Let me ask you this instead of like examining all the problems What would be done to make voting more secure? Like is it possible to vote online? I mean I've said why is it that we can bank online? But we can't vote online. Yeah Well, I think if if your system I'm part of the problem I think is if your system isn't clearly explainable and and transparent if people can't look at it and go I see and the reason why like in person voting right the day of the election is was for so long was You know nobody questioned it was because that's simple. That's transparent. You can look at it and you say yeah, I get it That's that's what happens. It's it's it's election day. Everybody go to the voting polls and vote And so if you're doing it online or there's just unsolicited mail-in ballots then People can look at that and legitimately go well, I don't understand it and so therefore I don't know that it's do you think the mail-in ballot mail-in ballots leave more of an opportunity for fraud There's a potential Do I think I mean again I go back to the same thing. Do I think there was enough in this pat? No It wasn't so much fraud that but I think there's fraud on both sides You think it's fraud in the Republican side and the Democrats side. Oh sure The public cancels it's yeah, well, I think it's I think it's there's a there's a there's a a You know again you go back to the human condition I think it's if there's an opportunity for fraud I don't think you know Republicans are gonna be less inclined to them Democrats or Democrats are less inclined to Republicans I just think it's the way it works, but it's I think you have to you have to have a transparent clearly explainable You know system that you could look at and go yes, I get it. That's why and so I'm a big fan of in-person voting and Unsolicited mail-in ballots no in the old days we had absentee ballots and and that was we look we change the rules To try to accommodate for the pandemic and that made sense right but There has to be an ability for both sides to look at the system and say it's credible because it's it's clearly explainable and transparent And I just don't think that's where we're at right now That's what created this confusion and distrust That's a very dangerous thing and also then we had outside elements Trying to you know drop in there with a covert action campaign to to see that Inability to believe in the system. So yeah, we we better get this nailed down before the next election Otherwise we're gonna have the same problems. Yeah, I'm worried that Trump comes back in 2024 And I'm worried that these people that were at the Capitol building getting more Organized and more emboldened the only difference is what's really kind of hilarious is these dummies We're also anti-maskers so they all showed up. Yeah, I mean, it's like a perfect storm of stupid Yeah, it really works Storm is stupid because if you think about it the facial recognition abilities that we have now all the images were masks Yeah, you fucking idiots. You can wear a mask and you'd be totally justified nobody would ever catch you perfect opportunity to wear a mask and not be identified I know these fucking idiots are putting their feet up on Nancy Pelosi's desk. Oh my god taken photos Yeah, no that was and but there was but then they got into a hot wash and we still haven't gotten the results of that yet in terms of the You know what what was the breakdown in all of this? Why? Why was it so difficult to just simply secure the Capitol building right and then look at the difference between when the black lives matter Protests were there and they had hundreds of security guards surrounding the Capitol building versus this right? What's a pittance right and what was it? But what I think what that's an easy thing to do right? To walk that back and say okay, let's do an investigation But the problem is with DC is you know, they they seem incapable of doing an investigation into anything right? It's where good investigations go to die and Yet these sort of things happen all the time you do a hot wash if some scenario or something that happened You can do that but in DC because of the dysfunctional nature of that place I don't think we're gonna get any sort of easy answers out of this But it should be relatively simple. I know some of the people that were you know in the sergeant of arms office there and in Capitol building and capital police guys it and It shouldn't be difficult to say what's the timeline who talked about security in the days leading up to this who requested additional security? Why was it denied what all these things need to be looked at and then explained to the general public in a clear and non-partisan way? Do I think that's gonna happen? No because it's Washington DC Do you think that the attack on Capitol Hill in many ways is like What happens when the social media chickens come to roost? That this this divide that we've had on social media that is accentuated by algorithms. It does it does it? emphasizes these echo chambers where people believe the election was stolen they only communicate with other people to believe And you're a patriot if you go there and we're gonna get together patriots they recall themselves patriots Violating the law right right violating the Capitol Hill storming the gates killing a cop and you call on yourself a patriot Look, I mean I think the vast majority of those people right when once they found themselves inside the Capitol building we're probably like Exactly, you can see You know, but you had some of those people who knew exactly what they were doing and they were they you know They and so they should be punished of course, but I think that yes I think social media played a big role in it I think Trump himself You know, I know people were saying well he said he called for peaceful protests Yes, but he could have done it in a in a better way he could have I don't want to man he anticipated that they were gonna do that I think he thought they were gonna go there and chant and scream like of course has always happened And that would be the end of it right do I yeah exactly do I think Trump? You know it tended our thought that they were gonna storm the Capitol, but of course not I know but he did want to incite them to cheer and chant and Sure and let people know on his behalf like the same like that tape that got leaked of him calling up the governor of Georgia Intelling them to change the election results. Yeah, and be a patriot like that kind of shit Everything says yeah, this concerning everything said everything's a problem with his messaging You know self-inflicted wounds and look we we talked back in what November right? I think was the last time and I think at that time I said that you know he's he's losing the election and He should the next important thing was gonna be the Georgia Senate runs right if you know if you're a Republican You should be pissed off that he wasn't smart enough to understand that after the election He should have turned his attention to Georgia and simply said all you got to do now is you got to focus on Georgia You got to get out there and vote you got to do everything possible he couldn't do that right he couldn't do it now look That doesn't mean I don't like that some of the policies of the previous administration right you can you know You can have disagreements with with the the person who's in the White House and still like the the policies right the foreign The attitude towards China and the way that we dealt with China some of the other things that we were doing that's great We don't live in that world now where you can separate and and kind of you know Look and analyze policies from people right now. It's like if you if you if you If you say look either were self-inflicted wounds people go I are fucked up You're not a Republican and you're just you hate the poli. I didn't know I'm just saying look he clearly Through his actions cause a Republican to lose Georgia He could have from that that bully pulpit of his he could have Pushed and we probably would have won both of those elections in Georgia But he didn't do that. How can you've done that? Simply by shutting up about election fraud and Realizing that this is the Democrats one thing that they do right and again I'm I'm a centrist here But one of the things that I always thought Democrats do well is they focus on the end result right on the game right on the game plan and Sometimes Republicans get lost in like principle and theory and and and and the purity of it all right and and it's it's like with I don't know it so I think that what he could have done was just Immediately pivot after the national election the presidential election and said Look, we're all disappointed Right this is not the result that we wanted But now we have an important task ahead of us and that is the two Senate seats in Georgia If you like the policies that we've been promoting and you like the the deregulation or you like the China policy or whatever it is Folks your attention in Georgia But you think that would have made a difference because yes the people that are on the fence Do you think there's that many people that are on the fence that would have voted Republican? But wound up voting Democratic because he I think I don't think they they wound up voting Democrat I think it just stayed home I think what they did was they sold this this belief in the in the lack of integrity of the election system and they probably that Ah fuck it You know they stole the first one they're gonna steal this one. So I'm not going anywhere You know, I'm gonna protest or whatever it might be so I think that's where I think that's where the mistake was But you know again look I you know what the hell I hope the Biden administration does a great job I hope they do you think he's gonna make it four years? I hope he does. Yeah, of course he does I mean, I think yeah, of course he does, but I think you think you're gonna make it four years You know what am I you had a bad if I had a bet We have a bet we have a bet we have a bet that that I bet the Trump won't Come back and run again. Oh, he's coming back. Oh you I know we got to it was our bet. What was it Jamie a thousand bucks thousand bucks I think I said I think I can't wait to spend that money. Yeah, I think Just reminding you because I still think I'm gonna win spending it right now. He's coming back. What do you get spit that up? Kind of good stuff Fine Eagle sculpture Big screaming he's coming back. I don't think so, but what did you think about when they attached in the COVID relief bill 180 days for the CA to release all the information they have about the UFOs That's one of the things I love about this is this we go Oh my god. Yeah, we can't be taken seriously that way. Yeah. No, no, but I will say this I tell people this all the time they say they say why is this so in a day? I said because he's curious about everything he's genuinely curious about everything and that's it that's it's a good question Look, I'm happy that that when it comes to UFOs There's a lot of things that the agency needs to keep you know off the radar resources and methods right? It's a need to know issue and frankly again going back to what's in in you know the US best interest You know for that day when China decides to release all of their intel operations and information then great Maybe it's time for us to be transparent, but that's not the one There's a lot of it is just secret programs Defense vehicles well, no, what I'm saying what I'm saying is oh terms of the UFO Yeah, great portion of it is yeah great portion of this is is 50% Now the 47% actually but don't say that That's well known Inside the community No, look, I think it's good because I think the look it's for the same reason the Pentagon released information about a tip about the advance Air and angle threaded identification program. I think I think it's actually good. There's no reason why we shouldn't unless You are talking about developmental aircraft as an example Right, which is important because what you're talking about? Hypersonic aircraft or missiles or whatever it is there's some stuff that needs to be kept off the off the radar screen Because there is a tremendous competition going on right now for particularly for things like control of space That's that's gonna be a huge issue About because the weaponization of space for a long time people think in our space. It's a great exploration and it's good for mankind the frankly You know there is a race to figure out how to weaponize space and so as an example of what we're talking about the idea of Just saying oh we're gonna open the books as a country and reveal all our information about you know developmental aircraft as an example That's the wrong move right because but do you think there are any credible Stories whether it's from Commander David favor who saw that tick-tack vehicle off the coast of San Diego or Whatever video yeah if I had to point to one I would say favor. Yeah. I would say without a doubt I'd say the one that if I were somebody who's looking for some Redemption because I've been beating the drum about UFOs and nobody's ever believed me. They always were all the rise I would say the one thing that would give them comfort would be the the incident with command of favor and and that citing That's that's one that I have yet to see an explanation for that makes any sense Well, not only that there's they tracked it. Yeah, like there's Yeah, and then also blocked their radar systems which is an active war and actively jammed radar systems. It's it's It's not Simple as like they saw something didn't know what it was like they tracked this thing going from I think it was close to 1,000 feet above sea level to one down. Yeah in one second. Yeah. No signs of propulsion. Yeah No heat signatures nothing right, and it was just it was a Yeah, it's it's one of those things you look at and you go okay and look the A tip program made sense in the sense that you know if if A nation is out there if Chinese are out there are the Russians whomever and they're developing a Propulsion capability that we don't know about then yeah, we should have a mechanism Within the Pentagon within the Intel community to understand what that is. Let's let's research It's a investigate right and so oftentimes, you know, they come to a logical conclusion the favor incident I've yet to see any Information that explains it right so that to me and and also as you pointed out the way that it was tracked The verification of it from very credible You know individuals that To me is is like the the prime example and they have video footage of this thing to On top of that. They have camera footage. It's incredible Yeah, and then Nimitz saying that these things are fairly common that they're seeing them every couple of weeks Yeah, they were seeing them and you know when favors like hey guys What the fuck is this and like yeah? You see it? Yeah, we've been seeing these things and there's no upside for somebody like that A very well-respected, you know aviator With great experience. There's no upside for these guys to come forward right in fact There's there's pressure to not because it's not necessarily good for your career right to come in and say I think I saw you I fall right what do you think is going on? I? Know we've talked about that before I I'm not you know Trying to get the right answer out of your community forget what you said before yeah, I don't know right You forgot about the I'm bet I shouldn't open my mouth No people go back to that though. They would have called me out if Trump comes back and runs they would say oh You owe him a thousand bucks. Can't wait That fucking screaming eagle in here little more You know, I'm gonna put I'll buy it for you with the money and I'll put a little plaque on there to say where it came from I know I've got one I gave a speech one time up for a Veterans Day event and they Was very kind of they gave me this big eagle I keep it in my office. That's fantastic I keep in the background when I do new segments from my office and it's it's like perched over my shoulder You got to have one in here Anyway, I know I don't know I Think about it Yeah, I do in the terms of and like I said with black files to class if I come up I just got another plug in we We're gonna do an episode. It's on the Discovery Channel, isn't it? It is on Discovery Channel and you know what you can see the entire first season on Discovery Plus Oh so I I I think it's it's foolish to discount these things because I did so much We don't know right so and the idea of of thinking that somehow we're the only you know credible life forms out there I think it's ridiculous so I think as a there's a high possibility that That there's Yes, I do think that but at the same time then I also questioned sort of the the way that That's great if some alien life force with amazing technology that we can't even fathom right now comes to visit us Then what the hell are they doing? Are they just sort of like watching us just for the entertainment value or? So I'm always puzzled by that part like you know the idea that you know I know they probably want to observe but they won't don't want to interfere It's probably if they're super advanced they probably realize there's a process That intelligent life goes through where there's stages of their evolutionary development in terms of use of technology Understanding of each other mitigation of war and conflict And then ultimately entrance into the galactic federation I'm on board that I'm good. Okay. If I guess We get uniforms Space force So force like that one over there silver one Right? We wear that when we get high and dish. Oh sometimes it's fantastic. It looks like some out of better call self Brothers on dot com. I got a famous on I go watch that again. You watch better call soul. I've never seen it You know, oh you should watch it. I'm watching it again a second time around. It's actually really good. It's you know It's that's breaking bad. Yeah So it's actually very entertaining. It's well written and But yeah, it's uh, salt So I was good as a black file show though, right? It's not as good as a black file show which is the first season's on discovery plus But and we're gonna start filming in mid April traveling around the country doing all the and you are gonna cover UFOs we are covering UFOs. You know, we got at least Solicious we get to add before we wrap this up Ah, I think I think that's about it actually we're getting I shouldn't say that this is interesting We're getting into vested recently in the cannabis business. Oh Yeah, I know I'm I'm starting to become a believer. I'm not a believer in Bitcoin yet, but I'm a believer in the cannabis business. Well, it's a fucking giant business It's like not being a believer in trees. Yeah They're out there at the lower actually. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, so yeah, no, it's we've we've But we're hitting it from a different direction. We're hitting it from because I've always thought I've done some some work a couple of shows on the problems that that are around cannabis In terms of the cash economy the inability of banking systems to get involved and all of that so we're going in on a on a business that does the Is worried about the tax and banking side of things So it's sort of the intersection of the of the trade with commerce and pulling it into You know, sort of the legitimate world of commerce. Well, that's one of the hopes of the Biden administration that they'll pass some sort of Federal law on marijuana that they'll change it and make it legal which I think they should they should I think it's it's time at this point Look the horses left the barn regardless of where anybody thinks about like you know You don't have to smoke it. No, no, but in terms of of legitimizing it and getting it out of sort of the cash economy I think so anyway this this business It's backed by Snoop Dogg actually oh my goodness Casa Verde So it's yeah, yeah, so it's a it's a business that that is Working on that that portion of it and I think it's so it's interesting. It's not like a grower. It's not you know It's not the production side and I think it in that regard it makes more sense, but It's sort of an initial foray, you know, and you know for a guy that came out of the agency That's an interesting thing. Yeah, congratulations to you. Thank you very open them eyes Take a little yourself that's I Gummies I was playing golf the other day with a guy who said he had a big bag of gummies. Oh, that's a dangerous person I know but he said he said you want some gummies. I just got like I'd play golf dude I'm just I'm just out here playing golf and he goes. Oh, it's gonna improve your game improves pool Definitely improves pool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah smoke upon improves pool tremendous. There's no way 100% I do smoke it just edibles. I do point. Yeah, yeah, but when I Smoke pot well edibles too. I my game gets about a ball better, which yeah ball better means like If you were playing someone and they like playing nine balls So when we give you the eight ball through a little bit better than you yeah, I'm like one ball better Okay, I mean when I smoke pot I any of a better feel that's interesting. Yeah, yeah A lot of a lot of pool players like high level pool players like Earl Strickland one of the best pool players of all time Smokes a lot of weed really or they or they it's a sort of like to halfway like what do they call that? What do they call it Delta eight or something like that? Yeah What is that shit Jamie you were telling me about this stuff that's legal right? What does this talk on the buy it? What's that it's legal though, right? There's some weird what is it? It's that's Like a variation or I think it's called Delta eight Nine is what it gets everybody really high right? But this is like a more a more model more mile yeah, yeah, and I think it's it's legal because it's derived from hemp Mm-hmm I think which is not a controlled substance in well no states me and my friend Tommy Jr. Whenever we play when I see him in New York He plays real good and whatever we play we get barbecued first and then we play I'm telling you you play better. Yeah, you play better. He really do. We play a lot pool at our house We know to tell you all that sense that yeah, and then the boys are very good. Well, if I lose that thousand bucks to you I know how I'm getting it back I'll take you up on that. Oh, okay. You come up in Hudson, Elk. Okay, I'll put Idaho. We'll play some pool. I'll play some pool for money. Yeah Bring a lot of money But really damn Eagle so I'm gonna take that Eagle for me All right, my friend. Thank you, man always good to see you again You show is coming out. It's out on Discovery Plus you can get it right now and the new season starts Yeah, it started later in the year. We're starting to film an admitable Always fun. Thanks. Bye. Bye everybody