create without bullshit. Very important when you recreate you have no bullshit. So it's Eric Wine's dime, not wine steam. Yeah, I think it was originally Vine stain. Vine stain? Oh vine stain. Yeah, German. Yeah, but uh, it was uh, we came from a town between a dessa and key of called Umine. And that's where the the Vine stain family came from. We talked about how many people mispronounce wine steam instead of wine. Stein. It's it's epidemic and yet nobody ever says Albert Einstein. Yeah, that's what yeah strange right that is a weird one. The Einstein is no, like is there a guy named Mike I like, oh Mike Einstein. No, no, no, I'm steamed. Is there a guy like that? Do you remember the old uh, it was blazing cells with uh, sure. Mel Brooks. Yeah, Mel Brooks and Harvey Coron. Yeah, it was headly Lamar and everyone would call him hety Lamar and it was like the running joke in the picture. That's right. I fucking loved Mel Brooks movies. Do you remember the Yiddish speaking Indians that that had to be the best? Oh yeah, that's right. He had some great movies man. There's fun fucking movies man. Just silly fun outrageous movies. Yeah, I mean he was it, he was transitional right. I guess it was the worst belt being updated for the modern era. Yeah, in De film. Yeah, but it was also it was you know for the time much more contemporary but with that sort of, the sort of, sort of, right in the writer's room I guess from Sid Caesar's show of shows was this legendary factory before Saturday Night Live for all of these kind of crazy talents behind the scenes. I think he came out of that with Carl Reiner. Oh, that makes sense. He's how old is Mel Brooks now? I don't want to ask the question because maybe something will happen. I know, right? It's one of the I think I saw recently that he turned 93 and I thought shit. Is he dead? Like Mel bro, you know, because they were saying all these great things. Mel Brooks, I'm like, fucked. We lose Mel Brooks. But it's like one of those things where is it, it's gonna happen. I mean, he's 93. I know, but every time it does, I know. I mean, I guess who Betty White is another one of these people, right? Right. And so we need these very exotic links to our past and they become more important as time goes on if they're still in vital because, you know, we want desperately to be connected to something before, you know, our current era, given that I think a lot of us sort of don't believe in anything that happened before Google. Right. Imagine kids today, imagine trying to describe to kids today what it was like to grow up without the internet. Yeah, or not being able to reach people. You have to make extensive plans and, you know, backup plans. Well, if you're not there at this time. Yeah, you used to have to yell. Open up. You want to know a yell for your friends. I remember when I first got an answer machine. I thought it was the most amazing thing ever when I was in high school. My family got an answer machine. And I was like, this is incredible. And you would, you'd leave like stupid music like to let everybody know you're cool. Like you have some cool music like, hey, it's Joe, not here right now. But if you leave a message, I'll get back to you probably. And then you've got like old people who are, I think I think someone in my family still has one of these cute C messages from like the late 80s. Really? Yeah. On their voicemail. But then who leaves voicemail? And the thing that gets that marks me as an old person is I actually call people. But that's I like that. I've been doing that more lately. Yeah, I call a lot of people now. I just feel like it's just it's better. The texting thing. The problem is if I it's very interesting how we separated ourselves into this, the, this electronic communication world where I will during the day be in communication almost constantly with a stream of people. The only thing that stops it is a podcast podcast podcast is my, my rest for three hours. I'm not talking to anybody other than you. So all those texts that come through, I'll get the end of the podcast. I'll go and and look at my phone. There'll be 40 texts sometimes. Like this is madness. If I had to make 40 phone calls, there'll be it'd be impossible to manage. It would be, it'd be calls would constantly be coming in. You'd never really be able to say anything. So we were feeding into this weird loop where we just have these short form things. Right. Okay. Dinner tomorrow? Sure. What time? How about nine? I can do seven. Okay. Let's do it. You know what I mean? It's like these weird little bursts of information. You ever see a, remember this program, California? And it was a called, was it California? Yeah. So I wasn't sure what the, yeah, what the, David did. Yeah. Right. So there's the scene where he's having some really hot intergenerational sex. And this gal says like LOL and it kills it. She said it out loud. She said it, she says LOL and he loses total interest. There's no amount of, of the heat in the moment that can compensate for the fact that she's using like verbal emojis. Well, he needs to fucking get over that. It's a bit hot. She is. And it also depends on how you say it. If she's really funny, she's like, LOL, you know, and she's like being silly. Yeah. I said, like, you know, I learned that from, I learned that from Jim Norton. Jim Norton will always say LOL like he'll, he'll say something really ridiculous. And then say LOL. Yeah. But he's just mocking himself with your over 50. It's intrinsically ironic. Right. Right. But, you know, in terms of this weird thing about islands of time, one of the things that we do is we have Shabbat dinner and every Friday, no matter how atheist and militant people are against any kind of organized religion, they will leave us alone. When if we say we're going into Shabbat. And so there's this thing about um, like people will pester me in all sorts of situations. But if I invoke something that is vaguely religious, even Sam Harris probably wouldn't call me during that period of time. So I find that very interesting. Like, could you, could you create a religion that was simply there to make sure that you had some time offline? Yeah. I know if I text Ben Shapiro, I'm not getting a text back on Saturday. Ever. It was dark. Yep. But it's, when it's dark, he texts you. As soon as there are three stars in the sky, it's been on Twitter. It's like, what did I miss? That's so weird. It's so, it's so weird that people bought. I mean, on one hand, I think it's probably a really good idea to just take a break from all that electronic shit and just connect with humans and a very old school type of way. I think it's probably very good for connect with yourself. I had this experience. I actually lived in Jerusalem for two years. And we landed in this Orthodox Round Hotel and on Friday night, everything shut down. Like they text book. And I then moved into an ultra Orthodox neighborhood, neighborhood right on the boundary of a place where the secular and the Orthodox met. What was really fascinating to me is I started telling people, you know, you'd never think that it's great not to be able to find a restaurant or a nightclub. But it's amazing that this is enforced downtown. And about a month in somebody said, oh, you're in the wrong place. Of course, you can go out on Friday night. You just go to the Russian compound and everything's hopping and you can go dancing and drinking and all these things. After I knew that, I went dancing and drinking. And I was much less happy than believing that somehow Israel actually shut down on Friday and so very weirdly I appreciated the constraint as soon as I knew you could break the constraint. I was less happy and I would never actually obey it anymore. Yeah, I think having a rigid rule, even though it seems like counterintuitive and that like it would provide you some freedom by having restrictions. But it does. It gives you some freedom like, okay, like now we don't have to think about all these other things. So now we have the freedom to just be alone. Now we have the freedom to be relaxed. Now we have to freedom just talk to human beings. You know what? I think constraints and it's like the, you know, Jaco is Jaco will link totally. Everybody knows Jaco. Discipline equals freedom discipline equals freedom. It doesn't seem like that makes sense. Like this motherfuckers up at 4 30 in the morning throwing heavy weights around grunting and act like a savage running goes out to the beach and he earns the sunrise every morning. It goes out and takes photos, you know, takes a photo of his fucking watch at 4 30 hits the gym like a savage and then takes a photo sometimes of the sunrise, earning the sunrise. And like, but you would think God has like a prison to like force yourself into that. But no, no, he knows if there's freedom in that because he knows he doesn't have to make any decisions at 4 30 he knows what he's going to do. Yeah, just, you just go do it. And that way, I mean, you look at the guy. He's a fucking tank. Why is he a tank? Because he's always up at 4 30 fucking throwing weights around. It just doesn't, he never stops. He never takes, never takes self indulgent time to lay him bad and beat off and pick his nose and then fucking check his tax messages. It's listening to this right now and thinking, man, I do a little bit of that. I don't think he does. Really? No. Total discipline. Yeah. Well, did you, I think I remember reading his inner dialogue about going to a birthday party and breaking down and having a scoop of ice cream or something. It was like the pie. And it's like, you know, the drama of there it was. Temptation. I held that for 45 minutes. But eventually, I became weak. Yeah, I don't fuck with that. I just do it. I'm in a party to eat that cake. I mean, I just feel like I do enough. I'm on the right. There's this story about Jack E.O. that she got this cancer diagnosis. Apparently her first words upon finding out that she had metastatic cancer was, then what did I do all those sit ups for? That interesting comment. That's an interesting comment. She thought, if somebody used to talk to her, John JFK was keeping her in the dark. Is that right? Yeah, it must be. What's happening over there, James? Something else with the TV. Yeah, like telling her that sit ups, you want, you want no cancer sit ups. That's what I do. I guess I don't know. I mean, I think I think we all we have so many days of our lives that we build this pattern that this is going to go on forever. And there's some first moment. I think I recall it where the phrase popped into my head. I can see my death from here. And it has to do, you know, there's like this weird thing when you hit 40. You start to be able to have analytic thoughts that are uninterrupted by sex. Really? Yeah. I don't know. When I turned 40, I found that some aspect of thinking too much about sexuality definitely decreased. And then you start to realize like when your testosterone starts to go down, you don't feel like you're yourself. Yeah, you become a different thing. Yeah. When your chemical composition changes, the way your body feels changes, the way you interface with the world changes. Like I wasn't, I wasn't feeling all that great yesterday. And I was sort of climbing around with the person behind the bar at Starbucks. And she said, Oh, why are you down? I said, I don't know. Just tell me something nice about my hair. And she says, she wants to read. She says, oh, it's, I love salt and pepper. I thought, oh, really worst is that you barely saw in pepper. I can barely see any salt. She's talking about the salt. She's both bullshitting you. No, she just didn't want me flirting with her. So she just shut me down by saying you want me to talk about your hair? Okay. You crossed the threshold here. Yeah, say which is, that's all right. Yeah. As soon as someone says, say something nice, like talking, you know, ugly for a girl, exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And she was in a captive situation wasn't being fair to her. Oh, yeah. Right. That was the worst. But we were behind a bar. We just established a rapport before that actually, I actually think she thought it was a kind and sensitive comment. But I don't see any salt. I'm looking now I'm just fishing. John, there might be a few in there. But not like, somebody's going to screenshot it and they're going to count all the hairs with arrows. This is something I've learned when you come on your show that your audience is so large and active that they will pinpoint every like time stamp. Yeah, there's a lot of people in cubicles right now wasting their employers time to those people. We salute you. Cheers. I should say for the folks at home, that before we started this, you asked me, did I want layered Hamilton coffee? And I said, layered Hamilton coffee, what's layered Hamilton coffee? And you gave me something laced with turmeric, yeah, which may turn our lips funny colors. So if not, doesn't not drink it every day. All right, it's fine. All right. It's really good though. But it does give you a little flam, a little, a little bit of that because it's got all sorts of MCT oil and all sorts of great stuff in there. layered Hamilton's a real freak. Really interesting. What a pioneer. Yeah. Just like, just talk into them and hang out with them and say, seeing how his brain works. Like, you got to do that. Yeah, I'm on the podcast. Yeah. It was really, really fun. So did you, what is he? Okay, this is something I'm totally curious about. I don't surf. But because surfing is in my estimation, going through some kind of a renaissance right now, I'm super keen to understand what the series of innovations are given that lots of other things aren't innovating at anything like the surfing innovation rate. Well, the big one is that new type of surfboard. What the hell is that called? Like a sail foil. Yeah, foil. That thing is amazing. And it doesn't, it's so weird looking. If you look at it, like, what are you standing on? Like, why is it elevated? What is the magic carpet of the sea? Let's be honest. That's what it is. And I am obsessed. I was asking before. Yeah. There's this guy, Kailenny, who for me is just redefining surfing by taking these monster waves and he's turning them into his private little skate park and doing tricks off the top of skyscraper waves. And I'm just thinking, do you even know what you're doing or where you are? And he's saying, keep saying this one phrase, which is I'm just scratching. What follows my mind is I'm just scratching the surface. He knows that he's making that discontinuous jump. And if you think about sport from the perspective of when did things just change like almost overnight, you know, Bob Beeman, arguably is one of the great moments in all of sporting history. And it happens in the long jump just because you have an incremental sport that suddenly, you know, somebody jumps a foot more than anyone's ever jumped before. So it's really interesting when somebody changes the game. It is. And when you find out that there's stuff that you can do in other sports, like skate sports, like different crazy flips and stuff, and someone figures out how to do that on a wave. The consequences are so fucking grave. If you make a mistake and you're on an 80 foot wave, that bitch comes slamming down on you. But part of the innovation is safety, right? Right. With these vest inflatable vest and with these water water safety courses for big wave surfers, I think that what's fascinating is you think the innovation is in the tricks maybe, but maybe the innovation is actually in, hey, you can afford a two wave hold down in a way you couldn't before, or you're going to survive all sorts of things that might have been fatal. Right. Right. So you have this open area to innovate. Yeah. That may be, I mean, surfing's fascinating to me. I don't do it. I haven't done it, but I went snorkeling when I was in Hawaii last a couple weeks ago. And I'm such a pussy. I'm just, I'm snorkeling with my kids, right? So of course, like I'm trying to figure out how to be the the mama duck and like corral everybody. So if the sharks coming, it gets me. I'm just trying to just look in around because some guy got gat he got jacked. I think snorkeling in Maui just a couple months ago, like right off of a resort tiger shark probably probably. Yeah. Yeah. Well, so yeah, some lady got it yesterday, not yesterday, a couple days ago in was it the Bahamas three sharks, one took her arm off and the other two just ripped her apart front everybody college kid from California. Well, I'm very interested in situations that change with sharks like reunion, for example, in the Indian ocean off of Madagascar used to be a surfing hotspot. And they had a bull shark problem where the bull sharks just sort of learned how to eat humans or attack humans. But the great thing is we have got some weird thing going on with the true apex predator of the seas, which is the orca. We have one recorded bite in the wild ever. Now, how does this make any stuff? Like great whites are not apex predators because orca's will just take them out. Right. And I had this poll on Twitter the other day, which is orca's colon. Best species ever was number one. Then the other possibility was the dicks of the deep because there's such assholes. I didn't know that there was a recorded bite of anyone in the wild. I thought it was all in captivity. No, there's a certain there was a surfer who got a bite. Really? Yeah. But you know, on the other hand, how are you going to make contact if you're in orca? You don't have opposable thumbs. It might be for all I know. I mean, look, it has to be a joke because otherwise the God would be dead. I mean, if a orca wanted to kill you and you're in the water, that's like if you let an ant go, okay, but why have orca's never attacked us? There's so many recorded instances of swimmers, paddle borders, surfers, or running into orca's some weird thing is going on. We have to work this after you. Yeah, let's try because we've got well, first of all, what assholes are we that we have those goddamn things in captivity and a big fucking shot out to Canada because Canada mostly probably through the noise that my friend Phil Demers has created in trying to get marine land shut down. Canada has banned all orca and all dolphin captivity. It's amazing. And I hope the United States does it as well. I hope it I hope it goes worldwide. It's I think it's I think it's slavery. I really do. I think it's a different kind of slavery. They're almost us. They look across between us and wolves in the edge. Well, they have they just don't have the ability to manipulate their environment, but they have a cerebral cortex. A dolphin does. It's 40% larger than a human beings. That's what is going on there. Like this cerebral cortex, there's thinking happening there like really complex, highly well, am I right that they have menopause? Like they're the only I said to the only other species with menopause and you're only going to get menopause likely if females are contributing some sort of like intellectual labor past their reproductive horizon. Because well, I thought menopause was just a shift in the hormonal balance of what is the purpose evolutionarily of continuing life beyond the ability to reproduce. That's a good point because that's doesn't that's not the case in mammals and mammals deer in particular can breed deep into their old old age. Well, if you have a resource that's limiting, you'd be better off in terms of systems of selective pressures of shifting something that is continuing past that point. This is the old point about I think it was Henry Ford who used to go to the dump to see what broke down on the cars and what was still working. He would transfer materials and resources from things that were dependably found to work to the things that would be the limiting feature that would break so that the cars would all break down sort of uniformly at the end. And you see this like with salmon or salmon disintegrate because it's a discretized, reproductive strategies. No salmon's going to make another run. So you might as well go out and blaze of glory. Right. Yeah. That's interesting. They also have a massive infantroside. That's the horrible thing about dolphins. They're ruthless. They kill their babies. The male dolphins will kill female dolphins babies in order to force them in the estrus. Yeah. And then the strategy that the female dolphins have acquired to mitigate that is that they become sluts because the male dolphins don't know whether or not the female's baby is theirs because they don't have 23 and me under the ocean. So what happens is the female will have sex with as many males as she can. Yeah. So that way she's protected and her child is protected because then all the males think it could possibly be their baby. They don't want to kill their own baby, which is really interesting to differentiate because many mammals that also participate in this don't like bears don't differentiate between their their babies and someone else's babies. So the females and you know, she's carrying around cubs, the male will try to kill and eat the cubs. So the force are back in the estrus and perhaps just even for food because they're so ruthless and cannibalistic. Right. But dolphins who we think of as our beautiful charming, wonderful little buddies in the water, they kill babies. They kill the whales. Of course, dolphins. Yes, they're a type of dolphin. So, you know, the issue is, you know, I think about why, why do we not get attacked? It's like professional courtesy. As souls recognize that. I don't know, man, but every time I go to Hawaii, we swim with, we either not swim with dolphins, but if you're in a boat and you go fishing, the dolphins find the boat and they swim with the boat. I've never done that. Oh, dude, it's here. I'll show you a little video. It's kind of wild because what they do is they literally go and they hang out with the wave of your boat. So as your boat is, as your boat is tuning along, they they they ride the wake, they figure out a way how to do that. They figure out a way to get in front of the boat and as the boat is pushing the water, they just sort of, it like helps them along. Almost like reverse drafting, like because they're kind of in front of it. So as you're pushing the water, let me find it here. It's really interesting, man. They're they're an incredible little animal. I mean, it's so, here it goes. See, that's us in the boat. That's way cool. Yeah. And then a while, just wild. They just hang out with you. I mean, wild, fucking dolphins, middle of the ocean. They don't know you. You could be at asshole. They trust you enough to the trying to get our technology job. They want the boats. I don't think so. You don't think so. You think we're trapped by that shit. They're laughing. Hey, watch this. We can do things. Yeah, they don't have to carry anything. We were carrying everything. By ourselves, we're almost useless naked, useless. We have to have clothes. You have to carry the clothes. You have to have shoes. You gotta have that. That's how we roll, man. We're extended phenotyp guys. Yes. They think we're fools. They think we're full. Yeah, they're out there with free food. They don't have to worry about carrying credit cards, Bitcoin, all that nonsense. They're out there in the ocean. I bet they have Bitcoin. They're going to the deep ash. I don't think they do. I think they're probably pretty pissed that we've killed all the fish though. Yeah. I think that they're actually, you know, the orcas figured out how to use our fishers or fishing boats and just wait for us to get stuff on the line. And then they're like, Oh, cool. Thank you for organizing my dinner. Yeah. Well, some orcas are not that smart because they're not adapting. Like, there's a particular pod in the Pacific Northwest that relies on Chinook salmon. Oh, yeah. And they're trying to figure out what, because the salmon populations massively depleted due to a bunch of different factors, including they put dams up and they've done a bunch of stupid shit that they didn't, they did a long time ago and they didn't really understand the consequences of it. It's really been devastating to the salmon population up there. And Chinook salmon in particular, because this, this, what these orcas eat. Now they also have this migratory pod that comes in that relies on marine mammals. And the migratory pod is doing great. Brilliant. They're doing great. They're eating all the seals and they're having a good all time. But for whatever reason, the pod that stays in that area doesn't want to eat marine mammals. They only want to eat Chinook salmon. So they're fucking literally starving to death. You know, I think they read this book on fixed versus growth mindset and the transitor transient pods are like, Hey, every day is a new day, we could do something different. The other ones that know I'm kind of a creature of habit. You know, they're even salmon are coming back. They just have a very specific diet that they just won't deviate from, which I find to be really weird. What is it? That pod's missing right now. Because they probably all dead. They haven't, they haven't been seen in over three weeks, which is the longest they have been gone for. Oh, Washington's resident orcas go missing. Oh, yeah, I remember that like no new babies had been born in the Puget Sound area. I hope I hope they're not dead. And that's horrible. I don't know. It's just sad because they can't figure out a way how to teach them to eat marine animals. They've, there's all these different strategies. They've tried to figure out a way to teach them to eat seals, but they're not interested. And they've also decided to try to figure out a way to farm raise Chinook salmon and reintroduce them to that area. But then again, you know, you know, to like how do you, how do you designate those salmon specifically for the orcas and not for fishermen? Like what do you do when people, you know, they catch fish? What do you do? Do you tell them put it back? It's for the orca? Hmm. Yeah. Joe, I don't have any actual expertise in this area. I mean, either. I'm just talking. Well, you know, we went down to a Hearst Castle and there's this elephant seal colony there. And my family decided that this is the worst species ever of mammal. Elephant seals? Oh, man. They're horrible. Like, first of all, in terms of sexual dynamics, you know, one beach master, he's got a couple of lieutenants who are trying to take over his role. The lieutenants seemingly can have sex with one or two of the females, like not too much. But this is enough to keep them happy. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And then the beach masters have to fight each other and they're all these dead babies all over the beach because the giant bulls just trample them on their way to fights. Oh, right. And so then then you have like the females. If they lose the pup, they've got to get rid of their milk. So they steal somebody else's baby. So the whole thing, if you transpose like human, if you answer for more flies, you just think these people are horrible. This is a crack house on the beach. And there's no way. How do we get some great whites and remove these mammals immediately? They're making the family look bad. Yeah, maybe we could get the orcas to start eating that. That's right. Yeah. Because orcas are we have a deal. Yeah. And it's a big animal. So it's a good meal. Look at those dead babies. That is so fucked up. Oh, they're all dead, but they might be. Yeah. And they are lazy. They're not an industrious. I mean, they are when they're in the sea. But when they're just on land, oh, they're just laying there? Oh, they're not dead. They're just chilling. Yeah, they're chilling. Look how many of them there are. Well, you've seen when orcas do beach themselves to get those things, right? It's quite. Yeah. Well, it's right on the edge. They hydrate, they hydrate on the and then they waddle back in. Look how like scratched up they are from the ground and everything. So weird looking animal too. What a weird fucking thing that is William Randolph Hearst was a real piece of shit. He really was. You know, he's the reason why we have wild pigs in California. That dipshit imported wild boars and released him on his property. That's true. But yeah, okay. So we're driving down the highway and my son says, look, dad, wild zebras. I said, haha, son, that's very cute. He says, no, no, really? And I look up and there's a herd of wild zebras. What? Herst castle has a close down the zoo. They let the zebras out. We have a herd of wild zebras in California that no one told me about shut the fuck up. Are you serious? I have one. The Joe Rogan experience. I finally told you something. You don't know anything about especially about invasive wildlife. Yeah. That's crazy. So zebras in California. Does that change your mind a little bit on Mr. Hearst? No, he's a piece of shit. All right. He's one of the main reasons why marijuana became illegal. Was he smoking too much? Well, it's all conspiracy theory and conjecture, but the story is the traditional told by stoners with some education story is that William Randolph Hearst, along with Harry Anselinger, conspired to make marijuana illegal when DuPont came up with the chemical composition for nylon and when it was a combination of several factors. And the decorticator was invented. Decorticator was a way that they could effectively process hemp fiber without the use of slavery. See, the reason why they switched over from hemp clothing, hemp sales and canvas canvas, which is actually comes from the word cannabis. All canvas was made for hemp. Yes. I did not. All that stuff is made. hemp clothing hemp sales and canvas canvas, which is actually comes from the word cannabis all canvas was made for hemp Yes, I did all that stuff is made from hemp. It's far superior to cotton far superior in terms of strength in terms of Durability I don't know what you does Jude is what burlap bag like oh, yeah, yeah, we better build that stuff okay. No hemp is a alien plant It's hemp if you had a piece of hemp like the stock of hemp and you cut it into boards like this table Yeah, that it would be as hard as this oak but as light as balsa wood. It's incredibly strange. I I've seen these like the actual stock of a hemp tree when it gets really big right and you'll have it thick around like like a man's Shoulder right, but it weighs like nothing. It's really strange. It's a strange strange plant not like any other plant It has all the essential amino acids it contains protein you can cook with the oil the oil can sustain you It's got essential fatty acid. No wonder we have to ban it. Oh, it's about fucking amazing amazing plant, but anyway They came out with his decorticator and the decorticator because the way they used to do it It was like a very labor intensive process of breaking down the hemp fiber and turning it into something that you can make clothes within paper Yes So popular science magazine in see if you could find the cover this in like the 19 early 1930s had a cover said hemp the new billion dollar crop and because they hit had this decorticator right so We ran off hers on top of having hers publications He also had paper mills because you know he had a he wanted to make his own paper So he had these forests and he had paper and he would make paper out of wood There is the well does it say there's a cover of it though that says hemp hemp the new billion dollar crop That's just the inside part of it. See if you can find it anyway So we ran off first would have had to have shift over because hemp paper and if you're played with it No, it's incredibly durable. It's crazy. It's hard to tear. It's really fucking strong like it's a fucking alien plant There's nothing like it. It's so weird like you see a piece of paper They think oh look at this light piece of paper to tear it. No, no, no fucking really durable So they were saying this was gonna replace all paper that's made out of wood and William Randolph hers was like slowly roll bitches. I got an idea So he starts putting together all these stories about Mexicans and blacks that are smoking this drug called marijuana and they're raping white women and when Congress made marijuana illegal they probably didn't even understand that it was hemp because it was the same goddamn thing marijuana was a Mexican slang for tobacco for a while tobacco So they repurpose this name and called it this this plant called this marijuana Like it was this gigantic conspiracy so that this fucking piece of shit could save money All right, that's really what it was because he had access He was like the YouTube and the Google of you know, he belonged with the 1930s. He did belong to us He he had access He was the one who could just decide what gets distributed and so he That's and that was the big part of the whole reefer madness film campaign and all that shit all that stuff was all about Economics the whole thing was about economics American farmers are promised a new cash crop with an annual value of several hundred million dollars all because of a machine has been invented Which solves problems in more than six thousand years old it is hemp a crop that will not compete with other American products instead It will displace imports of raw material and manufactured products produced by underpaid peasant and cool Labor cool labor. Wow. What does that mean? I don't even know what that means. Let's not talk about it No, no provide thousands of jobs for American workers throughout the land so this was all in February 1938 They thought they were gonna they were gonna change the world with this shit and then you had all these people that were a part of the Whole prohibition for alcohol. They just shifted those motherfuckers over to hemp I mean think about it's like over the period of you know 10 15 years if you had 10 15 years ago We're talking about like 2004 you know you had bunch of people from the Bush administration that were really into banning certain drugs and you still have them hanging around You know Allah that that dipshit that was the attorney general for a while with the fox's name that little weasel The little weasel the Trump got rid of sessions that piece of shit that guy same thing same thing these little weasel But good people don't smoke marijuana. Well, then you know he's a viper He's a viper and then what they used to call people smoked weed back in the way Yeah, he's not smoking a weed. Well that look anytime. I see somebody's really against homosexuality I said a clock. Yeah, right? Yeah, and You have to ask yourself who in the modern era? Like I found it astounding that when Elon came on this program it had a blood that like it was an issue Yeah, and Can you imagine if like Elon had a glass of Chardonnay well he did yeah I know I know but the Just the fact that our language and our thought process around this right I see what you're saying. I had a dinner at our house a while ago where we took some of the most knowledgeable people in psychedelics and related substances to just have a discussion about what is the state of schedule one pharmacology and we asked a question of the Interesting substances what are the three that you find were most informative in terms of self-revelation Changing your understanding for the better, etc. I was astounded that of the people who seemed to be very knowledgeable About mind altering substances almost everyone put cannabis in the top three Why because it's so well, I would I thought it'd be sort of commonplace. You know I wouldn't have guessed You know somebody would say five Mio DMT somebody else would say ketamine somebody else would say You know LSD or DMT or ayahuasca But the common thread throughout all of these people who were many of them were researchers Was that they felt that cannabis was miraculous substance? Well, it certainly is well the deal is it has two different forms right as a smokeable form Which you know you can get really fucking high or it has the edible form which is? Like you're also good. Oh, yeah, but it's like a psychedelic. It's very much so it actually is more psycho There's there's something called 11 hydroxy metabolite that it's only President when you eat it. I say it's processed by the liver there's something called the one pass and when it goes through the liver Produces this 11 hydroxy metabolite that's somewhere between four and five times more psycho active than THC And it's responsible for people thinking that they got dosed like a lot of times in people eat Edibles they go oh my god. This isn't pot something's in there. Well, it's just the 11 hydroxy metabolite. That's what it is It's no matter yeah, it's way different. It's way different like that's why it's confusing to people like oh, I can't fuck with edibles It's a different drug It's a different drug because 11 hydroxy metabolite is not present in psychoactive form when you smoke it so when you eat it That's when you get that really fucking weird body of high and interdimensional Relationship you better worse or interesting well for the tank. It's bueno. It's the best for the isolation tank That's my favorite my favorite is a good stiff dose Evitable of an edible and then you know wait about 45 minutes and then get in the tank So because 45 minutes it's like the way I describe it as like with certain psychedelic drugs And I do consider edible marijuana psychedelic especially when you get into the Hundred milligram 200 milligram doses. It's very psychedelic and especially in the tank because in the tank when in the absence of any visual stimulation When your eyes are closed you have these wild almost like neon visuals Like I start you start seeing these strange dancing cartoons and like weird weird shit Other substances you can get similar Situations on other psychedelics especially in the tank that the tank is a really unique way to experience anything even even normal like the normal state the normal state of consciousness that you have without any Drugs at all inside the tank it transforms right because in the absence of any sensory input and you don't have anything coming your way Don't feel your skin your brain starts really getting free and loose and you start It gets very confusing as to what's reality and what's not what are the boundaries of Vision and interpretation and just Creativity like how much of this is your imagination how much of this is not? Well, you when you add any sort of psychedelic to that tank experience everything is ramped up It's like you know, it's like you know, you add some drugs when you mix them with other drugs They become like way more potent that's what happens in the tank the tank in and in of itself is some kind of a drug Or it produces some kind of profound Drug like effects like it can it be banned the tank How much experience you have with the tank? Not much. I mean times you've done it I've been in once yeah, it was when I was a teenager. How many should have one? I should it's just a great way to relax too. It's a great way to link and you as a mathematician You think of things and you're caught you're spending a lot of time contemplating things and you have to realize that any other input whether we think about it or not is Chewing up some bandwidth. Yeah, although I actually have a kind of ambient level of distraction Which is most helpful for look when I get out there I get way the hot there So you like an ambient level of distraction? Sometimes for example, I'll go to an all-night cafe at like two in the morning and they'll be a just enough Human I mean I have very ambiguous feelings about humans Don't worry. I don't consider you one. What are you? What do you consider yourself? We'll talk about this one. Okay No, I really think in many ways I've left this planet real. Yeah, I think that there's a way in which I've checked out how so well I think that When you get deep enough into your own mind and you start dealing with abstractions and you find that the real world I wasn't planning on going over we can try it When you find that the real world is Often that kind of noisy Place to think and that you actually prefer Really powerful abstractions and then you check in with the real world to say does that abstraction actually govern the world that I'm in you start to prefer Living in the abstractions that's interesting like do you feel the same way about like a crowded nightclub? Like if you go to a bar do you do you find that that stimulates thinking well it depends? I mean if I'm in a Stimulating conversation. I'm very present. Mm-hmm if I'm in an unstimulating conversation I have to make my own fun Right, and so I will start to sort of play. I mean, you know it times I'll just make up a story and see how it flies You know if I don't think I'm hurting anybody and sometimes I'll sort of experiment with people I think we're all doing You experiment with people well, it sure like you like say something to someone to see if they bite well You know, it's like let's let's imagine for example you were gonna move to Austin. Okay, are you gonna just be the same old You you're not gonna take the opportunity to perhaps reinvent yourself. So for example You know if I suddenly change if I start wearing glasses And I wear like a really fashion forward pair of spectacles you should wear aviators with yellow lenses like onerous Thompson I would like that. I'd like that with you with your crazy hair. Yeah You with some yellow aviators and don't even address it don't even public. Yeah, wear them indoors If I do any sort of alterations like maybe maybe I I've never seen what I look like with a bald head So if I were to a niche yeah, if I was gonna move cities When's the best time to try it try something new right and so you know at our at our age Joe How old are you 53? Yeah, that's all right. Yeah, I'm 51 almost 52 so The great danger is complacency and so I I'm terrified about becoming complacent So I always want to experiment chain like what is it that I could continue to do to grow and If you can't play an experiment I May you know imagine you wanted to you you wanted to go by Joseph And just to see whether it worked. No, whatever it is We get so locked in and if we change anything people get angry and I've always looked at Madonna and David Bowie as Like Genius squared not only did each iteration of them Do something that was kind of Artistically interesting, but they habituated their audience for change and so the idea is that every time you you met a different David Bowie You know he would effectively say do you like this incarnation of me because it's not gonna be it's it's only here for one year And then I'm gonna do something new the next time and I just had conversation with Sean Lennon In which we talked about how his father John Lennon Always kept changing and yet people want to plug in with the idea that John Lennon was just the guy who wrote imagine let's say right and That's that's a great danger is that if you think about like your output somebody will say well, you know Didn't you in 2014 tweet X? Gotcha It's like well, you know, maybe you have 10,000 tweets and maybe you changed maybe Maybe new information came in so yeah, that is a weird thing about pulling up thoughts that you had from a decade or more ago and trying to Put them on you today Yeah, and pretend and if you say I don't think that way anymore People don't want to accept that these they because it's a disingenuous conversation They're not really trying to find out what you think they're trying to get you. It's more interesting for example There's been a ton of pressure we can get to this in a second to for me to address the question of The IDW is it still alive is it the old what's going national dark web? Yeah, so it is the intentional dirt well I dirt bag with the Come back that when share Did this remake of I got you babe with Beavis and button Took this remember cuz she had this duet with Sunny Bono and then she got into a bad thing with Sunny And so she says I'm gonna be record the song and I'm just gonna torch it Right now the problem is Somebody had that as their wedding song right? Beavis and button. No, no, no with Sunny. Oh, I mean so we probably did it with Beavis and butthad But then there's a piece of people from Florida. Okay. That one right, but Florida man uses The problem when you change things is that other people wed themselves to where you were Mm-hmm. So when you pull up and you say yeah, I don't think that that's just wrong I was confused man. I was going through a dark time and I probably was saying stuff I should if you do that right then anybody who Sort of invested in that version of you and integrated that into their lives is Now angry they're upset mmm. Wait a minute you pulled the rug out from under me and so right You know in part with what Bowie and Madonna did is they said look These are stages and if you like that stage that stage is yours But I'm not staying there and I think that that's sort of the more Responsible way of doing is that you're allowed your evolution, but you have to let people know I'm gonna do something totally different from time to time What I like the idea of doing things or just do it just do it. Yeah, don't try to explain yourself Constantly they didn't explain themselves right They just they did it in a clear enough way that people could understand the pattern and so you know for example And this is something that I think would be kind of interesting to talk about Everybody is losing their mind at the moment in the space that you and I sort of co-inhabit of ideas and trying to figure out how do we remain? Sane and plugged in and open-hearted and open to new things but also rigorous and fair like all of these weird pressures The idea is behind the intellectual dark. Yeah, but you coined this this concept of having a bunch of people that have different ideologies But yet share this common theme of wanting to have real honest communication and honest conversations and try to figure out Instead of looking at things from an ideological perspective look at things from an honest objective point and try to see the way other people open-hearted and not trying to destroy each other's price Yes, and effectively trying to become the adults in the room as we watch the kids run right right and and and not always not always achieving Because I refused to actually say what it was or who was in it because there was a lot of pressure to codify it I knew that if I codified it It would die. I want a membership card. You have you have one, but if I don't if I don't get one you have There's a clubhouse We just don't tell the members where it is because I'm there's an article about the IDW that doesn't mention me I'm like yes Yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm slipping away, but well, I like Pacino in three. We said I'm dragging back. It's uh But there are there's been some discussion about certain members in certain people that are losing their fucking marbles Yeah, I think it's pressure, you know, and I think one of the things that we're all recognizing from whether it's the internet and The or just celebrity in general which I think part of the culprit is Especially if you're reading comments and articles that are written about you, which I do not recommend if you are doing that I'm doing that Don't do that if you're doing that you are subject to a massive amount of pressure Yeah, it's a lot of pressure and sometimes people they apply that sometimes that pressure can help you like if it's a good friend or Someone who you trust and it's done with intellectual honesty and they just really they think that there's maybe a flaw in your thinking or maybe this could help you or maybe This is an issue and then you realize that and you self correct. That's great But there's a lot of people that are bending to the will of the masses and they also are responding to the pressure of the mass I don't even think it's the masses. I know no. There's no reasons. I read my comments Is because I want to know what Russia is thinking They're not kidding. Listen to me Joe. Here we go. Let's go to the rabbit hole together for sure And we when we talked about this recently, let me just say this before you get going We knew something was going on years ago. I used to have a message board and on my message board on my website It became problematic for legal reasons people were putting a bunch of illegal shit up there And I was kind of responsible for them a few issues came up where I was like oh Jesus I'm gonna get in real trouble. We had an influx and by an influx I mean thousands and thousands of Russian emails signing up from my message board I mean thousands with really similar email address, right? And they would post and pretend they're from fucking Cleveland or post and be mad that we don't have enough Nazis on or whatever the fuck it would be, you know, right? It would just be the same thing that the IRA was doing the internet research agency was doing with Facebook and Google and we were seeing this like four or five years ago That this stuff was kind of happening where they were recognizing that there is these large Portals of discussion and so they're trying to manipulate that discussion and turn certain discussions toxic and certain and you know And come up with preposterous conspiracy theories and attack people for nonsensical reasons Well, this is the thing I keep seeing the same message modified a hundred different ways from a bunch of accounts that have suspicious similarity Not one of these accounts usually is followed by anyone I care about and then they have a few high value accounts with blurry photographs of a person that like I think somebody's like putting real money into that account to create a fake person who just dog Doggily follows you and is constantly trying to talk to you in your ear that account But how do you know that that's what that is and how do you know? It's not just some person's kids of frenia that really is really interested in Eric wine stock Couple times I've tried to like talk to the person And suddenly the thing vanishes it's like you're so disgusting. I would never talk to you. It's like goodbye click Maybe they just panicked could be just a person. Well, that's the thing we you never know on the other hand You remember when we took that photograph at that dinner. Yeah There was this huge number of jokes about Ben Shapiro and a booster seat that were all slightly different versions of the joke And all of the accounts were like striking it's similar. I was just thinking like well, I could imagine a little bit of this but it's way too many and This is part of what I believe I believe that we are in a new world in which a lot of the grassroots stuff is is astro turf and If you start to listen to it you start to get pushed and I start to watch certain tactics I make models of the tactics. You know like one of the tactics is Cosh Eric I once thought that you had a lot of integrity and now I know that X You know if you don't if you don't address this situation I'm done following. Oh, really good. Bye. Click but I believe that I believe that there are sophisticated players who were engaged in trying to either boost our signal or Start to alter the signal somebody will be up somebody will be down And then there's like really weird dynamics I Think that there's a very strange thing going on Not with Dave Rubin, but with the crowd of people that is just trying to eat Dave Rubin and blind him and confuse him and this You know this is guy Sam Cedar who do you think he's a Russian? I hope he is well I don't know I don't think he's Russian, but I do think that his his I think he has a grassroots following I don't think this is inauthentic that just loves to Dark harass well dunk drag. I hate this language. I just can't I like the word dunk. Oh really? Yeah, it's fun. No. I'm not a fan. No. No, no because it's just a cheap and all-conversal Oh, you got dunk done. You got dragged Just like oh this is that thing and third grade that I never figured out well They found out that he won't engage them and so they think it's cute to just constantly shit on them and They also think it's cute to take anything that he says and interpret it in the worst possible way possible and Not think of it as him just being a guy who's trying to talk about things on the fly And maybe he isn't even prepared about the subject at hand like one of the things that comes up on this show Like you know, we we were talking before we were gonna go on there We're gonna talk about my come on. It's just talk. Yeah, and so when you do that come on Let's just talk thing. Yeah, you never know what the fuck is gonna come up and you might have a piss poorly formed idea of what a subject is if you just start rambling. Yeah, that's what I've done my two previous Well, no, it's not but it seems you know, it's easy to think that you did that but with Dave um You know There's enough moments where he's misstepped Where they just feel like okay, we got a wounded antelope. Yeah, yeah, they're trying to pick him off and you know I think There was probably a move to do Shapiro and there was a period where you were seemingly in the cross hairs But you're hard to kill and you know, I have no doubt that I was in the cross hairs I would even notice it see that's that's the benefit of not paying attention And this is something that I've been pretty rigorous about over the last like six months while the air is you Sam Harris and Dave Rubin have all given me versions of this advice and I worry about it because I'm not large enough yet that I've been the Target of a steady campaign, but what happens is you see people's feedback loops interrupted and In part to course correct you kind of want to know Was I was I too harsh with that kind of like what I went on with Jordan Peterson on Dave's show I was more aggressive because I think I'd seen Jordan and Brett on your show together and I come from an ethnic family we interrupt each other. That's normal and Jordan is an inner-rupter and so What I found is is that I probably was Intuitive that I had to be more forceful a lot of the comments that wow Eric I haven't really seen you this aggressive was there three of you on the conversation it started off Dave Jordan and myself and then Ben Shapiro came in for an hour and I think Sam Harris might have been Schedule to come in I don't remember there's an issue always more than one person There's a reason why I do one on ones almost exclusively. Yeah, like even when I had Bob Lazar with Jeremy Corbel Just just having a third person that wants to chime in like oftentimes interrupts the flow of conversation like in that case It was because I wanted to lock in on Bob Lazar. I wanted to get all my feed But I want to find out is this guy full of shit like what I want to I want to lock in with them And with there's another and also and also there's another person even if they have a good thing to say It's a distraction it becomes a problem You never know when one of these is gonna work in one of the when it works. It can be magical and yes when it doesn't you know It's a little bit like jazz guys If that group is meant to be then they don't trip over each other solos and they're trying to come up with something But even with three great friends. I have this issue. I mean it's just a great stuff with multiple people on your show And I see stuff that doesn't work and you know the other the other night we had Brian Callan is fast becoming one of my favorite people in the world and he had us over and Was really fascinating it was all Guys who could rip your head off night your head off they could certainly rip my head off and very thoughtful ones at that There were people from all different ethnicities my wife was the only female and One of the things I found astounding was that everybody was taking the piss out of each other and it was the most intimate Positive loving kind of an environment you could imagine where people are joking about each other's ethnicity their religion and I had to remind myself about how men Actually manage intimacy and closeness and it's not the way Women do it and I appreciate it on each other we shit on each other and it's Friggin important to how we do business and increasingly I have this idea that I Need that in my life well we have to check each other to see if each other is taking each other seriously You have to make sure you're not taking yourself too seriously. I didn't feel like lots of jokes were made at my expense I was probably the only guy there who wasn't you know some form of a combat sport veteran and you know there were a couple jokes that my expense on that there were a couple Jewish jokes I Felt terrific leaving that place. There was no part of me that felt like Wow, I really got haze, but I hope I got through it. I mean these guys were just so positive. Yeah in generous of spirit Brian is one of the best of that. He's so silly like most of his podcast that he does Yeah, other than with me and him have pretty cool podcast. We've known each other forever We've been best friends since 1994 is that right yeah, I mean guys that guy smart. I love him so much that I broke up with his girl and Brian She was she was calling me because she was horny and I was like look I have a new girlfriend, but I have a friend of fuck you and he's just like me And so this I I sick Brian on my ex girlfriend and he fucked her one of the funniest conversations I ever have with an ex girlfriend. She calls me up. She goes your friend came inside me And I went what she goes. Yeah, your fucking friend came inside me and I was like well Did you tell me you're on the pill she goes? No? No, I'm not on the pill and I was like well I don't know what to tell you, you know, that's Brian. You guys should work that out The damn ex girlfriend call you up mad because your friend ejaculated And you guys should have worked that out. My damn, my girlfriend call you up mad because your friend ejaculated inside of her. It was one of the most, I hung up the phone. I literally fell to the ground laughing. I was lying on my back on the floor of my house and I was like, ah! Like it's just so ridiculous. That's Brian Cowling. Brian Cowling, everybody. So I called him up and I said, did you what happened? And he's like, whoops. It was just such a ridiculous conversation. But I've been friends with that guy forever. So all of our conversations are like that. All of our conversations are like jokes and hazing and shitting on each other, but it's all hugs and love. I mean, I love how it's so positive and generous. And you know, one funny thing, I was looking at his Instagram and he's seated next to, I don't know if I can't remember, was it Cheetah? I'll say it's a wild Cheetah in Africa. Yeah, and he's talking about how he comes with it. I like to get up in the morning. Perhaps we will hug together. I smell antelope nearby. He's cladding. There's an actual real Cheetah. Yeah, but Cheetahs are interesting. You can actually pet them. It's weird. I didn't know it was a game reserve. I see. Like one of those. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, a lot of that is in Africa. I'm not in terms of like, they're not pets. Yeah. But they're so used to people because people are always going on so far right there. And apparently you can get real close to them in some environments. But Cheetahs in particular, a lot of people keep them as pets. Like you see like a lot of cheeks, like rich guys in the Middle East. They'll be driving around in their fucking AMG wagons with a Cheetah next to them. Cheetah on a leash. And the Cheetah is just cool with it. See, nobody knows what it is that with hippos. I think if you wanted to go next level. Yeah, that wouldn't work out. Hippos just decided to fuck you up. Yeah, what is with us in the hippos? Hippos are like, they're like cousin to pigs. And they're right. Yeah, they're a ruthless fucking animal. Oh, now I see it. They don't play any games. Yeah. And for vegetarians, it's not even like they're food. They are vegetarians, but they do eat meat. I know. Well, so do deer, you know, deer and cows, they'll eat birds. We're not going back into the vampire deer thing. No, no, no. No, no, no. But deer oftentimes eat birds, eat ground nesting birds. There's a lot of video of it. Like people don't want to believe it. They think that they just eat grass. Most of the time they do, but they will eat a bird if they get a chance. You know, they know it's food. Yeah. It's weird. Yeah, and they have an herbivores digestive tract. But they'll still eat a bird. There's a lot of videos. Well, I guess I've been really fascinated by the number of species in which some human, like, totally deadly species where some human is decided. I mean, they dedicate my life to hanging out and not getting eaten. Hyenas. Some asshole that is hanging out with hyenas on the internet and petting them. They seem really playful and friendly. Real sweet. Real weird. This guy's like nuzzling these hyenas. Imagine choosing. That's your system. That is an animal that bites so fucking hard. They have like one of the strongest bites ever measured because their whole thing is just smashing bones and trying to get out the nutrition that they're trying to get out the nutrition that they're trying to get out the nutrition. That the lions leave behind. So they're all just about crushing bones. So their whole face is designed to smash bones. And, you know, they're fucking, so here's the guy. He's hanging out with his hyenas. He plays with them. Look at this asshole. But they're playing with them. They seem to think he's like their buddy. Look, they're biting him, but they're gentle. I mean, they could rip his arm clean off, but they're biting his leg. And, you know, he's nuzzling with them. He's letting him bite his face. I do not know. I do not know. Because I think a lot of these have to do with him pretty. Oh yeah, for sure. Yeah. Well, that was the thing with my friend Phil Demers who worked at Marine Land. One of the reasons why he's so furious at them is because he's got a walrus named Smooshin. And the walrus imprinted with him when it was really young. The walrus thinks that's his mom. Okay. That he's rather the walrus' his mom. You know, so he's just on this fucking furious quest to get this walrus released and to shut down this shit hole known as Marine Land. Yeah. He's been sued forever. He's been involved in lawsuits as long as I've known him. And he's been coming on this podcast for years. For years we've been trying to boost his signal and trying to get the word out. And then when Blackfish came out that sort of really turned the tie. Right. So he's got a chance to see what orchid captivity is really like. And they're like, holy shit, this is horrific. It is absolutely barbaric. But anyway, his, that's his walrus come from him. He gave me that. That is cool. That, yeah. That sits there for Phil. That sits on the desk for Phil. Who is the Hall of Fame here in the desk? Is there a camera over there? Oh, this is, this is a, these are all little, little, little statueettes from a company called Plasticell. And Plasticell is, how do you say Fong's name? Fong Tran. He's an amazing artist who's created all these little, little, little figurines. This is Rory McDonald, who's a elite UFC fighter Bruce Lee. And the tourist B.I.G. that's my dog Marshall. Marshall has one. That's me, Tupac, Conemigrager, Kanye. And then that is a different one. The bobblehead one, that's rich rebuilds. He's got this really dope, really dope website or YouTube channel. Where he, he's the only guy that I know of that's ever rebuilt a Tesla. He bought a wrecked Tesla and then bought another one and put the parts together and figured out how to make it work. And the Tesla people do not like him. They don't like these doing that. Now he's made a place called the Electrified Garage in Massachusetts where he is working on Teslas and electric vehicles outside of their ecosystem. So he's doing it on his own. Like an independent Tesla. Massed uses. You think he's going to hybridize with Boston dynamics? No, he's an independent guy. That would be cool. He's not, how do you say his last name? Benoit, right? It looks like Benoit, but it's Benoit. Very cool guy. He was on the podcast recently. Hey, what happened? What do we know about the Kanye situation? He was going to talk about mental health. I was kind of excited about that. I, you know, if he wants to, he can do it. I'm not, yeah. He's a, he's a something. He is a brilliant artist, but oftentimes a brilliant artist is not, it's not the best format for them to just talk. Like sometimes it's better for them to express themselves through their work. Maybe, although I found, you know, I spent two days with him. And I found that when he's in a relaxed frame, his flow state is just, it's beautiful. Well, I enjoyed talking to him. I talked to him on the phone. I really enjoyed our conversation with a nice conversation. He said, I think he's a very good dude. Very sensitive human. Yeah, very cool guy. But this is not a relaxed environment. You know, this right here, everybody knows how many people are listening. to just fuck people's head up. Really? Because the illusion that I have is just doing me talking. And then I come out of here and people are like, what did you say? Well, you and I are friends. Yeah. So that illusion is more maintained when you don't know me and you come in. And I mean, I would have to be friends with them. But that's one of the things he wanted me to come to his church. You know, he's got these one on a cult essentially. Everybody's wearing white. They're all dancing, doing religious stuff. I do that. Yeah. I'm busy, man. I'm so busy. Yeah, some of his family time. So it's a laser family. Well, I'm not into it. I just, I get it. I think it's beautiful. You know, but I'm not. He and I were walking down the road. And you know, there was this cripple alert. Which is the clip. Yeah, the clip from Long Beach said, you know, Kanye, you better stay in Calabassus. It was like a little bit of a tense situation. So we're walking along the road. And like people were hanging out of the windows of their car. You're like, Kanye. And I think it was just like positive. You know, like, when you make contact. But it was very disconcerting. And this guy was predornaturally calm. You know, he was just like, I was nervous. How long ago is this? This was, you remember when he went on TMZ? Well, we're talking to year or less. I think it was probably year ago. It's probably medicated. Not anymore. I was there, right? Yeah. Yeah. He talked openly about the fact that last six months or so, he's been off of his medication. And he, whatever they had him on was fucking with him creatively. Well, you remember all of our sex had this chapter in the man who was stuck his wife for a hat about a drummer with Tourette's syndrome? No. And then he took a drug to control the Tourette's syndrome. And the guy's drumming became kind of monotonous. It's very regular, but like not creative. Yeah. Yeah. Look, what that guy's got inside of him, he's so prolific. I mean, you listen to his music. It's so interesting and eclectic and prolific. And he's just constantly turning out more great shit. He doesn't have any flops. I mean, his music is pretty fucking amazing. And he's just, that's his shit, man. He knows how to just get in there and create. And he's got this whirlwind going on in his mind. He's fearless. Yeah. He's got, he is explorer and only into the details. But one of the things that really impressed me was he would go to places that I'm too scared to go to in my own mind. And just, well, just, you know, thinking about your inadequacies and externalizing them and your vulnerabilities and knowing, you know, what is going to emasculate you. And his point is like, I'm so comfortable with myself that I'm going to mine that as a source of art because I bet it's in everyone. And, you know, by exploring these contradictions and these false fronts. And, you know, he's got a level of internal access. I'm actually quite interested in the mental health aspect of this, which is there's so much, so much mental on health as we, as we term it that I don't think it's all mental on health. I do think that there's something about the artistic process that seems to be very informed by states that we call on health. Yeah. Well, we require people to stay inside these rigid boundaries. And these rigid boundaries, they're great if you want to show up at a job and work nine to five and don't use certain noises with your mouth because it makes people upset, you know, but that's not for the creative process. If you look at true outliers, if you want to discuss true outliers, like people that are really capable of producing extraordinary art or architecture works, different interesting things that are part of the creative process. Those people are all unwell. Every single one of them. I mean, in terms of like, if you made them do what a normal person has to do every day, I think normal life is unwell. In terms of this requirement of showing up five minutes early, working all day long, getting off, maybe bringing some of your work home, getting some sleep, getting up in the morning, and doing it all over again, all while raising a family and trying to enjoy your time, your limited finite time on this planet. Well, this is why I said I've left. I mean, I think it's that it's not healthy here. So where are you? Well, maybe this is a good segue. I hadn't thought about it this way. So can we use this format to announce that I am in fact, starting the podcast, I've recorded a couple episodes already that are in the canon. It is called the portal. The portal. Yeah. So the portal is refers to this very interesting thing that I thought everyone was aware of, but very often people wouldn't react to it. When I was a kid, I read all of these stories that I thought were known to be the same story, but different versions of it. And I called it the portal story. And it was always the same. Somebody is trapped in a humdrum existence in an ordinary world until some sort of magical portal accidentally or on purpose enters their life. And either they go through a wardrobe, they go through a rabbit hole, looking glass platform nine and three quarters, or Dorothy famously was used to introduce technicolor where she, the first part of the film, she's in Kansas, and it's in sort of grayscale black and white. Oh, that's right. And then she lands in Oz, and they open the door in its technicolor, and there's this transitional scene where you see technicolor for the first time. Was that the first time ever in a movie? I believe so. Wow. And so the question is, where's the portal? Like why do we tell the same story over and over and over again? With different protagonists, but it's always the same formula. If somebody is trapped in an ordinary world, they're sort of, they're around normies, they find the portal, and the portal becomes the call to adventure. And they spend time in the alternate universe, and then somehow they're able to live very often. They return, if you remember, the Phantom toll booth, Milo gets this present of a car and a toll booth, and he goes through the toll booth. What is that from? I see. Norton gesture was the author and Jules Fyfer was Didill estrations, which is this brilliant book, where there's like the land of letters and the land of numbers, so it's arts and sciences. And, you know, like there's a person who starts from his head and grows down until his feet reach the ground, and there's a numbers mind, and he has to rescue the princesses of rhyme and reason in order to restore order between the two kingdoms of, you know, like left and right hemisphere. It's some incredibly exciting story, and the idea is that after he goes and does all of these, there's an island called conclusions, and when you make an assumption, you leap to conclusions, and so you suddenly jump, I mean, it's all very clever wordplay and stuff. At the end of the adventure, the toll booth disappears, because it has to go to the next kid who needs it, you know, and so my question was always, why on earth would we tell the same story over and over and over and over again? It has the same format and it's always a different context. And I came to believe that this story is actually this uncapped promise for most people, that in their adult lives, they don't find these portals. So for example, have you ever been to Barcelona, Spain? No. There is a church in Barcelona, Spain, which is plenty impressive from the outside. When you go inside, I've been looking at pictures of it my entire life called La Sagrada Famía. It is a psychedelic drug trip and a half, like you've never seen. It is the most bizarre interior space I've ever seen in my life. Can you bring up the interior of this thing? Whoa. And on the one hand, it induces like a hallucinogenic state. On the other hand, it's an idea of what this architect, Gaudí. Now Gaudí is very famous. He did a lot of buildings around Barcelona. There is nothing like the inside of this church on this planet. And, wow, fuck that's beautiful. And if you look up at the roof, and like, you know, most things, you're sort of prepared for them your whole life, and then you see it and you think, yeah, I guess that's cool. I've been seeing this thing my whole life, and I had no concept of what a genius this human being was, because nothing he did was really outside of it. The outside of it, I mean, look, this guy... Fuckism. If he never did the inside of this church, he would be a very famous and idiosyncratic architect. Wow. But... Well, they do work on it there? They have been finished it. And in fact, he's such a genius that they can't finish it in the style that he started. Because nobody knows... It's like an unfinished symphony. What would you do? Nobody's smart enough to finish this church. Wow, look at that roof on that. Okay, now that is a portal. That is a portal, right? And when I was on this program before, I thought, long and hard, what is it that I could push out to the planet to let people know how wonderful and beautiful the world that we live in is. And we pushed out the hop vibration. And suddenly, if you recall, I said to people, this is the most important object in the universe, not the hop vibration in particular, but the class called a principle bundle, which people have no idea it's out there. And it is the basis of the construct in which we live. So how is it that a normal human being can make contact with real physics? With real beauty of biology or just understanding order symmetry, all of these things that are beyond normal experience. And what I hope to do with the podcast is to have amazing guests and interesting conversations. But just... Oh, thank you for that, James. That guy was on drums. That guy was... He was drums. He was, you know, and remember that with Dolly said, somebody said, Dolly, do you take drugs? He said, I am drugs. Another Spaniards. Spaniards are really something. But that is very similar to psychedelic states. Well, maybe some people have access to them all the time, right? In part. Well, there's actually an illustration that sits above our sink out there. And a guy who has a tumor and a pituitary, or is not a pituitary gland. What is the one that they think produces DMT? What the fuck is it called? Not the pituitary gland. No. Pineal? Pineal. Pineal. Thank you. He has a tumor and his pineal gland. And so he accesses his states all the time. So this guy has... It's 100% DMT inspired artwork. I mean, if you look at it, it's like what you see when you do DMT trips. It's like it's a version in his style of art. But you can see the signature of DMT. There it is. There's his artwork. What is his name? Sean Thornton. Sean Thornton. Thank you, Sean. Thanks for the artwork. It's fucking awesome. And it sits in our kitchen. I'll take a picture of it later and put it online. But that's his stuff. That's super DMT-like. That's amazing. I mean, that's a thing. A triptamine type experience. You could say Alex Gray is probably the most representative. I would say he's the most representative in terms of artists in the DMT space, in terms of like triptamines and siloside. And things on those lines. And so if you think about psychoactive chemicals, some of them are stupefying. But some of them are portals. And this concept of, if you look at a wall, how do you know that the wall doesn't have a door? How do you know that there's an apanic room behind the book case if you just pull out the right book? We learn to stop looking for the portal. And I think what I do differently than other people is that I became obsessed with exits. That there are other worlds. And they're real. That this mythology of the looking class and the rabbit hole and the matrix is metaphor for very real things. And that we just, we live our lives in the most ordinary mesoscale phenomena where, you know, we don't see, we don't see the quantum because we're not, you know, playing with polarized lenses in ways that show us what light actually is. You know, we're not playing with super fluid helium. We're not understanding just how bizarre olfaction is. Or, you know, whether there's some sort of quantum aspect of biology. And what you see people doing is that they start grasping for everything. Like I'm not saying that there's nothing to ancient aliens or UFOs or whatever. A lot of that is just people want something richer and more, more amazing for their lives. And I'm not going to pass too much judgment on that. But I am going to say if we just restricted the rest of our days to the provable stuff that we know is out there, it could be amazing. People need more meaning with all of the rationality, with all of the mystery we've taken out of the world. It's time to put a ton of it back in. When you say put a ton of it back in, like how you're going to put it back in? Well, you know, if I were to start talking about the octonians, an eight dimensional number system that no one understands, I can do that totally rigorously. I can show you all sorts of bizarre stuff involving the octonians. What is the octonians? Well, that's my point. You don't even know that there are four types of numbers whose dance, it's called the real numbers that we know, complex numbers that we're tortured once with in high school. Maybe during some kind of a trip, a friend of you mentioned the court, mentioned the court tournions to you. And then there's this one system of numbers, which is like the crazy relative nobody discusses. And that's called the octonians. And the octonians are so weird that mathematicians don't even really understand why they're there. That's an octonian, that thing? Well, my guess is that that's probably back to the root lattice of E8, which we discussed last time, which has this kind of mandella pattern to it. But I could show you their multiplication table. I could describe their symmetries. There's a symmetry group called G2, which involves these strange numbers. But it's a mystery. Like if I got to, I probably know more about the octonians than most mathematicians. If I got to the end of all of my knowledge of the octonians, I still wouldn't know what to tell you about why they're there and what they mean. Nobody knows. I promise you that. That's a real mystery. Now we could talk about, like, you know, my friend said that that event that happened in Siberia in the early, you know, 20th century was actually an alien visitation. Well, maybe best, maybe no, I don't know anything about it. But if I just focused us on, like, what we know is out there that we don't grasp, which is 100% rock solid, it provides so much mystery and meaning and invitation to adventure. Like if you're looking for a hero's journey, I'll show you a ton of these things. And it's empowering. It's just incredibly, it's incredibly empowering to know that your hair is breath away from superpowers. So I want to help people explore that. So what is that? Like when you're explaining this, when you're saying this is bizarre series of numbers. What is it doing? Like how do we interface with it? Well, so for example, let's take an easier system that we feel a little bit more confident with. There's this thing called the quadrennians, which are based on the number one, the complex number I, if you remember that from some distant math class. And then there's something called J and K. So i times J equals K, J times K equals i. J times i is equal to the negative of i times J. So negative K. There's a multiplication table for these objects. And these objects help with computer vision, you know, computer simulation 3D projections. They're used all the time in probably video games. They may come up in nature. I mean, we know that nature uses complex numbers. And most people never found out why they were being told about complex numbers or imaginary numbers because they never got to the point. We're actually looking at wave functions that describe photons and electrons and all of that good stuff that you read about in physics. So in essence, the octonians are a system where i, J, K keeps going effectively through elemental PQR, you know, until you've got eight different objects. And they're not even associative, which is one of these rules that you learn about, you know, multiplication is associative. And you think, well, what is an associative? Right. So if you talk about community, for example, I can't tell whether you put on your shirt first or your shoes first because it's it's commutative as to which order you did it. But if you put on your underwear in a different order than you put on your pants, it'll become immediately obvious which order you did it. Right. Okay. Well, there's another thing called associativity. And it's almost everything that we deal with in, you know, elementary mathematics is associative. So you're like, why do I learn about associative? I've never met anything that is an associative. Well, the octonian thing is associative. There's a number system that is responsible for most of the platypi of mathematics, if you will, things that just occur enormously. So that's an example of an invitation out of this planet. You know, if you start to think about the octonians and care about them and say, are they a message? Do they have meaning? We can prove that they're there. I can construct them for you. But they generate so much bizarines in some sort of abstract space. How are they recognized? Like how, how was it, how did it come to be that this was a point of discussion? Well, there's a process. In fact, there are two processes where you can build these number systems up from each other. So you build the complex from the real, you build the quaternions from the complex, you build the octonians from the quaternions, and then you can't build anything beyond that. Because each time you're giving up a magical power to get to the next stage, and by the time you get to the octonians you're exhausted. When you give them a magical power? For example, it's very hard to think about the square root of negative one. So like, what does it mean for something squared to be negative one? So that's like the complex numbers gave up that kind of sensibility. And then the complex numbers are at least commutative, a times b equals b times a, but the quaternions don't have that property. So then you have a further property called associativity. So you're sort of to to build the next system, you're giving up properties that sort of make sense to us. And by the time you've gotten to the octonians, you've given everything away. There's no way you're going to build the next system. But yet it's real. Yes, yet it's real in a very real mathematical sense. So does it just highlight our lack of understanding? Yeah. And it is a call to adventure. It's like a message from something that isn't human. I'm not going to say that it's God. I'm not going to say that it's logic or design. But it's a more complex system of the universe. That's right. And you have to uncover that these things are there. Or for example, you know, see elegance. I don't know if you've like played with, do you know about see elegance? No. All right. See elegance? See elegance. Eligance. And elegance. And elegance. I think it's OK. OK. So it's this worm that was chosen by this guy, Sidney Brenner, who just died. And it's a shame because he would have been a great podcast guest. Just like one of the most brilliant biologists that we didn't focus on. He said, you know what? We're missing a species that we can completely describe. Soup to nuts. Here's the one that's about the simplest thing with a brain. It's only got a thousand cells. And 300 of those cells make up a very primitive neural system. And we're going to track where every goddamn cell. Like bring up Jamie, if I could ask you so, to bring up the cell lineage diagram for see elegance. So this will be the first of two images. Well, that is a complete map of how one fertilized egg becomes a tiny microscopic worm for every possible division. What? Fuck. I'm, I looked at that. I love when you say that. That is so wild. Yeah. Right now, here's the thing. Everyone in biology knows how cool this thing is. And very few people, not enough people outside of biology know that we have completely mapped how one cell, like if you're 30 trillion cells around, it's too big to write a diagram. It's only possible because there are only a thousand cells and this thing has locomotion. It has sexual reproduction. You know, it eats. So you're looking at the architectural plans for an actual... locomotion. It has sexual reproduction. You know it eats. So you're looking at the architectural plans for an actual organism. And Jamie, when we're done with that, if I could trouble you for the folks that are just following, what kind of pause for the folks that are following and home listening, just listening, not watching. What we're looking at, Jamie explained how someone can see this image if they want to go with themselves. The letter C, it's not not see like the ocean to see elegance and then that cell lineage. It looks like a really long basketball bracket that's pushed out forever. That's a good way to describe it. Yeah. So it's fucking wild. Yeah. Talk about March Madness. Yeah. Our madness, June Madness. It just doesn't stop. If we could bring up the wiring diagram or a Jason C matrix, yeah, the the CL is wired. Right. Yeah, perfect. That is a complete map of the 300 neurons in the CL worm, how they are wired to each other. Like that is a map of the mind of the worm. Wow. Okay. So that's the portal. That's another portal. Here's an organism which is completely mapped and has complex behaviors. It has I think about half the number of adult cell types that you and I have. So maybe we have like 250, like only 250 different kinds of adult cells more or less. I don't want to get too precise about that. And yet we are like 10 trillion or 30 trillion copies of those tiny number of different types of cells. Well, I think the CL again has about 125 or something like that, different cell types. And it only has a thousand cells and it's able to do most of what we're able to do. We move around, we eat, we have sex, pretty simple life. Do you think it's ever possible? Well, I'm sure it's probably possible. But do you think in our lifetime we'll ever see a map like that of a human organism? I don't think so. But the cool thing is we have this map and we still don't understand it. Like we've got this thing dead to rights. We've got it boxed in. It can't. We know every single cell what it does. We have all the wiring between the neurons. We still don't get it. Right. Right. So like imagine that you're eight years. Well, what did genius this guy Sidney Brenner was for choosing this organism? Right. Because this organism is the simplest place to look at complex life. Hmm. This image, the reconstructed biological neural networks. What? Like you're looking. Okay. Now, we could have a discussion about some weird Peruvian structure and whether we've been visited. And I'm be up for that. Look, I'm not going to pretend that I'm too good for it. But I know that this is real. Right. I don't have any doubt. I'm not going to sit around asking, well, do you believe that, you know, aliens talk to this federal government in the 40s? Right. That might as well be an alien. Yeah. And it's an invitation to adventure. Yeah. And we are destroying, I mean, you know, getting just getting back to it. The reason that I'm fighting through culture war issues, which are not very interesting to me, is that we are destroying the thing that has the ability to make sense of the world. Right. It's really the design and logic. Yeah. I mean, like the ability to say no, you know, you come with an experiment that failed, you know, and you say, I think it succeeded. I say, no, it didn't. It failed. And you say, well, I actually am Cambodian. And I think you're discriminating against me because I'm Cambodian. Like, look, your experiment failed. It has nothing to do with your being Cambodian. Hmm. You know, I'm serious. And you keep that stuff out of my lab. I mean, if you want your war stuff, yeah, really what I'm animated by is get your fucking social engineering out of my laboratory. You've got 10 minutes and I'm calling security. That's my issue. It's not telling people how to behave or that I have all the answers or that we need to be objective in our lives and that we just want to have sensible discussions. It's you're coming after core reality and our ability to make sense of the world. And so I'm happy to entertain all sorts of things. You take one step one foot in my lab and I'm calling security. And if I can't do that, if I can't maintain a scientific journal or a university in which the bullshit departments do not invade the departments that are actually doing the super important work, we're lost. And there is a distinction. I mean, this distinction needs to be made. There is a distinction between hard science and gender you could pull up Jamie. Let's do the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron. Oh, you can do that. Yeah. You went all Sean Connery on me. What a crazy eyebrow. Yeah. One eyebrow. Isn't that like a genetic thing? Like you can curl your tongue. Like, yeah, I could do that. Some people can't do that. I'm sure no. Mm hmm. We mean turn upside down. Oh, no, I can't do that. All right. You got one thing. I got another. Okay. This is a very mature. Joe. Huh. Um, but what is going on here? Um, put, uh, sign, I'm looking for a number with like 10 or 11 significant digits. Um, we are able to do calculations in quantum electrodynamics. Let's say a quantum field theory in which we can figure out the precision of something we can predict it to like 10 or 11 decimal places of accuracy. And when I look at the, the achievement that was necessary to have theory agree with experiment to that level. And then I listened to some of the discussions about, oh, just take these hoaxes about, you know, somebody submitted parts of mind comp to, you know, with Jews rewritten as men. Peter, if that was the end. Yeah. Those two subjects are taking place in the same institution. One is incredibly rigorous in demanding and completely unforgiving. And the other thing is just like frivolous and nonsense. Well, maybe there's a core of it that makes sense, but there's, it's not going to get anywhere close to the achievements of the, of the hard sciences. But the core of it, whether or not it makes sense, the, the real problem is the motivation for doing it in the first place. Well, the real motivation may be activism, but activism, activism and scholarship aren't, I mean, there's so many things that I want to be true that just aren't. I want beautiful, I mean, like, you know, nature, you spend time in nature. You want to think, you know, like, nature's a community and we're the forest is a bunch of different organisms all working together. No, it's red of tooth and claw. Everything that you think about the universe that is purely beautiful and aspirational is contradicted by some system in nature. And that's why evolutionary theory was the first thing on the chopping block. It's just like, well, this country takes everything we want to claim about organisms. Well, tough luck. I feel like there's a way to define this clearly that makes people understand it better. Okay. And I don't, I don't know if I'm the guy to do it, but I feel like someone, there's a, this is an incredibly complex issue, right, where you're dealing with emotions and feelings and people who feel like there's injustice in the world and inequality. And they focus on those things to the point where they're almost participating in social engineering by ignoring reality and focusing on what they want to be true in sort of this way of re-imagining the world. And they're also demanding compliance. This is a big part of this whole thing that's going on here. Then on the other hand, you've got this stuff. Yeah. These hard sciences that demand just rigorous intellectual debate. They demand careful study of the facts. They demand deep understanding of complex mathematics in order to achieve these results and to be able to verify them. And they're unforgiving. Unforgiving. Yeah. There's just, they're two totally different things. And what you're saying is when one of them that is this sort of frivolous, airy kind of utopian version of what they like the future to be and interferes where they want a certain amount of diverse people. I'm not even saying that it's frivolous. I'm not even saying it's not scholarship. I'm saying that whatever it is, I don't care. Maybe it's maybe it's some beautiful social thing. Well, do you do, but then they'll hit you with you don't care because you're a white male and you have white male privilege. And I don't, and what I realize is that it's important in as inclusion is exclusion is equally important. And the instant you say that, I don't know you the time of day. What does that mean by important? We keep talking about diversity and inclusion, diversity inclusion, inclusion. And there's an implicit threat in that, which is what makes it really juicy and interesting, which is like, well, let's look at us. We got three white guys in here. This Jamie, you and me speak. Speak to yourself. I'm 1.6% Africa. I knew it was going to play that card. But you circuit passes white, right? Yes. Okay. Now, in order to have the objection, like there's some little bit of guilt, which is like, well, why aren't there any people from Cambodia in here? Is that that we're really anti-cambodian? If you carry that guilt, you're always worried that you have to be able to prove that you're inclusive. It doesn't matter. Right. Right. Okay. It is also important to exclude certain voices from the conversation. So the voice that plays the card, which says, well, you're only saying that because X, I don't have to listen to that voice. And I think this is really important. That is not a voice that needs to be answered. It's not a voice that needs to be taken seriously or paid attention to unless there's some serious allegation that there has been some kind of discrimination inclusion. The burden of proof is on you for saying why that's interesting in a particular conversation. The burden is on you to explain why that's interesting. Right. Well, for them, they're trying to engineer a more fair and balanced society. If I was going to take their perspective, they would say that the reason why there aren't more women in science or trans people in science or you know, feeling like I'm also trying to engineer a world where there are more women in science. How are you doing that by trying to figure out what is it that's selecting against women? For example, that we need to get women more money, as I said on this program earlier in their lives, so they can hire help to help raise their children so they can spend more time on their careers and balance. Yeah, but a lot of women don't find that attractive. They don't want to do that. Maybe. But I'm trying to think, but my point is that there are lots of reasons that men and women are different. Right. So for example, I saw a beautiful video of a guy who jumps down an enormous flight of stairs on a skateboard and he just nails the landing. And it's just a thing of art. And then it shows you 150 attempts where this kind of just abused his body and failed and failed maybe broke a tooth, you know, blood everywhere and you're thinking, oh, you showed me the success. And you didn't show me that this guy was willing to put his brain, his life on the line in order to nail that trick. And he's actually one of the world's falling champions. Right. Okay. Well, when you start saying, well, why are you putting this video of this person who's doing this thing, you know, on the internet, because that person belongs to a privileged class, I'm saying, well, I don't know that guy abused himself and put himself at risk and, you know, devoted his life in a singular way that no sensible, I mean, I would be a, I would be a pauled if my son did that. I'd be furious with it. You know, there are things that are that are happening that result in imbalances that aren't about some kind of unfairness. And I think it's very important to say that unfairness is real and structural problems are real and non structural problems and things that really aren't unfair are also real. I think we both agree that it's important for people to have the opportunity to pursue what they enjoy pursuing. I think there's also an issue where we want people to be more represented. We want more of that kind of person that's interested in something when they might not necessarily naturally gravitate towards it. And it might not be that there's some impediments and that there's some boundaries and some sort of boys club that keeps them out. And it might be more that they're just not that interested in that. Well, that there's also biologically been that's been proven in studies. But I'm trying to make it a different point. Okay. To me, what I'm trying to say is I made a mistake years ago, I think of engaging and this point, which is, let's take piano competitions. Why are piano competitions historically disproportionately, let's say entered in one by Russians or chess or who knows? Well, Russians are beasts in the way that they destroy children on their way to the concert stage. They will do things that most American families will not do to produce a concert pianist. Okay. That's not an unfairness for the rest of us. I mean, I play the piano. I can't get on stage with these guys because they're just amazing. It's not it's not an unfairness that I'm not represented on that stage. You know, if I told you that my intention is to become the world's greatest Jiu Jitsu expert at age 53 being overweight, not having any history and combat sports, you know, and I know that it's not going to happen. With the right amount of drugs, come on Joe and engineering, we can do more. Acuteless things. That's true. We can make him better than he was. Yeah, we need daily stem cells. We're going to have to do some real we're going to take a chance on cancer and all sorts of other diseases. Right. We can we can achieve some things. Okay, but the previous conversation where you're not worrying that you need to develop. You need to develop. It needs to be a part of your well, here's the thing that I always say about striking sports, striking sports are probably one of the more interesting ones in that when you start out on an early age, your body develops learning how to strike. And it's a gigantic advantage over someone who learns once their their past purity. When you get someone who's learning how to strike and they're in their 20s, it takes a real outlier to become super successful. It's very, very rare. Black, I remember being in a fist fight and throwing a punch and not connecting and hurting my arm. Yeah, it happens all time. Oh, I didn't understand. If you it's not free, you know, it's like a very it's a very oh, now all you've got this your left arm and you got a really pissed off person across from you. What I was getting back to is I wanted to talk about in part the portal and how it relates to the sort of weird social justice thing. The key point is I'm not that interested in the culture wars. I'm interested in the pipeline of amazing stuff that is unforgiving. Right, but do you think that along the way you have to kind of address that the culture wars are a thing, try to figure out why they're a thing, trying to figure out what what are the main points and main factors that are responsible for it being a thing. Right. And is there a way to mitigate its impact on progress? Well, this is I'm concerned that the culture wars are going to keep girls, black people, whoever short people, I don't know what out of the things that they want to do. Why? Because we're not being honest about what it actually what is involved in selecting against people. So you brought up the issue of interests. So like the Google memo, the James de Mora issue. Right. For instance, a great example. Well, publicly. Okay. But my wife went on Dave Rubin's show. And she, you know, look, this is a woman who brought techniques of gauge field theory into economics. So she's she's no slouch when it comes to analytic thinking. She's a mage field three similar to gauge symmetry. That gauge theory. Okay. Same just just called a gauge theory. She wasn't doing she wasn't doing quantum theory, but she was taking she her thesis brought techniques of bundle theory like the hop vibration that we had and showed that economics without any alteration was a mature geometric system in a gauge theory. So it didn't necessarily we collaborated on on showing that you can't accommodate changing preferences in economics without gauge theory. So that was kind of pretty amazing. It was really great. Great fun. The she her point was I didn't enjoy the unpleasantness of focusing on these things because they were so abstract. And so I wanted, you know, I was interested in people. I was interested in making sure that our models could capture human dynamics better. And you know, I was just really excited by the collaboration we were doing, which was, you know, she and I came from two different worlds and we found this bridge between them. So she went on Dave Rubin and said, look, it's not about abilities. Women are as smart as men. It's interests. We're not interested in the same things necessary. And that should be okay. But when she said it on Dave Rubin's show, it didn't register anywhere. Then James Demor said it and like the world freaks how dare you. But that's also because he said it within the environment of Google. He just wasn't on a podcast if you just said that. But if he had said that same exact thing and he wasn't an employee of Google and he was on a podcast, even if it was a popular podcast, I don't think it would have created. Well, he was on a special issue. Well, he was on such an issue. Well, he was on such an issue. It was the fact that there's a Google and the fact that you can get paid for these, you know, these weird sort of spectromy skills, which, you know, guilty. That's what I care about. I really enjoy doing isolated things in the absence of other people that have a very technical nature to them. And, you know, my experience in general is that I've had female collaborators in very technical subjects. Fewer women are interested in things that involve isolation and technical things removed from human interaction. And so that statement will undoubtedly cause a flurry of activity. And if a person says it who's not suspected of trying to keep women out of something, like my point is I want a much more equal world. But we have a very different diagnosis as to why the world is as unequal as it is. And your diagnosis is that it's unequal because people have varied interests. And that, but also something is dumb as teamwork. Women take care of sick relatives, children, and the elderly at a level that most men can't be bothered with. You know, it's just like, I don't care. So, you know, you've got all of these guys hyper focused on their career who are doing the equivalent of jumping down a flight of stairs on a skateboard, you know, maybe it's not healthy. And then you've got another group of people who are like saying, you know, I want to have children, I want to to stay home with the kids for a couple of years because it's really important in terms of their development and bonding and all these things. And I say, absolutely. How do we create a financial product that gets you money early in your life when you need it? And then, you know, maybe you pay something out when you're like, it's just a different diagnosis as to what the problem is it's not all oppression. Part of it is resources and financial products. Part of it is interests. Part of it is the fields being set up in a way that is biased. I do believe in structural I just don't believe in the level of structural oppression or the remedies for structural oppression. Like if we don't, we are losing many of the best minds that are on female shoulders. We've just are. There's no question about it in my mind. And rather than saying, what do you mean by we're losing them? Well, they exit the system. We, they get through the, like let's say, BAs and STEM subjects, a lot of them enter PhD programs like let me give a very simple example from the Harvard math department from years ago. I think Harvard had this weird thing where it would very often allow one woman in a year to the PhD program in mathematics. And that person usually felt isolated and would often kind of leave the program. And then one year a female who was admitted deferred. So that meant that there were two women starting the next year. And they formed a support network and they both got through and then other women came in after them. So it's like, oh, that's interesting. We just learned something. Right? If you, if you let women in in pairs, maybe they're going to do better. And then then maybe three will do better or four will do better. Okay, I'm totally up for that kind of a remediation up until we can build up enough female experience so that women have role models. Like it's really helpful to be able to look at a senior female researcher and go to her and say, how did you do it? You got married, you had kids, you had a very successful career. How did you come back? You know, one of the things I found, I used to be interested in this problem. And I found that a lot of the women in the 1950s were very successful in STEM subjects had a lot of money where their husbands had stable jobs that allowed them to use nannies and housekeeping in order to free themselves from drudgery. Well, that was an unadvetized feature of the system because that's not available to everyone. That's it. It's a a feature where financial privilege actually enabled somebody to stay in science. So, you know, the issue isn't a question of inclusion or exclusion of groups. It's a question of how are you so sure that everything is structural oppression? That's that's a really weird thing. And if you can launch that objection cheaply, if you can just say, I can take any group and say, why is this group have no one in a wheelchair? Now, I've got to spend 30 minutes explaining that. I don't want to do it. It's not a good enough objection. Like, if we're going to make progress, let's actually make progress that matters rather than making ourselves feel good. Why do you think that this social justice movement has reached such hysterical levels over the last decade? Well, a couple things. One, I think that certain positions became like the failing business of traditional media meant that it couldn't actually employ people at the same level that you could employ them before. So, a lot of people who didn't have huge opportunity costs entered journalism. What does that mean about huge opportunities? Well, let's imagine, for example, that you're very ideological. And somebody offers you a $50,000 a year job, which allows you to be ideological, or you could take a $150,000 a year job, and ideology isn't a large part of the offer. Only the ideological people are going to give up a $100,000 a year for the privilege of activism. So, in part, when you have a failing business model, you start select is a system of selective pressures. It's going to start selecting for very different people. So, that's one of the things that's going on is that you have very economically frustrated people because the silent generation started a problem. The baby boomers amplified the hell out of it. Gen X is still waiting to take its place in society and the millennials just don't even see a path through, you know, standard careers. Nobody's putting a glass of scotch in their hand in a cigar in their mouth and saying, come with me, kid, let me show you how it's done. Well, isn't it also partly because the discussion is out there and the discussion is a very attractive one. The discussion of one of the reasons why you haven't gotten by in this world is because of inequality and because of some sort of systemic racism or systemic sexism or systemic homophobia or transphobia and it becomes when you give people an option to find an excuse, they gravitate towards that. But when you create safe space and you coddle and you make, you mean all these pieces are in place. There's many, many, many moving parts. And I think all these little pieces are in place where we also have these massive echo chambers because of social media. We have these people that, you know, they find ideologically similar here beings and they bounce off of each other. But these are all real problems. Like I have an intersects friend, I was not. Somebody who's indeterminate between male and female physiologically. So, okay. Let's imagine that they have some carry type X, Y profile and that the developmental process did not produce unambiguous genitalia. Okay. Okay. Is that a hermaphrodite? I don't want to. Okay. Just interesting. Okay. This is a person I think of pretty terrific. And I look at all the forms that say male female. And I just, you know, my heart sinks. Like we're not even in trans here. We're talking about somebody who's biological card that they were dealt could have been you could have been me. Right. And through no, no choices at all, this person is being shoehorned into a paradigm, which puts them in an increased risk of suicide. And it breaks my heart and we should change it. We should break the male female dichotomy. Absolutely. Now, I have a different feeling about trans, but if we solve the issue of intersex, which is not pressuring, just accepting that some tiny percentage of the population, which is not vanishingly small, just not large, is neither unambiguously male and female in terms of genotype phenotype concordance. We will do most of the work necessary to take care of our trans folks who are suffering too. Right. Now, trans is a much more rich world because there are a million different issues taking place in trans. And they're all conflated. You know, part of it because of developmental biology, part of it because gender really, in some sense, is socially constructed in a way that like when people say mathematics is socially constructed, I have to reject it. You know, and I give this example of like kilts and lunges from Scotland and India are skirts, but they're not female in those places. So you have to learn about male and female relative to the codification in your society. And the issues of what are our, what are our obligations to recognize, hey, this is really a female mind and a male body versus this is a regular mind and a regular body, but needs instruction. All of these things are conflated. And I was really hoping that if we, if we used intersex as the test case, to break them, the binary because the binary is an oppression. There's no question in my mind about it. Well, how is it an oppression? Because let's imagine that I, let's say I have persistent malaria induct syndrome. So I'm phenotypically on the outside male and I go to my doctor and he says, hey, you've got a uterus. What? Yeah, you have a uterus. Okay. That's an exotic situation. Maybe I want to identify male. You know, because the outside equipment looks male. It's a, it's a weird situation. Maybe the idea is we're talking to extremely rare circumstances. So does that really define it as being oppressive? Like what is for a friend of mine who is in neither situation? Yeah, it's oppressive. But I mean, is it a press like some people are born paralyzed, right? Some people are born with like serious neurolog... Who is in either situation? Yeah, it's oppressive But I mean is it a press look some people are born paralyzed right some people are born with like serious neurological diseases Don't allow them to be mowtile. That's right like what is it oppressive if people are just Recognized like most people recognize as being able to walk if there was no category called Disabled right okay or in a wheelchair. Okay. No category Yeah, so you've got somebody who's who's got a spinal cord injury and you've got people saying all right everybody walk this way What do you mean you can't walk? Get up Where are you lazy? That's what it sounds like to me like it's one thing to recognize that not everybody is in the standard category But it's another thing to hard code like I just hard code where you talking about job That can't form so yeah, the federal government can be a form. There's a binary. It says male or female Let's imagine it doesn't say other or prefer not to say okay So until we're just talking about filling out forms which is how often does that take place in your life? Often enough that it represents oppression Well, you have to be defined in most your female emotionally emotionally. I think this is oppression oppression. Yeah I'm not looking but I really isn't it done under the interests of defining people simply because For the most part yeah dealing with males and females and it's the most part They're just trying to figure out what's what for their statistic. Yeah, but you know again This is fun I'm glad you're asking me these questions because usually I have to be on the other side of this issue And this is really where my heart is which is I care about these people and I know that in every single conservative society in the world There are accommodations made for the failure of Simple binaries to accommodate the population There's no society this There's no society so conservative that they've sorted the world into male and female You know the famous example of it in Iran of the Ayatollah Making a thought to it that said it's fine to have gender reassignment Right we have to recognize that every single population produces gender sexual ambiguity But isn't that also to get around the idea of homosexuality being a grievous crime because like believe In Iran, it's illegal to have homosexual activity, but you can have gender reassignment So if you're a gay man you can choose to become a female That's true, but there's also a thriving gay scene in Tehran You know do they have to recognize this and they're all sorts of execution. You know that there was a situation in India where I You know I have more experience where you would say oh those two people are confirmed bachelors You know that they're so dedicated to their professions that there's no room for family and they live together right so like traditional societies have everybody accommodates homosexuality and failures of simple gender binaries and You know I always bring up the example of Turkish where Turkish doesn't hard code the third person singular pronoun as Male or female it just has one pronoun for both so Thank you for giving me the opportunity to show where my heart actually has been this entire time which is I Believe this is oppressive and I don't think that it presses that many people But I believe that it's an important oppression that we have to realize that we hard-coded and that's what generated a lot of the feelings Before we get to trans you can simply say from the position of inner sex That the world is a richer place than male and female and people say oh it's XX versus XY No, it isn't it just isn't it for the most part is if in the most part it is so in terms of It is it has been an edge case to deal with but that edge case is important to me right because the edge case are they are human being sitter Not only then I actually look I like people who are outside of the norms I think that probably a larger percentage of those people are going to be more interesting people because they're forged in the fire So it's not just a case that you know, do you want to chase a couple a couple of edge cases? Everybody with a really different experience is more important to me than everyone with a standard experience I think we have to take care of the standard case But I'm absolutely interested in outliers in edge cases so To get back to the to the line of thought. Well, that's an important distinction And what you're saying is very important because you are In one way someone could pigeonhole you from your earlier statement that you're not interested in a lot of these Different studies grieving studies a lot of these gender studies because they're sending it if they interfere with hard science Which you are getting particularly with evolutionary biology you're getting a lot of interference You got it right and you're not interested in that But that does not mean that you're an insensitive person. It's un-instant You're being just not interested in the disruption of the acquiring of data and the analysis of said data. I don't think that activism makes for good advancement Well, I think he's also a problem with who's the activist and what age you're talking about and how idealistic these people are and what How what how going back to biology? How where's their mind at it? How how formed is their mind? And how narrow is their view of what the world is or should be and their impact? You know what what what's what's significant about their impact my disagreement But to give you an idea of where my energy comes from Let's imagine that you actually believe that males and females are equally intelligent Fissure in equivalents. Can I say LOL? Then you're then what would you be you'd be fascinated as to why? You don't have males and females in an intellectually depending in equal numbers in a in a demanding occupation So you'd start saying huh if I already assume that males and females are equally intelligent I care about different categories how much of this is about fertility? How much of this is about kin work? How much of this is about structural oppression? How much of this is about path dependence? You do some very careful thing In order to understand your problem and only when you'd finally understood your problem Would you say okay now I have an idea of how to remediate it? We need a financial product that transfers money from late life to early life because the huge burden that knocks women out of the stem pipeline might be That they have to take care of elderly parents or young kids Bingo now now you're working in a totally different idiom Because you've you've actually come up with a different idea or for example If you make if you hard code like it's Sean Carroll I think just had a podcast in which he said something to the effect of well in the IDW is kind of two interested in race and IQ I have never been interested in race and IQ the only time I became interested in race and IQ was when I started hearing there is absolutely no Variation between groups and you know in any kind of a cognitive endowment well Certainly there is in terms of height the ability to radiate heat melanin kind that tend to the skinny ability to absorb sunlight It doesn't pass the smell test that you could be able to say that a priori It's just it's not a scientific type statement. It's something you'd have to investigate so in that situation Am I interested in in some finding that says that one group is smarter and other groups are not as smart? Do I believe that IQ equals smartness? No, I don't believe IQ equals smartness Do I believe that there's no cultural bias? I think there is cultural bias. I you know, I'm definitely on record of saying There are ways in which groups that are said to Fair less well in terms of IQ Demonstrate actual intellectual dominance. This is some rich weird area I've never cared about before and the only reason that it becomes interesting to me is That suddenly we're making these incredible proclamations with certainty Like you know, you can't say this word or this is absolutely true and it like life doesn't work like that There's no word in the English language George Carlin made this point all the time. There are no bad words There's bad intent. Yes, they're bad people Well, isn't it also the issue being a part of a group? Same one I the IDW is too interested in race and IQ. I'm not I'm not who is I mean, I'm really not I don't discuss that at all. I understand but who who is interested Sam Harris is disgusted before but he discussed it with someone who is studying I don't think Sam cared. I think the same felt that he had Sam felt the Charles Murray Had been railroaded by him by he Sam Harris and then as Sam came to understand what it is like to have a mob turn on you Sam said maybe I'm wrong about Charles Murray and then as recline made this really Interesting point in a really unfair way against Sam Which was basically like hey, you don't know what Charles Murray is he's a hybrid He's not just a social scientist. He's also got an agenda Right is that accurate? I think so. I've never read Murray's work, but I know enough to say either but I deeply polarize I think about curve the whole idea about being able to recognize The differences in in race and IQ. It's like it's a very contentious subject both Analysts of all I mean look I have to admit that I don't score that well on certain tests so I have it built in total skepticism of IQ tests SAT test ACT tests any kind of test because it's an unnatural Examination not intelligence. It just isn't what is it? It's a proxy like there are people who think oh, it's a really good proxy I've never met someone who has a really high IQ though that I deem to be intellectually inferior Yeah, but I've met people who don't have very high IQs who just blow me away. Yes, right? Well, there's absolutely There's a type of intelligence a certain people possess particularly creative intelligence. Yeah, there's a creative Like there's certain people that might not score well on SAT tests, but they're capable of producing amazing stuff whether it's literature Comedy whatever whatever it is Movies they can make things they can do thing they have a genius in their ability and that requires Some intelligence requires some Immeasurable to something that you can't put on a scale well, this is what I think you know I said to Jordan. I said to Jordan Peterson I don't think I have an IQ because the conceit you have to remember that a priori We would always have guessed that I intelligence was many different things It was a composite of like lots of different types of intelligence, right? The conceit around IQ is you'd think that was true, but guess again There's essentially one kind of intelligence. There's one scale. It's a surprise Oh, that's really surprising. Tell me something of the various forms of intelligence is one of the things that you call Intelligence processing Yes, yes process is very important Okay, I don't score well on processing in fact. I don't think anyone in my family has ever scored well on what you mean by processing some kind of Mechanical process of how quickly and flawlessly you can encode information play with it and get it out You know if you're a dyslexic Let's take spelling lots of people on Twitter say how you misspelled here In fact, it's H E A R in the case that you meant it really just shows me something about your intelligence that you can't Keep track of spelling Okay, that's your level of thought do you have to know how many brilliant people can't Can't spell can't write well also you're not even thinking you're just trying to get the word out and you missed out Yeah, but like my mind you know at some point I got sent home I think because I was asked to draw a chicken in school and I put two wings and four feet on it So non-observant Mike might my handwriting might get home. Yeah something like this. They sent you home I was like Abarance or you know I was making fun of the teacher because it was four like you know famously Mrs. Buck Yarrow and first grade sent me out of the class because I said that a spider wasn't an insect because it had eight legs and That it she sent you out of class. Yeah because I was well you're correct In that case I was in the case of a chicken. I wasn't but well maybe saw some weird fucking Chernobyl chickens Yeah, man Chernobyl chicken chicken Kiev. That's good. That's comedy goal My point my point being that if you don't have a high confidence in net normal metrics The race and IQ discussion doesn't land Like so to get back to Charles Marry. Yeah, so Charles Murray it is hard to say He wrote the bell curve right was either dismissed as being racist or applauded by people who you would call white nationalists who trot out his ideas as Proof right as measurable proof that certain races are superior and you know we could discuss So he's an online people who trot those out all the time and they use it to form These weird groups of people that love to hear that right and that smacks of race Well, this is the issue which is You have a situation in which He appeared to have a political orientation Which is that he didn't want money spent in certain ways and he wanted it spent in others There there was an in political interpretation Of why he wanted that Be which was maybe he's a closet racist Then there was facts that will tend to empower people Who are actually racist? All right, but let me pause you there sure But then there's the actual data right now in examining the actual data if you just look at the actual data is Is it racist to look at the the real numbers like if you say Nigerians are particular who are incredibly industrious and some of the more Successful immigrant groups. They come over to America. Yeah, also having to be black if you wanted to look at Nigerians right in terms of like if you wanted to if you if you if all If you wanted to look at them particularly as a group be very difficult to be racist you'd have to say well These are superior a lot of superior intellects come from Nigeria They also trot out the Asian one right that eight like this one of the weird things that people like to show that they're not racist Right like look at shows Asians are of a superior IQ. I I puzzle on that one that one's puzzling say more Because I think with certain people with certain males. Let's just go with males. They look at African Americans and they see superiority in In certain ways they see superiority athletically Artistically musically you look at the contributions of African Americans culturally Across the board in terms of like the real that the Jimmy Hendrix the speed of speed of thought and creativity analytic Not just that also Affuletically like the the fucking outliers are just so many there's so many Michael Jordan's Mike Tyson's Sugar Ray Leonard's There's so many African American Outliers who just extraordinary in terms of their their accomplishments right but not that many Asian Americans in that regard So it's almost like they'll concede like they're not doing the things that make me jealous I'm saying okay, they're not they're not creating this insane music although there are a few right but overall Not creating these insane athletic accomplishments that these white Americans can't keep up with right so we'll say But look there's a period actually so I can't be racist I'm pointing out that these Asians who I'm not jealous of because they don't do the things that I wish that I could do But then when it comes to the African Americans They're pointing out all the things that the African Americans can do that they can't do But they're saying all but they're intellectually inferior Whether this is proven. I'm not racist. I don't want this to be true, but it seems to be true. I see you see them saying It's like a way of It's a way of suppressing accomplishment right Wow like almost mitigating the impact of the the jealousy that they feel so if you think about for example first Does that make sense? I think so Um First of all, I just I hate this topic. Yeah, I mean to it's a weird topic. It's a weird topic. It feels greasy even touching it well But now we have to right like this I feel like my wrong view of it is if you'd never brought this thing up We would never have had to deal with it and I no longer believe that's true because we have so much inadvertent data right like I don't want The data on chess we have an idea of how many grandmasters there are and which groups like male female Asian black You know various portions of Europe I don't know what that data means But I can't stop the data because it's gonna be generated even if nobody comes up with a standardized test because it's a game And it's scored and it has something to do with intellectual abilities right on the other hand I mean I'm a competitive guy and I I You do comedy I do some some amount of music I can guarantee you that both of us have had our ass kicked at some point in my African Americans who excel in both of these areas and I don't mean You know all God's children got rhythm. I mean getting out funk in a competitive situation You know looking over somebody's shoulder on the keyboard and they're thinking so quickly and in so many dimensions I can't even imagine what the hell is going on right so therefore I never had a lot of fear about it because I you know I'm in close proximity with somebody who's just kicking my ass and Therefore I thought I could leave these topics alone I would never have to deal with it the way in which that they come up we you know in a way that is really unpleasant Is this new thing which is that all imbalances are all structural oppression? Right and which doesn't allow for trade-offs between Groups like fins fins are good at some things and not good at others Nobody believes in like anti-finish prejudice. So we don't think about it Right, it's just not a it's not a big issue for us You know finish humor how many finished comedians are there? There's no idea right. Well, how many do you run into at the comedy store? That's a bet it's a bad example because you're dealing with America America in American comedy and also you're also dealing with the highest level of the game It's like you know the comedy store is essentially like the It's like the Harvard research labs of stand-up comedy. Yeah, but it's something Nobody's worried about anti-finish behavior We're worried that we're prejudiced against certain groups. We're worried that we're prejudiced against Jews We're worried that we're prejudiced against Mexicans against blacks. We have a pretty clean idea of What bigotry we really still need to worry about right and we feel guilty about it And that's why you say it has this kind of lubricant's quality So what do you really up to over there? Well, where are you looking at that data set? All right, and what my comment is is I don't know how to stop this thing. I'm not excited about it I'm not interested in it I definitely think that we have to actually think about the social implications of all these things But if your if your idea is that we're gonna stop this at the level of data and analysis I Can't afford that I just can't afford that we need to have somebody Who's able like for example microcephaly? You've got people with smaller heads than the rest of us maybe because of the Zika virus Well, is it is it Unethical to study what the cognitive impairment due to microcephaly is right? I don't know I don't know what to do, but I know that I want to have a very thoughtful conversation. Well, how can it be? How can it be unethical to study the cognitive impairment of someone who's it affected by a disease and that could possibly help fund research help fund preventative measures correlation with with smaller heads and cognitive impairment, you know and Like what if somebody like let's take mosaic a down syndrome mosaic down syndrome doesn't have the same profile as regular down syndrome You get much higher functioning people Right, I mean ultimately we're all souls and we have to figure out dignity and we have to figure out some system by which We can live with this increased level of knowledge, but does examining? impairment Right does that really mean that it's a prejudice like what it would about an examining impairment from people who've been injured? Should we avoid doing that because we don't want to be ableist? Do you see what I'm saying not quite we're because we're talking about reality right? We're talking about issues if you're if you're examining someone who contracted the Zika virus and it led to them developing a smaller head which is one of the horrible side effects of that Right it is examining that in some way some sort of prejudice it should be avoid examining Avoid examining it. We might do some damage if we examine it and publish the findings. We might do that Do that I mean there's you might say you might do damage to the people that are infected look or a flick if we don't begin with an idea that ultimately the issue is compassion for ourselves and others and that a lot of our genetics and our history Dispredisposes us to bad behavior now that we're living with each other like we have to start I mean as hippie dippy is a sound we have to start from a place of love and decency I care I certainly agree, but I think that we should avoid reality. Well, that's this is the thing right? Yeah, so now I have this other thing which is Reality is compassionate in and of itself remember when HIV was an equal opportunity disease and it just started in the gay community And it's gonna jump the fire road and it's gonna be as much a heterosexual problem as it was a homosexual problem That turned out not to be true. It was an ideological statement That didn't look at the differences between different kinds of epithelium and different sexual practices between gays and straits It was a it was a an activist position that started to compete with a Epidemiological position or a biological position and so Historically what we did is we had private expert communication And it's not always clear that you can trust your experts It's not always clear that you should start with the data what if the data says terrible things like maybe the data on people with microcephaly Says something and you have got a person who's gonna be judged by the size of their head which is visibly off from the rest of their body You know we we haven't taken up the challenge of our time which is Okay, we got a lot more information than we wanted and we have a lot more ability to analyze it and we know something about ourselves We know that we have got bigotry as part of our our makeup and we know that We're not really good at certain ways of integrating information and not you know becoming Tri-unfulist and jerkish about it and taking victory lapses if it's a competition like my groups better than your group So that's where we're stuck now. I want to be struggling with other people are saying like I don't know what the answers are I Don't think you know as I brought up before I don't think East Africans are cheating in the Boston Marathon because they've come to dominate it Just because you know suddenly you had a diverse group of people Replaced by a very tiny group from Ethiopia and Kenya We are we are behaving as you would expect when compassionate people who recognize that they have been bigoted and structurally oppressive Encounter data that they can't handle which the science is giving us more data than we ever wanted on these things And we're not answering the challenge of our time and that's what my issue with social justices. It's not about I don't want a better planet or a more inclusive planet. It's like Stop crowding out the really difficult interesting open-hearted and hard-headed conversation with this dime store nonsense About simple answers and simple simple truths because those aren't true and it's not going to work in the long term I mean, I guess that's maybe the idea is we're competing with social justice for the rights To try to come up with a better more equitable future and the complaint about it isn't You guys are trying to come up with a better more equitable future. It's What if you're going to make the same mistake when we said well the heterosexuals are as much at risk as the homosexual? That wasn't true. We needed to devote resources to our homosexual community And we did need to get the heterosexual community interested and we had a problem And we needed to think about you know very thoughtfully. We've got an epidemic that's killing people I think when we're talking about this. I think everything you're saying resonates and everything you're saying makes sense And I think when we're talking about compassionate Compassioned human beings Looking out for each other and that this should be something that we we all This is like one of the one of our primary concerns whenever we address any any issue Right. I think our problem in this country. There's as many problems. One of our problems is The loudest voices on the fringes And this is one of the things that I want to discuss with you is what's going on in Portland Yeah, and I think what's going on in Portland is the loudest voices on the fringes that the people on the right and on the far right and whether Recognizes recognizing as emblematic of the left they think it defines the left and I don't think it does and I think it is It's a symptom of It's a symptom of first of all terrible government of Someone who's allowing this to flourish inside the mayor of Portland who seems to be supporting this in some sort of a weird way weird way and ideologically believes that Antifa just because of a name stands for anti-fascist if you had no name Which you would have as a bunch of hoodwearing mask wearing violent thugs who are beating people who disagree with them Because that's what we saw with that Andy. How do you say his name go? I think it's ending no no and it's NGO Right, I treat no is silent until somebody correct. I think you're right What you saw from that video that anyone could support that of With a person who's just talking they I mean he if you what I've seen of him Yeah, what they've tried to describe that he supports neo-Nazis that he supports the proud boy I've seen none of this I've seen no evidence of this But I've seen the narrative trotted out over and over again as a justification for violence against him when the left supports bullying in the the worst possible form but ganging up on someone punching them hitting them with sticks Crowbars all this crazy shit thinking that it's okay to throw milkshakes at people thinking that this is fine This is nothing if you say what I think this is a horrible precedent to set and it's A terrible it's it's a terrible move if you're playing a game It's a terrible for first move because things only escalate They don't de-escalate no one says wow you beat the shit out of Andy. No, this is a mystery right like what the hell is going on? Well the hell's you're allowing people to wear masks and carry backpacks with weapons and There's a natural human inclination when someone gets hit to jump in and hit them too So if you see it all the time watch world star go to world star hip-hop.com and watch someone gets hit a bunch of people Just jumping and hit them it happens at truck stops and fucking high schools it happens people get brain damage people die each other all the time People yeah permanent injury when you're seeing in Portland There was one of them where an old guy got hit in the head with a fucking crowbar Right some mass kid because the old guy apparently disagreed, but they all disagree on things I don't say one's decided I guess is that the old guy is not exactly as portrayed I believe that the old guy may have been there With a telescoping baton So he was hitting people let's take this I think this is so worthwhile But like let's do it right okay because I think this is so mysterious what the help are people doing supporting Andy know being beaten up on video so let's stay stay with him Okay, so that's the the best clearest example of someone who's a tiny little gay man. He's tiny right and he know being beaten up on video so let's stay with him because that's the the best clear example of someone who's a tiny little gay man he's tiny mean he represents so many different my mind populations right he's pretty intersection yes he's Asian is an immigrant he's an immigrant he's gay I is your republican I thought he was left of center but I told you that serve it well I've been told I'm a fucking alt right now so I like it's very confusing he's also a diminutive in physical form he's not debt he's not threatening physically right and they've chosen this guy as an example and one of the more disturbing things were how many people saw the video and were justifying it saying things like get another hobby these end the are the anti-fascist will not stand for you know your your your bigotry and your hate like what do you talk to you you think it's okay to punch this guy like the fact that you guys all piled on and punched him in the middle so I'm I've been thinking a lot about it I have a model I'm happy to hear yours because there is a mystery can we both agree to be at the beginning that you would imagine that that video would have shocked people and defines so many people sort of excusing it is really shocking well it's given that he's also in a clearly intersection like you wouldn't predict this from first principles right now you wouldn't do what you looked at it on paper you definitely wouldn't especially if you allowed him to self identify as left a center okay so here's how the I think the model goes okay and unless you want to give yours first not bad right the first thing that we have to understand is that there's a division I want to lay this at super carefully the first division is between the what you're calling the loudest voices and I'm going to call the most courageous the most willing to accept loss the voices most willing to accept loss most of the left does not want to be dragged to the extreme left so you hear this thing about why are you focusing on a fringe and the answer is because the fringe is running the show in my opinion what do you mean by willing to accept loss if you go into an antifa versus proud boys melee you're willing you accept that you may get clocked with a bike lock I don't think that's right I don't think that's correct I think you're dealing with people that have no concept of real violence no experience of real violence there are things if you see yes there it's fucking cosplay it's cosplay love have you seen the image of the guy who's a suspect looks like he's never worked out a day in his fucking life looks like he's never been outside and I think these people are playing a fucking game we've agreed on yes okay you are willing so you think you're going to get into a while e coyote versus the road runner kind of a thing we're both of them always survived to the next car to have no idea what they're doing ever ever see a fight between people that have no idea how to fight yes yeah okay we are I've been one of those okay that's done me as a martial arts expert it's done me that people are willing to participate in that it's like me not knowing how to get the motorcycle and getting a race right I don't I don't know how anyone's willing to do that but they're willing to do that and they're willing to do that because they're delusional they're supported in their delusional perspective by the giant numbers of them they all get to get and then they wear masks which further emphasizes this illusion that they're a part game look assume that you are not even in a physical situation you're willing to be very loud on social media about very simplistic perspectives yes and you're willing to become a pariah at some level because are you though I think mostly your support I need far more support I'm not necessarily you're going to trigger so many times on this explanation that I probably just need a little place in the table to start building this up and then you can tear it the hell okay okay the first belief is that the belief that I have is that the fringes are much more running the show than the people who claimed that this is a small number of people believe that the fringes are scary fringes are willing to go places the rest of us aren't I agree with you on both sides left and right left and right so I spend a lot of time focused on the fringes because the fringes have become terrifying and the middle has become cowardly the whole principle about the whole idea of the thing was about creating a non cowardly core that could actually potentially hold the center because people are actually fairly courageous like you would have to say my brother is fairly courageous bench a pure and you know Sam Harris these are people who stood up to death threats you know I have a guy who's threatening me every day of my life you know coming through the internet in my family you have to have some courage in order to be part of this thing and that's part of my irritation when people come after it so there is a cowardly center and a very terrifying fringe and the fringes going around the whole thing right left and right the next thing is that people are secretly weirdly sympathetic with their violent the violent fringe to their extreme rather than making common cause across the center so for example you imagine that you run a laundromat and you're being visited by a member of organized crime every week and it comes into your laundromat and you kind of Plays with your stuff and he says I'd be shame if anything happened to your business and shakes you down Start saying oh, you know, I noticed that you have a daughter. I would love to date her Perhaps perhaps we'll go out sometime you hate this guy then some sort of violent Vigilante element that's operating extra judiciously after you've gone to the police over and over again breaks the sky's kneecaps Right you're weirdly sympathetic with the vigilante because you're being terrified by a group that is not being taken care of I think that this is in part why some elements of the left That it should be more responsible that have institutional positions that have Platforms that they can broadcast are weirdly sympathetic to Antifa and why Country Club Republicans are weirdly sympathetic to some of these far-right groups is that they view them as This is the dangerous group that's kind of taking care of the problem that I can't stand up to So you've got this bizarre cowardly sympathy from the center Who won't actually stand up and say I have more in common with a country club Republican In like in my case. I view myself as a progressive or at least a liberal I have more in common with a country club Republican than somebody who's got a bike lock who's looking for trouble in a street demonstration trying to smash up a Starbucks Right I don't want the help from my left Now the the group that wants to play this out using these sort of proxy groups to handle the problems is Saying look we're gonna we're gonna sound an air horn before one of these things so that all reasonable people can get the hell out of the way and If you don't respond then your collateral damage and that's on you. That's how they see this I Think that's very so in other words I think Andy know is the guy who doesn't listen to the air horn Brett Weinstein doesn't listen to the air horn Jordan Peterson Sam Harris don't listen to the air horn That's very accurate in the description of these fringe people doing the work of the people that are more reasonable but are happy to have these bad people do do their work to fight this battle for them because they think that ultimately It's for good. Yeah, I need my organized crime group to get rid of your organized Yeah, right and so the idea is that the law and order people like I really don't want anybody's organized crime group And I'm gonna actually stand up to the mob and I'm actually not gonna pay you your goddamn protection money because I'm gonna own a laundromat And this is the United States of American fuck off That's that's the view that I represent. Yeah, I don't want I don't thank you anti if I don't need your help Yeah, you know what I actually am much more afraid of the far right and the reason I concentrate my negative energy on the far left Is what are you trying to do you trying to get the genie out of the bottle on the far right? That is the danger. Yeah, you want to see more tiki torches It's not tiki torches to you need to worry about it's armed people who come and they're not that I'm bringing bike along We're pushing ordinary human beings to the extremes. Yeah, right and the thing that I get is that like I believe that the Republican Party You know, I just I never get a chance to say this stuff. I have never gotten along with the Republican Party I just don't like it. I view it as the thing that wants to exclude me from their country clubs I have an older model They're the group that wanted to put in condo developments in Yosemite Valley Because they couldn't figure out why we would want to preserve the national parks They're the ones that laughed about clubbing the baby seals. Ha ha ha I just always had this attitude fuck these people. All right. This is mine. This is my emotional cadence and We always had this thing where the Democrats were this we we had most of the smart people and so in a tiny fraction of time We have seen this giant evaporation of intelligence if not actually Through a lack of courage The people who represent responsible left wing thinking who believe in structural oppression, but don't believe in the extent claimed You know who want to keep making progress who want to make sure that traditionally marginalized groups are Taking care of that we take our responsibilities but not our guilt as the reason for trying to make a better world I'm not paying reparations for slavery I mean my family came over here and like what the 19 teens or 20s I mean be you know we came from programs. Is anybody gonna be paying Jews for the programs that you know Am I gonna be getting you cranium reparations? Let's not be ridiculous What would we want civil war do we just want to open up tear off every band aid for the purpose of you know trying to make everybody As uncomfortable in their skin as possible what we have as a situation in which we don't have Courageous people willing to fight for what works We have a tiny number of people who are animated by this the reason I'm animated by this is that I'm trying to keep the pipeline open for science It's really what happened to my brother Before it ever happened to him my brother and I were in this discussion about what are we gonna do to make sure that there's always a place to do biology to do mathematics to be able to weigh you know competing claims and When you start politicizing everything and you choose activism over thought and reason and civility and comedy You can sign yourself to becoming a less great nation and you're no longer able to lead you can't build a world On angry activism that's trying to go back to a lily white nation that will never happen and you can't enforce Equality of outcome. We don't even want that people who work their ass off deserve some of the pleasures of working your ass off and I don't always want to work my ass off and I you know Jackie Chan is the one I always look at that blooper reel at the end of every Jackie Chan film tells me he deserves his money I'm never gonna do that to my body ever I don't want an equality of outcome with Jackie Chan if I make some little film and this guy's wrists his life for every scene It's insane We need to create a world in which people are excited and animated about keeping the pipeline of decent thought compassionate thought open-hearted thought and rigorous and unforgiving thought both on the table at all times and not Adulcherating one to serve the other I don't want to see science abuse to oppress anybody and I don't want to see somebody's dime-stored concept of utopia infecting our ability to make sense of the world those are those are twin You know twin directives And this is this is what I'm excited about we need to get the world excited About curing disease. We need to get the world excited about cross pollinations of ideas Between different groups. We need to get the world excited about every group that is sort of marginalized Contains neurons that we are not accessing Right, and so you know for example Asian females make up about a quarter of the world's population and very few of the world's Nobel prizes We should be getting greedy about how do we get those Asian female brains Into into our stem labs So that we can have the fruits of their discoveries People can't hear this because they've settled on very cheap versions of progress It's time to get back to real progress not fake progress. How do we do that? I agree with everything you just said, but how do we do that? Honestly This is my third time on perhaps the biggest podcast in the world. I don't know maybe that's giving you a little bit too much credit It's not very far off We're doing that. We're trying to stand up and if people respond and you know you've given me courage to start a podcast I gotta tell you I did not want to do this might brought my producer Jesse Michaels here. I was a pain in the ass to this guy I did not return his phone calls. He tried to get me to sign contracts. I wouldn't look at them I've started with this turnkey podcast company called cast media. They put up with me for like eight or nine months where I dragged my heels I don't want to be famous. I don't want to be well known I know while I'm sort of well Well, it's time look so this is the crazy thing you want to get really nuts. Yes. It's time to leave Time to leave what this planet. Oh boy Listen, we can leave this plan. I got something right here. No Take you to another planet right now. He's joking federal agents Let me let me give you my argument where we going Well, we don't know that we can leave this planet. I love this planet I have a good time here. This is my favorite planet mine, too. I know But here's the real reason We started a clock around 1953 which is when we had the explosion at bikini in the first hydrogen bomb and When we figured out the double helix And I call this the twin nuclei problem it began in 1953 1953 We started a clock it was also the height of the McCarthy era We do not have the wisdom To be able to fuse nuclei We don't have the wisdom to be able to investigate the cell. It's too much power So our wisdom may have increased slightly Maybe it didn't I don't know but our power is now godlike. So our Biological intelligence what our minds are capable of Has not it's been surpassed by our intellectual achievements in terms of our our Technological innovation these things which while complicated Um Sccumb to our intellect right right there much simpler than we ever imagined To be able to create something that normally happens in the sun On an island in the Pacific Or to be able to rewrite a cell the way Craig Venter did you know synthetic biology We are now gods but for the wisdom And We are now gods but for the wisdom Should be a meme pick me Picture you You're now god. Let's keep for the world That's gonna take up the difference Do not write now I know let's not focus. Okay. Okay So that started this clock and The world's most serious human beings should be working on the twin nuclei problem What do we do with new godlike powers given our history of conflict our history of envy our history of Madness right because we succumb regularly. We are you know I was born 20 years after the end of world war two and we all know what really happened there I mean we're nuts We're absolutely not capable of this level of responsibility And so the question that we have is do we believe that we have a long-term solution in terms of increasing our wisdom? We should definitely try it everybody believes that should work on that problem but If we don't think that we have the wisdom to live like this We we don't know how much time we have left, but it's probably not 100 I mean it's probably maybe a few hundred years tops because sooner or later you're gonna have Putin like or Trump like People I mean, I'm sorry. I would have a very deep antipathy towards Donald Trump He's not temperamentally fit To have the secrets of theoretical physics at his fingertips he just isn't and It's imperative to me that he not be elected in 2020 and that the democratic party wake up and get rid of its crazy fringe So that we can buy some time and it's nice if Elon thinks we can go to Mars Maybe that will allow a small number of us to diversify in case we do something really dumb to the planet But if human beings are to continue and we are to continue evolving We need to spread out There are three rocks that are inhabitable. There's the earth. There's the moon And there's Mars and the moon has nothing There Mars is pretty uninteresting to be in blunt. I know that it's beautiful They'll be send back these pictures and we've got this one gorgeous planet that we are clearly not smart enough to steward We're still having idiotic climate change debates I mean even if even if climate science is somewhat junkified We should still be taking climate super seriously because we don't know what we're doing It's such a complicated non-linear system and we're not even capable of focusing. You know like two seconds later I'll be watching the Kardashians for sure So what is the answer? Well in my opinion We got to increase the number of possible places we can go beyond three To say nothing of space stations because that's not realistic. None of these things make sense So the first place that you have to get to is we're really deeply screwed and not because of apocalyptic cult-like reasons Just because of science Just because of 1953 So the only opportunity is if we can break the Einsteinian speed limit so far as I know Or we can upload and to silicon or we can reboot from target grades like none of these answers are good So what I've been toying with since I was 19 was What is the theory beyond Einstein? And that's the thing and I've been most uncomfortable talking about Although I've been talking about it more I gave these lectures in 2013 and in May of 2013 in Oxford And I was appalled by the way in which the world's physics community responded I mean I was very scared. I'm not a physicist I don't claim to be but I felt like I tried to present what I hoped was a path forward given that the field was completely stalled out And this is it physics and biology led us into the Valley of Death And it's now time to try to get out and people No, please, thank you. So What is my responsibility in terms of the portal? Um What I'm going to try to do with this podcast is gain the courage To share whatever ideas I've had um About breaking The speed limit in the form of I don't think I have the wisdom to Figure out what it means but at least I have a hope of trying to Write the fundamental rules to figure out our source code and that was that was the plan which is What is this place? What is the source code for reality? Now what was the response to the physics to the physics from the physicist that you found Paul in well There were two articles that appeared in the Guardian a newspaper or website that Talked breathlessly about what I had done or what I might have done To call attention to the lectures that I was giving so these were the special Simone lectures by Richard Dawkins successor Marcus DeSotoi Who is a colleague of mine from way back? Who found me in New York City? I think in 2011 2012 or something like that working on This theory I called geometric unity and I was very uncomfortable I hadn't really told anybody that I was working on this theory for all these years because it's a crazy You know there's certain stories that you find in theoretical physics Which are kind of the precursor to madness Where you know somebody thinks that they've solved Some big problem and they're working in secret You know this sort of what happened with Andrew Wiles and Fermat's last theorem Which was a really interesting story because his first proof of Fermat's last theorem I think was unfixable So he announced a proof that he had solved like this most famous problem in mathematics And he didn't have a proof And then bizarrely he was under such pressure that he found another proof And actually pulled it off so it's like you know hats off to him It's one of the craziest stories But he was working in secret for seven years and nobody knew what he was doing So sometimes these stories work out But he was a professor at Princeton and very highly regarded and he had sort of husbanded seven years worth of work to pretend that he was releasing papers when he was actually secretly doing this thing that would have made him a madman In some sense And so this is what I was trying to do is I was not able to work on these issues In the string theory community because the string theory community was possessed of this belief that they had found the answer back in the 80s In 1984 they had what they thought was a revolution And the math community doesn't think in these terms Like both of these are very conservative communities historically And very focused on following the leadership of the top people unless there's a revolution And so I started working on a different idea to unify the two branches of physics That appear to be incompatible That was different than the string theory idea And different than the loop quantum gravity idea or any of the other And your main motivation was to do this to try to figure out a more advanced version of space travel? Well, it wasn't space travel. It was we need the source code like it's It might be safer to go further Once you've unlocked Once you've unlocked nuclear fusion You're pretty much as screwed as you need to be So then the issue is Okay, we know that we're pretty I'm pretty sure that Einstein's theory is not final Because you get these singularities which I don't associate with ultimate equations So the black hole singularity called the Schwartz Chilts at singularity Or the initial singularity that we associate with the Big Bang And like the Friedman Robertson Walker space times Are signs to me that these equations are incomplete But the big problem with Einstein is that Einstein's work Was so fundamental That it's like you can't get in under the ground floor of Einstein You begin a physics seminar and you're already immediately in his world You say let x be a space-time manifold boom You're already in relativity So it's almost impossible to figure out a way To get in at a deeper level of physics than Einstein's theory And we know that we have to recover Einstein's theory because that's been proven You know to work in all sorts of situations and then the same thing with quantum field there Which is why I talked about you know the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron So my idea was That only since the 1970s have we known that particle theory was based on geometry We knew that Einstein's theory. Einstein used geometry to develop his theory. It was the language of relativity called Ramani in geometry But many years later we found out that Boer's sort of quantum and Planck's quantum and Einstein's quantum as well Was based on a different geometry of this guy Charles Aerosmott was an alsace in geometer worked with Cartan And that geometry was figured out at Stony Brook in New York by Jim Simons who became the world's greatest hedge fund manager And C.N. Yang who's arguably number one and number two greatest living theoretical physicist he's now in his 90s And they figured out that the secret language of particle theory was also geometry but a different geometry And so geometric unity is simply the idea that it's not a fight between Einstein and Boer It's the two parents Riemann on whose work Einstein based relativity And Charles Aerosmott with this gauge theoretic stuff that we did in the time before this Which in fact empowers particle theory And so when do those two geometries unify two different geometric theories and Well, I found that in general they don't unify in a way that you want you don't have the ability to do Einsteinian Tensor analysis where you compress something called the Riemann curvature tensor and The gauge stuff where you do this gauge symmetry that we were talking about Because gauge symmetry ruins the ability to compress the Einstein tensor never mind what that means But in one or two rare circumstances you can actually combine the two geometries And that's where I think we are and so partially what the part purpose of the portal podcast is is to use You know, I'll just sort of tear the mask off a little bit We've been talking about lots of interesting things about social justice about mathematics about wonder about psychedelics and Trying to be decent human beings to each other and to set an example and I think it's been partially a success and partially a failure But what I'm trying to do is to gain the courage to talk about what these ideas are And the worst comes to worse is that I wasted a lot of my life on a crazy theory that Turned out not to be true. What was the response though? Like how did the physicist react and what was was Disappointed about it so the articles engendered a In immune reaction Immune yeah, it's an immune response. Okay. Okay, so somebody's giving a lecture and now how many times have we heard before the next Einstein Yada Yada Yada and I totally understand this. It's a reasonable reaction Like Sean Carroll had this reaction. He referred to me as a backyard Einstein and his wife and Tim twice today Yeah, he's on my mind his wife wrote this amazing article in Scientific American called dear guardian. You've been played Now, she's not a physicist, but she has access to Sean's brain and she writes on physics and Then there was this whole thing where the new scientist said, okay, this guy Claimed to give this lecture in the physics department, but he hasn't written a paper and he didn't tell the physicist So it was a sneak attack. Well, of course that wasn't true. There there was announcement of the talk I stayed in England and I gave the talk once more And then a final time a week later and by that point All sorts of people from Cambridge and Oxford came to the talk as it was a worldwide topic of discussion what the hell's going on and I gave a two-hour talk Consider that nobody But the outside of theoretical physics gives talks on physics. It's like North Korea They don't get many visitors right to the extent that they get visitors. They do get visitors From mathematics, but in general mathematicians don't take an interest in the real physical world and to be blunt about it I don't think that visitors. To the extent that they get visitors, they do get visitors from mathematics, but in general mathematicians don't take an interest in the real physical world. And to be blunt about it, I don't think that the string theorists are very focused on the real physical world either. They've been playing with toy models for nearly 40 years. So a lot of it was playing out in the press. And the new scientist had to retract. They said, no, what we wrote wasn't true. They did publicize the talk. And then there was an article they sent a reporter to the final talk that I gave. And the reporter did not know any physics. So I spent the morning with this person teaching him what the Dirac equation was, like a very fundamental thing. The question came up in the talk about is your model anomaly free? And my model has a property called non-chirality, which is the difference between left right asymmetric models are called chiral and left right symmetric models are called non-chiral. So my model is non-chiral, but the chiral nature of the universe is supposed to emerge from it. And I was asked questions that didn't seem to make sense, which is you can't have a chiral anomaly in a non-chiral model. And the person in the reporter picked up on this and didn't really get it. So there was like a flurry of activity with a big WTF. And if you ask me, by the time I gave the second lecture, people weren't laughing. It was a serious lecture. People heard that it wasn't like somebody come up with their own language and their own, written in crayon and some indecipherable thing. It was written in the normal language. But I hadn't written a paper. And papers are very much the stock and trade of that community. So I would say that the community settled on a rubric, which is paper or it didn't happen. In other words, put up or shut up, give us a paper. I had written something. But because my trajectory through this, through math and physics was very unusual, I have a very low trust of the academic community. I support them as you can tell, you know, I'm extolling the virtues of science. But I was subjected to a situation in graduate school where I had, I'm probably the only person you've ever met with a PhD who was not allowed to attend his own thesis defense. Why is that? I don't know. What was your thesis? It was on self-dual equations not being as peculiar to dimension four as was claimed. But I had a situation in which the thesis when I, when I had entered grad school was something that you would present to the world. And by the time I was trying to leave, it was a closed door affair where the department would appoint the person for you. And I was in the unusual position of not having a thesis advisor. So there's some very fraught story. One thing you'll find is that graduate school for some sub class of people becomes an extremely fraught experience where the power of a department not to grant you a degree or not to help you get a job or to expel you becomes very contentious. Right? And that was the situation. So I got into a very contentious situation. But there was no explanation of why it was so contentious. We can talk about it on another podcast. But I was in a very low-trust situation with with Harvard and with the standard community. And so when work that I had done that was rejected for my thesis was discovered by others in 1994 and revolutionized topological gauge theory. I became very sort of sullen and angry and withdrawn because my department knew that I had put forward the same equations that became revolutionary in mathematical gauge theory. Did you revisit it with them? There was a seminar where a guy named David Kajdon, who I very much admire, the person who had been my advisor, I don't want to name names, had given a seminar saying all of gauge theory has been revolutionized, old gauge theory is dead, and there is a new gauge theory. And David Kajdon, who I will name, said I was in the back center row. I think I was picking my nose actually. And he said, didn't we have a student who told us to look at these equations? And suddenly the whole room turned around and looked at me. I think this is in room 507 of the Harvard Science Center. And it's just like, try to imagine you're an anonymous person in a lecture and suddenly everyone is staring at you and your fingers and your nose. And that was the moment. And I think I mumbled something just to get out of it. But I was angry. I was angry that they had taken away my agency. I would, you know, better not to give me a PhD. Better just to say, look, we're going to go short you. Screw off. You don't get a PhD. And then if I end up doing something, screw you. That would have been a better outcome. So instead, I got a PhD through a very tortuous situation. And I came to give up on academics. I don't think that there are fair system. I don't think that it's open-minded. I don't think that they welcome all sorts of different belief structures, which are capable of producing innovations. So, you know, from my money, I've been very vocal about this. I've written articles on edge.org. And I've said theoretical physics is stalled. And you've been claiming that you're going to ship strength, strength theory. And since 1984, well, where is it? And it's always, you know, end years away. Now, what was the premise of Sean Carroll's wife's article that they got played? Well, Jamie, can you bring it up? I had broken the rules. The rules. Yeah. You're supposed to submit a paper. The paper's supposed to be reviewed. It's supposed to appear in a journal. You're not supposed to be doing this from mathematics. You don't have training as a physicist. This is a hoax. But it's on a hoax. Well, I don't know. I mean, if it is a hoax, it's on me. Clearly not a hoax. You're not hoaxing anyone. I'm not trying to. So I don't understand. I don't understand. Because the action. Okay. Imagine that you're the, you're the Princeton physics department. You probably have a corkboard on the wall called the crank, the crank board. And every week somebody writes to you and says, I figured out perpetual motion. I have a laser transport device. Right? And so everybody is concerned and frightened that their, their time is going to be wasted by lunatics. Now, I both fit the lunatic profile and don't fit the lunatic profile on the lunatic side. I'm outside of the system. I haven't kept up. I'm not particularly mathematically minded. I mean, in fact, I'm sort of a B math student for my school. So it's kind of a, I'm the only person I know with my profile with a PhD in math. And on the non lunatic side, I mean, look, you've been listening to my crazy ideas for a while. And they're all over the world. I have lots of heterodox ideas. I don't think that they're taken as being insane. And I don't think this isn't saying it's been looked at by enough people to say, we'll, until you actually write it down very cleanly, clearly we can't fully evaluate. But it's a, it's a gamble. And the worst thing that can happen is that I have something that looks like a final theory that turns out not to be, are you going to write it out? It's already mostly written up. I'm in a different phase. I felt that I got rolled in an alley. So here's, here's the big, here's the big reveal. Okay. It's going to be a lot harder to roll me. I can roll myself. I can screw this thing up just fine by myself. But the opportunity to take me into a quiet corner and make something disappear or to hand the credit to somebody else is going to be a lot harder to do. It's not going to happen. Do you find it? Do your guardian you've been played? I love when they use like contemporary slime. It's so bitchy. It's so bitchy. Yeah. Are you like say, bitchy when it's a girl? What? When a girl writes it. I don't, I don't care. I think. I mean, look, it's only like the future of the number of people who have been privately asking me about the recent guardian article and a company on op ed by Oxford mathematician Marcos Duce how do you say it? So to Marcus Ducetoi Ducetoi, Gushing over support of supposedly revolutionary you new unified theory of physics by a man who officially left academia 20 years ago. Or as I've taken to calling it, the Eric Weinstein's amazing new theory that solves everything puzzling conundrum in theoretical physics. Only he hasn't written an actual, but all these are capital letters. That's why I'm saying it this way. It's capital S and actual paper yet. So physicists can't check all those hard mathematical details, but trust us, it's going to be awesome. Well, that's super bitchy. You let me say it. Yeah, I can say it. I can say what other fuck I want. A ham with a period. First a couple caveats. I've met Weinstein. He's a nice guy. He's wicked smart. This is a stupid article. Because you know better. Well, it's just the way it's written. It's it's, uh, it's caddy. Yeah. It's for clear. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But we could go. She's playing, she's playing in for sir. Yes. You broke the rules. Yes. We know why you broke the rules. There's fame and fortune for you. And you think that's what it is. Well, or your delusional. What's her motivation for writing this article? Oh, that's what's weird. Well, she's a physics. Look, she comes from, um, I think she's a protege of Casey Cole, the great physics writer from who's not a physicist. In her defense. Yeah. Do you feel that she felt this honestly and that this was problematic in her eyes that you were entering into this field that you had not written a paper. And you had left academia 20 years ago. And that she was like, Oh, listen, I'm, this is all nonsense. Okay. I'm going to put a stop to this nonsense. And I'm going to do it with sort of contemporary language and slang. I don't like the bitchiness, but it's, I understand the motivation. Look, I think the bitchiness is to make the article more entertaining and more, um, it's part of his or both part of her style as a writer. Okay. Not actually met her as she says. And I, I had a very high and positive impression of her. So why do you think she wrote this without discussing it? You know, look, Sean is also one of these people who's trying to enforce the rules. He didn't have the easiest time. I think he didn't get tenure at Caltech. He's kind of a stickler for reality. He's on the one hand talking total nonsense about Boltzmann brains and thought experiments, which is what I associate with desperation physics. On the other hand, he's kind of this rigorous, um, rationalist thinker who's in, you know, prominent atheist. So he's a complicated guy. He's a great explainer. Uh, he's got his own sort of economic incentives that he's one of the very few people who sort of, a voice of physics to the world. And they, you know, operate in some sense as a couple. And there's a richness to this, like, you know, my, my point isn't to run them down and order boost them up. It's just people are playing out their roles. And ever anyone has a sentence that consists of one word and that word is a ham. Yeah. Yeah. It's I did not enjoy their article by him. Well, but look, yeah, but she's trying to throw me a bone. He's wicked smart. He's a nice guy. But he's delusional. Yeah. He's delusional. And to the extent that I've been delusional before, I'm about the only person in the US who's against high-skilled immigration because people think why should we keep out the best in the brightest? That's complicated story. Before the financial crisis, I was saying mortgage-backed securities may blow up the world. People are like, are you kidding? It's the great moderation. We've banished volatility. People have a chance to know me now. They know that I can get way out. Right? Right. I said, this is the beginning. I get way out there. Yeah. Okay. I think Elon Musk is totally wrong about going to Mars. Mars is not going to save us. And maybe going to the stars isn't going to save us. Maybe the AI will follow us. There you have to get it. But I'm not going to take this line down. We're in a desperate situation. And if you're not trying, here's the clear thing. We know what nuclear weapons look like in the fusion air. If we aren't trying to get off this planet before people are unleashing gene drives and weaponized anthrax, and who knows what the hell people are going to get up to as the power of biology and the power of physics keeps going in the power of information, all right, at least I'm trying. I think I'm doing a damn site better than trying, but assume that I fail completely. How crazy is it that we're not trying to take our arms against our new sea of troubles? It's time to rush the cockpit. We've got to get Trump out of office. We've got to restore sanity to our sense-making. We need newspapers. We need fact-checkers. What is particularly problematic about Trump being in office? That man has nuclear capabilities and I have zero confidence in his decision-making. When people imagine that I'm a Trump supporter after I've called him an existential risk, you know, and my boss and good friend Peter Thiel was a supporter of Trump in the last election. I'm taking a huge risk in how much I love this guy, Peter Thiel, and how much he loves me, because I'm putting the employer employee relationship at risk. People say, okay, you're just a Peter Thiel tool. Nobody's going to take that kind of risk unless they have real faith in their friend. I work for a friend. I'm in a real friend. A person who doesn't cut and run when trouble starts. I totally disagree with Peter. I have come to understand that Trump, I thought people would understand that Trump danger and that the Democratic Party would reevaluate their situation, but they didn't. They tripled and quadrupled down, and that is alarming. And so that's something I very much got wrong about Trump. Is that even Trump wasn't enough of a message to let people know. But Trump cannot have the nuclear codes because he's not a skilled or regular enough player. He's going to accomplish a lot. One of the things I said before the election is he might be the best and worst of presidents. He might get us a North Korea deal because they're going to look at him and say, this guy's nuts. Who knows what he would do? But we, we, the technical community created this problem and we're abdicating our responsibility by worrying about our egos, by worrying about our reputations. I am abdicating. I should have turned this theory over to the theoretical physics community years ago, even if they screwed me over. And I'm too petty and egotistical to want to give up on it. I watch them take credit for things that weren't, a sign credit. I don't like the way they work. The theoretical physics community is our most important community in the world. And it is also a very unpleasant community. And we need to fund them and we need to let them play their dangerous boys for the most part. They're our women. But in general, they're very unpleasant men. They have been somewhat cowed. They are not the same cowboys they used to be because they've been failing for 40 years. I should be sharing stuff. I should be writing things down. I have not had the courage to do it. And if I really have the courage of my convictions, I should share this and see what happens. But one thing is I don't know if it could be weaponized. As soon as it's right, you know, I have this decision tree. As soon as wrong, I've got to ego my face. It's okay. I'll be okay. I worry much more about if it's right. The two things that can go wrong if it's right is one that it could be weaponized before it becomes useful and two is that there's no solution in it. Maybe we actually are stuck in this place. We never get to go to the stars. We can look at exoplanets and dream, but we're stuck here. Until we change human behavior, isn't a trip to the stars just a relocation of our own thought? Yeah. We're kicking the we're kicking the but we need time, man. We need time. We have not gotten to the point where we don't even feel the danger we're in. We are in so much danger and we haven't had almost anything happened since 1945 at the scale of World War II. And so we've got magical thinking between our ears where we think it can't happen here. You know, this is the thing that makes me so fucking furious about screwing around with Europeans and sovereignty, which is Europe is a dangerous place. Europe is historically a dangerous place. It's been a place for years where college students can go and take in the sights, but it's a dangerous ethnic cauldron and Jews know this better than anyone. And the one thing that the far left and the far right agree on is Jews and it's not in a good way. All right. So it is very important. We are the canaries in the coal mine. We feel this stuff early and things are things are coming apart. The physical world, the world of commerce, the world of like structural engineering and building permits is still okay so far. But the intellectual world that sort of wraps that keeps it in check is coming on glued. And quite frankly, I don't want to go through that again. We cannot afford another World War II because World War II won't look like World War II. Oh, we're three. Yeah. And I don't know, maybe it'll look like information warfare. Maybe it won't look like anything like a war that we've seen before. But you know, the problem is Joe is that I've got some sort of wildly tattooed martial artist across from me. I'm some sort of guy who dropped out of academics years ago and doesn't have a published paper in this area. And I really literally think that maybe it comes down to you and me. Maybe we use this podcast and some crazy-ass differential geometry to at least make a go of it. At least at the minimum excite somebody to think maybe it's possible to make progress. Well, what's interesting about that is what you've said is reaching an astonishing number of years. That's nice. This is why I pushed out, look, I've been responsible about this up until now. This is my first really irresponsible podcast. Why is it irresponsible? No, I don't know. Maybe it's egotistical. Maybe I shouldn't be talking about this. I guarantee you there are going to be a lot of people in physics departments are going to be pissed off when this hits. Yeah, but it's your thoughts. There's nothing irresponsible about your thoughts. You have to appreciate that when you're working as hard as these guys have, and these guys have been slogging in the salt mines for forever with no progress of the type I mean since the early 70s. It's pretty galling. It's pretty galling to hear somebody talking like this who has the luxury of an invite to this podcast with no vetting, with nothing behind him other than the hope that maybe he's done something that's interesting. I've never spoken about this. I have a recording for example of the lecture that I did at Oxford, which I chose not to release. It was so unpleasant, the caddiness, the biciness, the nastiness, the undercutting, the idea that this came down to ego or fame. I guarantee you the thing that I really like least about what I'm about to do with this podcast is fame. I think fame is a bad deal. You have to deal with this. You don't want to say what your location is, where you're going to be. People react all day long. People say, can you get me into Joe Rogan? Can you connect me with Joe Rogan? Joe Rogan? Joe Rogan? It's constant. I get two to three requests a week. I don't want it. I've had a wonderful 53 years without being very well-known, and if this doesn't work out, I'll go back to being very well, not very well-known. My greater fears is that maybe it will work. Then the thing that I really care about is does it help? Does it buy us time? Can we get off the planet? Is there anything we can do if we actually know the source code? John Brockman runs this thing called edge.org. Every year he asked a question to 200 scientists. Finally, he got tired of asking the annual question. He said, okay, 20 years is enough. The last question is what is the final question? Jamie, could I ask you to bring up edge.org and my name and my answer must have been 2018. It's interesting because I kept putting stuff out in edge. For example, I was very worried about professional wrestling, pre-saging in election. I did an article on K-Fabe, which is the system of lies that undergirds wrestling. I did one on Bitcoin called Go Virtual Young Man. Nobody ever paid attention to my series of answers to the edge question. This is the last question. Something unprecedented happened when we finally learned our own source code. Nobody cared. This is the question that obsesses me. This is when I say I've left this planet. This is what I'm focused on. What happens if we actually figure out where we are, where this place is? What are we doing? Who are we? What built this? And who acts on that information once we do figure it out? What steps are taking? I don't know. It's a whether or not the consequences of those steps are ever really fully. You know, I always thought out. I always tried to talk to somebody like government or the intelligence services. I don't know whether I have something. Maybe I do. Maybe I don't. But wouldn't you guys want to know as a schedule? Never was able to get anybody interested. I went through graduate school on the Office of Naval Research's top grant for graduate study. And I always thought they would check in with me, but they never have. So like the federal government paid for my postdoc and the military paid for my graduate education and Harvard doesn't care and they don't. Nobody cares. Nobody believes that anything is possible, which is the really interesting part. What do you mean by not nobody believes anything is a part? You mean really astronomical breakthroughs? Yeah. Like we all know, we're waiting to see what Tim Cook is going to do for the next iPhone. Will Elon get to Mars? Does anyone actually care about Mars? I was there for the moon landings. And let me tell you, we were bored of the moon by the time we left. It's a very weird thing to say, but that's something I was born in 1965. We were bored. Well, my perception of the whole Mars thing, so it's a shittiest location that we can get to. Yeah, it's a bad name for us. If the best location that we can get to, that's done this one. Well, yeah, but it's also like we have spots on an earth at Suck. Yeah, we don't even go there. We don't even go there. But like at least, you know, hats off to Elon that he at least inspires people by he he followed up the scent when we gave up on progress. Right. So my point is, we're not nobody thinks this is going to work. I can say it on the show. It can generate a little bit of flurry of activity. We'll die down within a week. We're going to go back to, you know, who got milkshake. Right. And we're going to want to know, is Tulsi gaining on Andrew? You know, what about Biden? Can the center hold? Well, the fringe come in, we're just constantly distracted. And at least this is going to be entertaining. We are at three hours and three and a half hours. See, last time we almost got to four hours. I'm happy to end it. If people will go to the portal, the portal with Eric Weinstein on Apple, Spotify, Spotify, and popular clients for podcast. I'm sure they will. This is going to be an interesting one. I'm really curious to see what kind of blowback this one's going to go. Well, two things, Joe. One, you along with Sam and my brother really encouraged me to do this. So I'm holding you personally responsible for whatever goes wrong. The second thing is, I really just, I have such a positive feeling about what you've done in terms of empowering people. Like it really touched me that when my brother was shit out of luck, you did a bunch of shows with him and helped him get to a safe place. And I just want to say that there is like an aspect we keep talking about, is there any use for men whatsoever? And standing up in a situation in which you can take a fair amount of golf, you can take a lot of heat. You said this thing to me that was really amazing, which is that this is a golden age of comedy. And my interpretation was that there was a period of time where nobody could figure out how to tell a joke on a college campus. And our best comedians have figured out how to be compassionate enough and kind enough and touch the things that are animating us and making us uncomfortable. And that that's what you're a part of. And so I view you as like a very delicate neurosurgeon. I watched the evolution, for example, of your jokes about professional wrestling being gay. No, seriously, stay with me. Joe. I watched that. It was always funny, but it got better and better and better. And the idea that that could be told in a way that you'd be totally comfortable with your gay friend or lover right next to you laughing your ass off taught me a lot about the power of just radiating decency that together with analytic thought. And it's a bit of a template. I don't know that I have the skill to pull this off. But you've been in inspiration. I just want to say thank you for having me back on the program. My pleasure, my friend. It's always a pleasure. Thank you. Thank you. Bye everybody. That was fucked up.