Oh, good. See ya! Did you make it back? Back right. Back to your hotel. Where? How did that happen? Hmm. I left it blast ice in the cold. I just, uh, hitchhike... It's a nice person. Did you do shirts? No. Oh, I know that name. Right there, I know that's gonna turn anywhere. Who is that? Right for it. How did you know that? Can I plug with him? I don't see his hair. We've never done anything in here before. This is actually our dining room table, as you know. You're a dinner year last night. Yeah. And, um... You cleared a bunch of stuff out there, right? We just moved the chairs out, but we actually, I mean, this is our family dining room. Uh, so... And I just thought I don't want to be in a studio anymore. Yeah. Studios. Right there. Studios right there. It's like tiny and there's something... I've been in it my whole life. All right. I just gotta ask you about this. This is like, thank you for dinner last night, by the way. Thank you. That was amazing. That was really special. I don't know how you got home. It was like that was pretty cool. Not alright. Lexi, you got me right. Oh, you're wandering around in a t-shirt in the freezing cold. Okay. This is just... Okay. So I asked him to pull a bunch of news stories. I've been a little bit out of it. Uh, this is from the Guardian. Scientists have created a vaccine that has the potential to protect against a broad range of coronaviruses, including varieties not yet known about. The experimental shot, which has been tested in mice. So it's a vaccine that doesn't protect you against anything specific, but just against kind of like everything that might happen to you. Supposedly. Yeah. Just leaving the science aside, but it's a pure kind of like marketing question. If you're in the, I'm going to see who makes this, I guess they're all the same, but some company makes this. If you're the company making this, do you really think people are going to be up at this point for a vaccine that just has no real purpose, but just like kind of for the sake of a vaccine because it's today? Yeah, today. No. I don't think so. Do you think a single person will buy that? Yeah, for sure. That doesn't mean people. There's so much fear still. I mean people, many people are scared still. I think there's a swath of population. There's still people who drive around and masks. Yeah. No, that's true. And I'm, I try not to be judgmental because I think, of course, I'm very judgmental. I think they're mentally ill, but then I feel, you know, I've known a lot of friends, family members, mentally ill. So I try to think, you know, I should feel compassion for them. I have a lot more compassion for them actually. Yeah. And empathy. And I've been strong against the backs, against mandates, against lockdowns, against the course, all of it. I think the last few months I've been looking at things a little bit differently. And I think it's time for a lot of us to maybe adjust some of the approach that we're doing. I mean, it obviously hasn't worked. We've been trying to wake people up, I think, with the studies that are out there now exactly with all the time, with the articles, with the change in stances by everybody from Chris Cuomo on down who have either had vaccine injuries or side effects or just look at things differently. And it's caused me to, I think, have a little bit more empathy and compassion for those people who had ton of fear, you know, thought they were doing the right thing for themselves, for their friends, for their families, and went through all the mass formations psychosis that we all did. Yes. That's right. With compassion and kindness that just come over to the side of being awake to what's going on. Because I think we all need to come to the grips that this could happen again. So how do we call these people forward to, like, in love and acceptance, not forgetting what happened, how we're treated, how we were canceled. I mean, everybody from yourself to me, the jot or mutual friends that we have, but like calling people forward to, like, step into the truth. And that there isn't shame and guilt on this side, which I think are side, you know, just ifiably at times because the way we're treated feels, it was like we need to kind of get some get back. I totally agree with you. But at some point, I was talking with Joe about this kind of off camera, Rogan, but like how do we kind of bring everybody back on the same side? Because this has been very divisive and everything in our culture now is so divisive. Yes. But how do we get people more aligned on the same page? And I think it's only with love and compassion, forgiveness. And, you know, I admit, I've been very combative about this because I was attacked personally a lot of times when you're attacked, you want to just fucking fight back. I have been to, I agree. Of course. But it hasn't really accomplished what I want to accomplish. Like in my mind, my ego is like, well, I'm going to be able to convince these people that they were wrong. And you throw the science back at them, you think, somehow that's going to matter. Like, people who talk about science all day actually care about science, not at all. Of course, there is no effect. How has it been for you? You know, because you were one of the first to talk about it all the time on Fox. And actually that's what made me tune in every night was like, what's talking to say. And like what, they didn't want me to do that. But like there was obviously some cancelization, some shaming, you know, I'm sure that may not have been why they let you go. But it wasn't, there was a lot of people who... It was this sign of disobedience. And by the way, I didn't want to be disobedient actually. I didn't want to fight it, but the facts at all. I never... But you had all the people that ended up going on a road. You had Robert Malone on there. You had a curse. You had Pierre Corrie. You had Peter McCullough. Right. I mean, all these people in the beginning. Right away. Because I just had a different standard. And the different standards as well. Of course. Yeah. I had a different understanding of science, which was that it's not a set of facts. It's a process. It's a way of thinking. Yeah. And... And it needs to be questioned. That's the whole part of the process. It's a set of candidates. It's an unending series of questions. We think we know this. How do we know? It's not so different from what journalism used to be, which is like a process of... It's a process. It's way of thinking. It's skepticism. Polite reasonable skepticism. It's rooted in reason though in the belief that we can get to the truth or closer to the truth using logic. And that was just a band in immediately. That was the tell for me. I know nothing about vaccines. I still don't really know much about vaccines. But I know a lot about people. And I saw people saying things like to shut up and do it because it's science. And I thought, well, that's the opposite of science. And I also got a very sinister vibe right away. And I just, I'm like, gut level. I was like, I don't know what this is. I'm not doing that. And there's my family. But the weird thing is that's why I so appreciate what you just said is I don't really know that many people who got faxed. I don't live in a vast world at all. My kind of people, given where I live and the people I like and how I spend my free time, like they're not people got the back. So I don't spend really any time with people who would defend that. And I think I need to think much more about it. And in realizing all of us live in our tiny, our own tiny little worlds and we think we're mainstream, but we're not. And, um, And through the algorithm, we're in an equity chain. And not clear. You know, across the store we're seeing. No, it's totally right. I, someone said me their name. It was you. Do you know anyone who didn't get the vax who's upset, he didn't get the vax. Yeah. Does anyone regret that decision? No. No, right. Not one person ever. But people who did get the vax really, which is why I love what you said. I think they do regret it. And I think that when you're doing something wrong, you're very defensive about it. I used to smoke cigarettes. And they tried to make me feel shame for smoking cigarettes. And I would always like smoke a cigarette and public, okay, I'm smoking a cigarette. Yeah. Because I sort of knew you shouldn't smoke cigarettes. Not good for you. But I got my hackles up. And I was more aggressive. Would you like a cigarette? Would your child like a cigarette? I mean, I, I'm sorry. Well, I'm not being that way. Because I knew what I was doing was wrong. And don't you feel like that's part of what's going on here? I think there's a, there's a big spot that's like that. There's definitely the other spot that goes, I did this because you told me to do this. And this was mandated. And now you're walking back all those things you said to me back then. Now there's some anger. So there's the whole population. It's like, I'm going to keep doing this. And I'm going to wear my mask and public. And I'm going to get another booster in your fucking face. Right. And then there's the other group that's like, I know I did this to keep my job, to like keep from being canceled, to keep you off my back. And now you're going to walk back and say you didn't say it was safe and effective. And you didn't say I wouldn't get or or I wouldn't acquire or transmit COVID. Like what do you mean? You're now you're changing history. That's the only reason I got it. You said this was the only way to be safe and there was no side effects. And that was all that's not both. So that was all stuff that was said. And there's videos out there you can check out. So there's there's that side of the population. And it's like, oh, the, hold the fuck on like you said all this stuff. Now you're walking this back. That's all I feel, you know? And then there's the other set that doesn't want to engage at all. They did it. And now has a lot of fear around it. A lot of shame around it. And so I think two of those three groups of people we can kind of like bring in, you know, there's compassion and kindness. There's compassion and kindness for the person that's still wearing a mask too. Oh, no, they're especially that person. And I can't relate to that type of fear. But I understand what it's like to be scared of things and just the fear to, to feel like you still have to do that. Like that's a really shitty place to live. So like showing compassion and kindness and it's easy to make fun of those type of people when you're on the way other side. But like what is that actually accomplished? If we want to come together more and look, I'm guilty on it at times for sure. But like, I'm tired of that. I don't want to be a part of that. I want to, I want to be a part of bringing people together. I so strongly agree with that. What was last time you saw a national leader trying to calm people down about anything ever? No. Yeah. I would love it if somebody in elected office or with a lot of influence nationally, we're to stand up and say, let's start with what we know. We're all going to die. Probably terrified in a loan. So that we know we're going there. So in light of that, why are we afraid of anything actually? Even that our fates are all sealed. Like, doesn't that liberate us? I think so. And I think that's a great place to be. You know, like when you step into this, you personally, when you stepped into this, this realm, you were a number one anchor at the number one show nightly and the stuff you were taking on and then the way that you were ousted there. And then you go to acts and you're the fucking, the interviews you're doing, the numbers you're going, then you go and interview Putin. Like, you're putting yourself in harm's way. Like, and I commend you just like I commend Bobby Kennedy because there's Bobby said recently, there's a lot worse things than dying. That's for sure. And I commend you as I commend Bobby, like there's something to stand up for what you believe in and doing your job. You don't own old school. I hate to say, but old school journalism where you're just talking to me. I am old. I am old, all of it. Unfortunately, like, but when you go into that, it's just a piggyback of what you just said. Like, I don't know this person personally, but I know that you must have a relationship with death where you realize that it's inevitable. And you know, I'd rather like live the way I want to live, stand for what I believe in, then like live in a fear that something could happen. I'd rather be a freeman in my grave. And so of course, yeah. And by the way, I have the massive advantage of having grown children. So when you have little kids at home, and I haven't had a very adventurous or dangerous life, but a couple times, one time in particular, I was pretty sure I was going to die and I had little kids at home. And I was in a plane crash. And I remember as it was going down, I was like, oh my gosh, you know, they're not going to thrive if I die. I mean, that really terrified me. And but now that they're grown, it's like, I am going to die. So this we know and I meditate on that a lot. I don't think it's morbid. I think it's liberating. And so then you realize like, what are you going to do to me? You know, I'm not afraid at all. And I mean that. You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network at Tucker Carlson Network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. You go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn when only an iPhone is running. Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. Why do the bad people have so much power? Because the bad people have all the money where they get all the money. You gave it to them by using their businesses, businesses that undermine this country and empower countries that don't seek the best for your family. Trust us, but there is an alternative. It's called public square. Public square is a network of over 75,000 independent businesses, small businesses in this country from which you can buy guns and ammo, fresh food, household goods, things you so you need to live. And when you buy them, you can feel certain that you are not doing a bad deed. You're doing a good deed that will make this a better and more independent country and make your kids future brighter public square dot com. We are honored. We are proud to have them as a sponsor of this show. So I the people who got the vaccine don't want to talk about it because they feel shame. I get it. The people who went along with it because they really believed it and now we're starting to realize, oh gosh, I was misled, but I can't admit that because it makes me look like an asshole week, like a follower. I understand that too. The people who called for the death of the unvaccinated, that's kind of the category that's harder for me to people like Jimmy Kimmel, for example, who famously said, and Sean pen as well. Oh, actually, and sort of like, but what would I like him last after hearing that? How do you treat people like that? Who wanted you to die? Dr. Fauci said that if hospitals get any more overcrowded, they're going to have to make some very tough choices about who gets an ICU. But that choice doesn't seem so tough to me. Vaccinated person having a heart attack. Yes, come right on him. We'll take care of you. Unvaccinated guy who gobbled horse goo, rest in peace, wheezing. You're... I think you've framed that in the right place. There's a great mash-up that Rogan talked about a few times where there was all these different shows, and it said, brought to you by Pfizer. Anderson Cooper, brought to you by Pfizer. It's an amazing. I think if they realize that it's all about the money. As you get into this, you read Bobby's book about the around any Fauci. You realize if you want to know what's really going on, not just in Big Pharma, but government is follow the money. Even in the NFL, there was a strong push. They sent stuges out to every team to try and enforce a vaccination level above 90% of every team with zero exemption, with zero informed consent. Just get this so that we look good because Big Pharma ad spend is humongous, not just on the late night shows. It's obviously influenced its Hollywood, the NFL. You have to understand who is actually. I was talking to a Navy SEAL friend of mine the other day who just got out of the Navy. Like professional athletes, I mean, these were the last people who needed the VACs. There was this intense push to make them all get the VACs. He left the Navy over it. He said most of his friends on the SEAL team he was on did not get the VACs. They got fake VACs cards because they knew they're very in touch with their physical health. Their SEALs, not so different from an NFL player. The NFL player's actually got the VACs. Do you have any idea? I don't have any idea. I'm sure that there was plenty who got fake cards. I feel like there's a base level of hesitancy around just the Big Pharma, Madison in general. When you're black. What is what the say it's like 70% black to their great credit a lot of black guys are like, no way. Based on the history, I think it's warranted. Totally. The human experience that went on in ridiculous things in some of those communities. If you know about what's gone on in foreign countries as well with some of these VACs scenes, predominantly places like Africa where people have been maimed and killed and paralyzed by these vaccines, many of which are not actually approved anymore in the states. Get sent over to Africa. Again, that's a reference to something that Bobby talked about in his book about Fauci. There's a lot of interesting chapters around that. On a base level, there was a lot of hesitancy. I don't think this is how I'm going to do this. But in the NFL, if you're working for a team, there was no choice. It was gift-vax. If you're a player, there was a choice. But if you chose not to get it, then you had a whole different set of rules. You had to wear a different colored arm band. You couldn't go to a restaurant. You couldn't spend time at somebody's house and one, three people were there. You couldn't go anywhere on the road. You had to test every single morning and not enter the building to get a negative back. That all went away once the playoffs happened because of course they didn't want to ruin the money at that point and all the testing went away. But there was a playoff exemption for the disease. Yeah. No, I got to ask. If they're making you wear a colored piece of clothing, since all of us grew up in the United States where World War II is the only historical event we learned about, forcing a small despised minority to identify itself with the yellow piece of clothing, it seems kind of resonant. Did anyone at the NFL say maybe not a good idea to force people to wear yellow arm bands if they weren't banged? I don't think they cared. I don't think they cared. I think they just wanted to hit their numbers. So we look like Nazis, but we don't care. I mean, when the students came and talked to us, I asked a lot of questions about like informed consent about testing, about liability. And he based in answering my questions, the president of the team ended the meeting. And to a ton of people from every level of the building came up afterwards and thanked me for asking the questions because many of them had no choice. I'm just get vaccinated, they're legit job. And there are certain coaches around the league who quit because they don't want to get vaccinated. I'm sure there may have been fake cards that they went around. I hope the whole thing has been a real interesting thought experiment in action around what people are willing to put up with, how you can control through fear and how obedient someone will be. Just remember what was going on in all the networks. You had the live death tolls that were taking up as you watched the TV. You had the live case numbers. You had just a fear mongering and then anybody that stood up to it was canceled. You mean all the Twitter files I got released when Elon took over that show, the collusion between the alphabet companies that control a lot of stuff. And the old people with acts were going on Facebook and the censorship and all these true experts in it. The raw bones of Peter McCulloughs and the bookories, all these different people who stood up the odd parents and who said, tried to just get the message out, were silence and censored. I think a person with any level of common sense would, even if they got the back so go, let's get out weird. Why are we silencing all the sending opinions? One in the history of the world has a censorship ever been done by the good guys. The good guys are the ones doing the censorship that actually doesn't happen. What do you scare the people to make up their own mind? And you see it on Bobby just released the video, 30 minute video about who he is that got censored by Facebook, which is just wild. I mean they're censoring the election stuff, which we know is gone on. Which you know the Cambridge Analytica, if you've watched that documentary about what happened. It is just pretty wild. The world that we live in where there's a, you know, the idea of even free speech and what is it. It's called into a question all the time. I just read an interesting book, there was a few years ago called The Coddling of the American Mind. And I basically talking about what's going on at college campuses, which we're seeing now all this, you know, this outrage and different things. It started post 2016 when Trump got elected when campuses feel like they need to create safe spaces because speech is violent. You know, certain types of rhetoric is actually violent. So we're vilifying the opinions now and we're canceling people based on what they believe. And that's slippery slope to go down whether you cancel somebody who's, you know, a super racist or, or, or, you know, against the opinion that you believe in. Like none of that actually works ignoring the shit you don't want to listen to or be a part of is one thing. But like picking and choosing what the sensor is a very slippery slope and you being in the media, you know how important is to, to get people in all different sides. Well, you can't have democracy if people can't say what they think. But democracy in general, and this country is found as a constitutional public. Which empowers the civil liberties, you know, democracy is always. Government unless people are not slaves unless they're free. But you know, so I mean, democracy always falls into, into fascism and, and tyranny and ultimately dictatorship. Unfortunately, I'm aware of that. And that's where we're at now. Why do you, oh, I'm aware. Why do you think that is? Why do you think, do my, and a lot of 19th century sort of free-minded people in Europe looked over at what was happening in the newly mentioned United States and said that's going to become a dictatorship ultimately. What do you think that happens? I think, I think there's a lot of reasons. I think entitlement is a big part of our society that has been, you know, a cancer for us because people believe that their opinion is more important than somebody else's opinion. You know, it was, it was weaponized against people who chose not to get the vaccine. I would say your freedom isn't more important than my fucking right to live. And, and, but I, I think that, I think ultimately it creates, it creates too many voices that, that are all about division. So there's, you know, a true democracy where every vote matters means that all of us are important to the whole. But when democracy spirals out of control and entitlement is the common thread through it, then nobody believes that European matters are much of their opinion. And it goes into a straight egotistical narcissistic view, which ultimately leads to some sort of fascism, some sort of tyrannical stuff. And when it's weaponized by the people in control who control the messaging and the media, control the food supply, control the water supply, you're, you're fighting a losing battle. It does feel that way. And it, it feels like, you know, both of us grew up in a country that was outwardly focused on it. It's enemies were outside its borders, right? I mean, I grew up during the Cold War. And I mean, it was the Soviet Union, you know, China, you know, pick a country we were at odds with. It does seem like all the energy that the federal government musters against its enemies being mustered against American citizens. Like, were the enemy? That's the way it feels to me. Yeah, I was at the Kentucky Derby this last weekend and they were swearing in some new recruits to, I think, join the army. And so they had them repeat, repeat after the, you know, sergeant or whatever it was who was swearing them in. And I just was stuck with that one line that protect against all enemies foreign and domestic. Yes. And I was like, and I said kind of domestic out loud because I was like, are we forgetting that one? Because there's a lot of domestic people in this country who actually don't love America, who actually don't want to see us thrive. I'm super patriotic. I think it's because my grandpa fought in the Second World War, it was a prisoner of war, and believed in freedom and fought for it and lost many friends using the Air Force who were at Pearl Harbor and, you know, was flew many bombing, bombing missions over, you know, to try and liberate the French and Polish people there over in Europe and almost lost his life for it and lost a lot of friends and believed in this country and the freedoms that he was willing to fight and die for. And so that's why I grew up in, you know, and I love this country and I want to see it thrive. And I think there's a lot of people that don't give a shit about it. You look at some of the policies. How does make any sense to have, you know, open borders, to have non-secure elections, to have, you know, the lobbying that we have in Washington where, you know, the pharmaceutical companies, the big ag, the big everything controls the policy of the policymakers. You have people in Congress and the Senate who, you know, go right from, you know, their duties to these huge, you know, huge profitable jobs or speaking engagements and pick a pick, you know, swath of the economy, whether it's banking or ag or military defense or whatever it is and everybody's in everybody's pocket and then you create these bills that have 40 different things in it and we're spending billions of dollars, you crane and billions of dollars, the Israel and billions of dollars to these college campuses. There's just a lot of issues right now that seem really un-American and I think there's a lot of red-blooded Americans. People are like, how can, you know, how can Trump have such support? Well, people are fed up with that and he speaks the rhetoric of like taking back, you know, making America great and stuff. My thing is he had four years to do it and didn't drain the swamp and whether he just got scared because of what he learned when he was in there. I think it's very plausible. But that's why I was interested when Bobby Cain, and said, would you think about being my running mate? And I said, are you serious? I'm a fucking football player. But I love this country and I'd love to be a part of, you know, bringing it back to what she used to be. There's a great, did you think about it? Oh, yeah, I thought about it. I definitely thought about it because I love Bobby and I just wanted to hear what he had to say about it. There's a great opening scene of one of my favorite shows called Newsroom. Do you ever see the opening scene with Jeff Daniels? Jeff Daniels is a, he's an anchor for a new station. And there's a panel. Yeah, great person. And he gets asked this question, why is America so star spangled great? You know what makes America so great? Somebody says like democracy and somebody says like freedom. And he's like, you know, he doesn't want to answer the question. He says, you know, the preamble of the Constitution is the greatest piece of written material ever. He's something like that. And then he goes, not I'm not going to let you off like that. You know, you got to give me an answer. And he goes into this like three minute monologue about America is not the greatest country anymore. He talked about the literacy rates and math rates and reading rates. And, you know, we spend more than the next 25 on the, you know, on, on defense spending. And, but at the end he said, but we, America's not the greatest country anymore, but it could be. And he talks about what he used to be. And we used to dream big dreams and, and it build incredible, you know, buildings and great technology and different things. It's like super patriotic. And that starts to whole show out where he gets kind of canceled for this or he gets put on display like, oh my God, like this guy is willing to like tackle some of the big, the big issues in this country and like keep it real. And I think that's what that that resonate with me because I'm like, yes, like what used to make America great? Like how can we get back to that? And that's why I love people will understand up for what they believe in like yourself. And, and the stuff you would talk about on your show was, was, yeah, but that's what would be. No, nobody else is doing that though. You know, yeah, but that's how they're cow, there's cow town to, well, yeah, I get it. The work country of Canada. That's how the people are. No, no, nobody else is doing that though. Yeah, but that's how they're cow-town. They're cow-town too. Yeah, I get it. But we're a country of cowards now. People are not willing to stand up to people that are in charge. Well, I know many people. And I have such contempt for them. I mean, they're not even good at fascism. That's, I guess, my final analysis. What was it for you? You're just like, fuck it. Like, I'm going to say what I want to say. Were you always like that? It was just so good. Yeah, I've always been that way. But that had to be something were you like, okay. Could you talk to my JFK? And the CIA being part of the... Well, I did not. We were talking about this outside in dinner, which was so interesting. I mean, you're a professional athlete. This is not your day job. No. It is my day job. I lived in Washington for 35 years. And I didn't really... I mean, I had lots of opinions, all kinds of opinions, but they were sort of aligned with the political party. And I didn't ever question any of the basic assumptions that I had. You know, people would say, oh, Roosevelt knew that the Japanese were going to attack Oahu in December of 1941. I was like, you must be crazy. Well, it turns out that's true. Yeah. It was a Senate inquiry into it during the war that suggested that strongly because it's real. That and a lot of other things. But it took me a long time to even ask those questions. And when I did, I was like, well, then I had to leave the city. moved out because I was so shocked by it and so distressed by it. But you were saying that... I mean, the real question is not how did I come to that. I mean, I was marinating in that world my whole life. Why did it take me so long as the real question? But how did you run an athletic track? How did you come to these conclusions? That's the more unusual. Well, I think I was... It was a number of things. I always wanted to question what I believe because I feel like it could strengthen that. And although that wasn't maybe the thought process growing up in the church, there was a lot to just believe this and have faith. Don't ever question it. If you question it, that's doubt and doubt is a sin. But I was like, I don't know. I kind of want to question this so I can have it confirmed. Okay. Can I just point out that on the cross as he was being tortured to death, Jesus said, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Jesus said that. So the idea... Yeah, it's a doubt. He had some doubt. Yeah. On the cross. But I got into... So I think you're allowed to ask questions and have more? Well, yeah. But yeah, I kind of gave myself that permission when I was younger. But I did a report myself in a high school on JFK. And I was just kind of super fascinated by his charisma and the Kennedy family in general. Yes. And then his death. And what little I knew about it. And I talked to some people that maybe didn't believe the Warren Commission or the official narrative. So I did a report on it. It was more on JFK because I think we had to pick the influential person from history to report on. So I picked JFK. And in high school. In high school. And back then with very limited internet access, I did a lot of research in the library and read a lot of things rather Warren Commission, a decent amount of it, the Warren Report. And I was like, there's some bullshit in here. This is some makes sense. You tell me this magic bullet from this guy went boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. And then they just happened to find it in the hospital a certain spot. I was like, that doesn't sound right. So that kind of got me into questioning things, conspiracies for sure, questioning things. I've seen some really interesting UAP phenomenons in the sky. I've talked about it. It's something that you are fascinated by. At the time, I also found a way to see those a brutal film, which was very fascinating as well, even though super grainy. And that kind of got me into questioning things. And then there's been a lot of really interesting things that have happened over the years. My grandfather though, he, you know, I didn't get to know him that well, but I do know that he always questioned and believed that Roosevelt knew about the Japanese coming. And that always stuck with him because he, you know, he was super patriotic. And another one of my heroes, Pat Tillman, who left the NFL to join the army. You know, his death is very suspicious as well. And that not the fact we know that he was killed by friendly fire, but the way they handled his body afterwards, his uniform. Confiscating his last journal, using his death to prop up the war propaganda. There's been a lot of great people in history who are super patriotic who've questioned their government. And I think that's what I've done since, you know, since I was a kid. I wasn't in part in my ignorance. I didn't, I didn't even know that about Tillman's journal. So that was confiscated by the, his uniform was burned and his, in his journal was, was confiscated. That's in John Crack our book, Where Men Win Glory, which is a fantastic book. And one of my best friends in the entire world, Asia Hawk, AJ, the gurus, hair out him and his buddy in 2004, as an ode to, to Pat. Because Pat always had a long hair, played for the Cardinals, left a multi million dollar contract to go, you know, fight, you know, fight. Yeah, Al Qaeda and Taliban gets over there and it's like, what the fuck am I doing? I'm guarding these poppy fields. It's not what I signed up for. I missed my wife. I missed being the States. This is not what I thought we were going to be doing over here. And then some really negligent maneuvers happened and split up his unit and he ended up being with one of the members of the Afghanistan, the army who was there kind of guide. And, you know, a guy saw the guy in some dim lighting on the ridge. He was with Pat, they fired on him, obviously Pat. And the Afghanistan, he thought that they were getting fired on by Taliban. So fired back and then Pat got killed. His brother was not told right away that it was friendly fire. They come like that. It's all in the book. It's fascinating book on, I mean, it's one of the only books I've ever cried reading just because it's so I mean, John's an incredible writer. He wrote into thin air. He wrote into the wild and he wrote under the banner of heaven. I read those three. Yeah, those are the Tillman book. Yeah, the Tillman book is incredible. But I don't know why I'm bringing it up. There's so many people that I really love this country. They've gotten disenfranchised. And that's part of it. The whole betrayed by their leaders. Yeah. I mean, for your grandfather who said lost friends at Pearl Harbor. Yeah. And was shot down over Europe and held as a POW by the United States. And he, you know, recently there's a gentleman writing a book about me. And he's writing a chapter on him. And he went found the war crime committee that actually interviewed him after he came back because he was mistreated over there. There was one of his. One of the guys, there was a group of like, there were 10 people on his, on his bomber. One of the guys ruptured his spleen on the way down and they mistreated him. He made a march like 20 miles in the freezing cold didn't get him any medical treatment. So there was like a war crimes commission that was doing interview. So he was interviewed about that. And it talked about kind of how he was treated. The, you know, how they put, you know, warms in his food and being a water for certain times. And just the bad conditions there. And that's all he went through. He went through all that because, you know, he really cared about his country. And I think even up into his death, you know, there was for sure some bitterness. I would guess around what was actually doing and why was I doing and who had to die. You know, my friends at Pearl Harbor, you know, for this country that I fucking love that I almost died for. That's right. And I think those are the great people that have made this country what it is. And we're, you know, now to even question the government. You're, you're some like right wing conspiracy crazy 10 foil hatware, which is wild because it seems like the left has gone so far left. And anybody right of that, there's no center anymore. That's according to the left. You're just your right winger. That's your so far on the left. The left used to be a party of occupy Wall Street and free speech and rights for everybody. Now is there the ones beating the drums on the war machine and censorship and obedience. They're not criticizing Wall Street too much. I noticed. Yeah. There was a fascinating study, a very revealing study that showed that at the height of occupy Wall Street, the New York Times torqued up its coverage of racism. So the word racist racism, white supremacy went up hundreds of percent in the New York Times. You can check all this on their database during occupy Wall Street. It was almost like somebody decided it would be better to be at war with each other than to be asking questions about our financial system. It's not surprising. That's what they do. They distraction. The true disinformation comes from actually those, those publications now. How have they treated you? A lot of character assassinations. I noticed. When I tested positive for COVID, the whole my whole world changed. And people I thought were allies in the media just turned on me. They spammed my sponsors, you know, to the tune of one of my sponsors who is having a hard time keeping me. They got to the got spam with 140 million impressions across all social media to get rid of me. Because of my choice about what I want to put in my body. They didn't to their credit. They stuck with me for one more year. One of the sponsors dropped me within a couple of days, which is fine. But yeah, you know, when when it came out, whether it was somebody from the campaign or not released that I was a finalist to be Bobby's vice president, there was a total character assassination. It was a bizarre story from 12 years ago that somebody thought they heard something that I was questioning something. And what it all comes down to I think. That was CNN that did that. Yeah, of course. Is I'm not beholden, you know, I have a contract, but I don't, you know, I'm not beholden anybody. I'm I'm dangerous to them because I speak my mind. You know, I'm not, you know, cliche, written, you know, obedient. Star athlete. I like to speak my mind. I'm I'm a loose cannon to them. Why I mean, wouldn't it just be easier to collect the accolades and collect the money and and just not say what you think in public, keep it for dinner parties like. Yeah, I mean, I think a lot of people have done that over the years. Yeah, a lot of great stars who've done that. And I respect that. I think I just I love, I love this country and I believe in this country. I believe in people too much to just be quiet about things that seem so obvious to me in corruption in any form is is. You know, should be exposed and the evils in this world that are out there. And you know, there's good and there's evil and the powers that be that they don't want the light to shine, the good to to exist, you know, really push, push things that aren't the best interest of anybody. And I just got tired of dealing with it. Also, you know, got to a point that Rogan got to, I think, and many other people where I made my money. I have a platform. I've had success in my business. What's the worst that you could do to me like you kill me? Yeah. At least I'm not dying on my knees and then and stand up what I believe in whether you agree with me or not with the agree with the way I went about it. That's your own opinion. That's fine. But I feel, you know, I feel good about about the way that I stood up for myself. And like, probably said, there's a lot worse things in dying. And like, I would be dying a little bit every single day if I didn't say some of the stuff that's on my mind. Now, I do want to like not be a part of the, you know, the war against the people that try to cancel us. I would rather be a part of bringing people back into the fold and actually building bridges with some of those people. Now there's the evil that exists that I don't care to engage with those people. And they know who they are. Most people that have attacked me that are beholden to big farmer or money or whatever it might be. But I think if there's a chance for this country to keep going into exist and to not be like the Roman Empire and fall from it then. And I don't know if that's even possible, honestly. But I think it's got to start with love and compassion and empathy. And I'd like to be a part of that conversation if possible. I so strongly agree with that. And clearly, COVID was used like race questions have been used. Like the trans stuff is being used to divide people and to make them hate each other. And that, and you don't want to be a part of that. I don't want to make that worse at all. And I agree with you. I love the country. And not only do I love it. I'm stuck here. You know, born here, I will die here. So it's my country. That's how I feel. So I don't want it to get worse. But I do have unanswered in my mind like, what was that? I mean, you described, I think the motives of the people that you know or I know. They were afraid. They're just instinctively deferential to power. Okay, that's fine. That's all human nature. But like big picture, that's so crazy what just happened. They have this game plan where it's like, you know, we're a name call, you know, anti-vax or anti-Semite, big it, racist, whatever it might be. Exactly. You know, we're going to censor you and we're going to try and cancel you. Then we're going to go out for the people that you love and care about. And that's kind of how they do it. And so if they call it a vaccine, then all these people who are hesitant to not get canceled, not be shamed by being called an anti-vax or are going to get in line to take it. But big picture, do you have any guess as to like, what is the program here? Like, what is the point of this? I think those are some of the evils that they're up against. Are you noticing all around just in your life? Are you noticing people begin to make reference to spiritual forces in a way they didn't say five years ago? Is this my imagination? No, I don't think so. I think that I think that more people are kind of waking up with that. I think people that watched and there's probably, I don't know, 10, 15, 20 million at least that saw your interview on Rogan and saw you talk about the super natural component of UAPs. I think that is a good part of the conversation for people to reference. I grew up in the church and in the church, you know that there's a battle that's going on between the scene and the unseen world between good and evil, between the powers that we can see and the powers that we can't see. There's some wild things out there that we don't know about and there's some government secrets we don't know about at a bare minimum whether you believe in alien life, UFO's UAPs, what everyone will call it. There's some technology out there that exists that's finally have some sort of disclosure that the government or the powers that we don't think we're ready to be given that information, which is kind of wild. And I understand that I don't actually don't understand it. The thought process is it's going to change the way that we look at life or religion or whatever. That gets in the whole other idea about the religion being as a way to control people, control thought maybe which is pretty wild. But disclosure I think needs to happen. It's going to be interesting to see how it happens, where it happens. But I, you know, in my space where I'm at where I do, you know, a lot of plant medicine, the veils between world, get, world's get, then dimensions get very thin. So the idea of seeing other entities, seeing, you know, angelic type of beans and demonic type beans is very normal. And the idea that there's a demonic aspect to the UAP phenomenon, I think is very plausible and interesting. I do too. So you say plant based medicine, I think you're probably to a lot of different things, but among those would be say ayahuasca or psilocybin mushrooms. So the conventional understanding is that if you, you know, take a hallucinogen, you see hallucinations, things that your brain creates that don't exist outside of you. But you're suggesting that you can see things that are in effect real, but that you don't normally see. Is that what you're saying? Yes, definitely. And I've done, I have many times now and I've had many incredible experiences. Finally feel comfortable talking about it. There wasn't maybe after the first like six times I sat and then I finally said, you know what? And like this has made a huge impact on my life and made me feel more connected to this world and more loving and more in my heart. And even this last ceremony, group of ceremonies that I did, I think has really helped me with the last four years of my life where I went from a pretty beloved semi enigma still, but pretty beloved athlete to very polarizing figure. And it's helped me to kind of put that on the right context and perspective and actually have a ton of gratitude for the whole process, even those tough up and down and more empathy and compassion for those who have like slanted me and canceled me or tempted to. So it's been really important for me and really really deep healing for me. And I find up with more compassion for your enemies. It's hard to criticize it because I think that's that's where we need to be. Well, they also couldn't criticize because I the first time I did it. I won an MVP then the second time I did it. I won a BP again. So everybody wanted to you know, put me in the like drugy category. Oh, you're just some wild hippy drugy guy. It's like. also I'm better at football probably afterwards and a better leader and better at relating to my teammates. So there's a lot of positive. What did you just come from? What do they say in general? They're interested. Very interested. So many people from all different sports. I'm talking basketball players, tennis players, golfers, baseball players, hockey players, and in my own contemporaries and league are all interested about it. There's a base level of plant medicine use for the most. I would say it's marijuana. And you know, people have the only opinions about marijuana. But a lot of people are really interested about the healing effects they can have in the self deeper sense of self love and deeper sense of connection. There's just so many myths about it and misnomers. I like to say and kind of and revised my view of that plant medicine is people like, oh, plant medicine, what is a shit blah blah blah. Medicine is anything that is healing that's not addictive and drugs are substances that are addictive and there's a ton of drugs and not all farmers bad. I'm incredible pharmaceutical stuff that's helped us with with with things that I've used. Obviously I've had many surgeries and anesthesia and I'm thankful for those types of drugs but medicine and food as medicine has been really impactful for my life. And there aren't you know, they're not addictive substances. They're stuff that I like to use with deep reverence in ceremony setting. And this made a big impact on my life and the people that know me have noticed the change. People that don't know me. You know, have their shots and their opinions about me but. But I do have more empathy and compassion for all those people and and for myself too and I'm just trying to do my best and I was fighting a lot of battles, you know, when I tested positive for COVID and got canceled or attempted and. I don't feel like I need to fight as much, much of those. What about you though, because you you did one the most controversial somehow, not to me. I don't know how long when you went to Russia and did Putin. How did it feel coming back is like anybody watching anybody was like number one it was fucking awesome number two Putin came off. And I was like, I love to see Joe Biden give an interview where he can speak on the history of the United States in the same way that Putin talked about the history of his country. I'd love to see Biden knew an interview where he shows how to operate a microwave and I don't I don't think that's going to happen. And by the way, Biden won't do interviews and neither will Zelensky so far. But was it like to come back and where you were you were like in a couple of the places after that. I went to the Middle East after that for a while. I mean, I was out of the country for almost a month. So I missed and I don't ever read about myself anyway because I know who I am. I don't need someone to tell me so I missed all of that as I always do. But the idea that someone would criticize an interview where you just let the guy talk for a couple hours. I mean, I just think that's inherently useful. I mean, I just wanted to do it as a documentary record of what Putin is like or at least what he's like in this context and people can decide for themselves. I'm a big believer in letting people decide for themselves. I think adult men have the right to come to their own conclusions about things adults have the right to. So I'll never stop believing that because we're not slaves. We can have any opinion we want. And if you don't like it then try and change it through reason and if you can't then fuck you. And I really feel that way. So that's the kind of perspective I had going into talk to Putin. My perceptions of him are exactly what you just said. I thought he was an interesting guy smart guy. Impressive guy, you know, in some ways obviously a lot more impressive than Joe Biden. But he's Russian and he runs Russia and I'm American and I live in America. So I care about my country. I want my leaders to be better. I'm not on Putin side. I don't have any emotional attachment to any foreign country because I'm not a foreigner. I'm an American and this is the only country I care about. But for the record, yeah, I thought people can watch it and assess for themselves. And they should. It's a fascinating idea. But the idea that you shouldn't be allowed to do that is so crazy to me. I'm just not going to submit to that. I'm cancer by the people who have like just bowed down and given interviews from their knees to the Zelensky's of the world. Gargling is the interview. Yes. It's wild. As it comes over and fucking an outfit you'd wear to the store on a Sunday morning to ask Congress for another hundred billion dollars is fucking wild. He looks like he's going to be in the village people music video. It's like insane. The whole thing is like saying you do sort of wonder like that and a million other things going on right now. You wonder if they're sort of seeing how far they can push the population until someone starts laughing like are you joking? It feels like that sometimes. What can we, what if we did this? Is anybody going to give a shit? No? Okay. Now let's try this one here. We're going to put Joe Biden up into this. We what? This guy can't even walk over your shit spans every now and then. We're good. Then we're going to pick the single dumbest but most self confident person in the entire nation of three hundred fifty million people and make our White House press secretary. It's good to deal with this every day on your television. No, I know it's well, I'm an old man. So I bet, but the real question I had for you in relation to freedom speech and free speech is to to I believe champions of free speech who are now in exile. Julian Assange and Ed Snowden. I know them both and you've had conversations with them. Both people who expose corruption and yes. attempted murders on both of them. Yes. Both are a lot of Julian is kind of rotting in a cell right now. I believe in yes and Ed is in his own exile in Russia. But thriving. It seems like yes, but both people who have a lot of affection for it. Just the fact that they would do what they did and expose the exposed and knew the consequences. What do you feel about those two and do you think there's any path back whether it's Trump or Bobby. Maybe I'm in Trump because I've had Trump didn't do it, but if Bobby were to get elected the opportunity to pardon those people would they come back to the States you think would they. Well, I mean, in the case of Snowden who stuck who I like a lot and as with him in Assange, I don't agree with them on everything. I don't agree with my kids and everything. I don't have to agree. We agree on the things. I don't know that. I don't know if I'm being totally honest. I probably do agree with them. But whatever. I'm sure we'd find every. I just love the exposed corruption and that they they're their bravery or visible courage. Those guys that are willing us to suffer for what they believe and the principles for which they're suffering. You know, the dignity of the individual. We're all created by God. You cannot treat me like a slave. You cannot tell me what to think. You cannot tell me what to say. You cannot lie to my face. Period because I have self respect. And there is a field of value. This is right. This is wrong. Exactly what's going on was wrong. And we got exposed. Well, in Snowden especially, I mean Snowden, you know, Assange is Australian. He's lived around the world. He was a journalist. I don't think he had any expectation that he would wind up spending his adult life in prison. I don't think that even crossed his mind. Maybe it did. I haven't asked him. But Ed Snowden knew exactly what he was getting into. And he was middle class American. High IQ guy. Lots of job opportunities here. He could have lived a very comfortable life with his wife and kids. And he intentionally put all of that at risk in order to tell Americans what their government was actually doing. And what's crazy to me is not that the US government is trying to murder him, which of course they are. But that news organizations don't defend him. That's when you realize the quote news business is totally fraudulent. None of these people mean it. They went into it. These are people who went into the news business as a way to exercise and exert power over their fellow Americans. Like, as nothing was informing people, it has to do with controlling and oppressing them. That's why you work at NBC News. So you can control people. It's really sick. And my loathing for them just can't even be described in words because it's so profound. I have not forgiven them. And I don't think I will. But Snowden would come back tomorrow. He's American. His wife's American. I think he's got to find life in Russia, but he's not Russian. And ultimately, I mean, not if you've lived abroad, we probably haven't had time. But if you spend enough time in foreign countries, you realize no matter how wonderful they are, they're not your country. You know what I mean? You'll never fully be a citizen of another country if you were born here. So he wants to come back and they won't let him. And it's disgusting. It's disgusting that they would use a term like traitor for him. When he's literally exposing government corruption and stuff that you should give a shit about. If I catch you robbing a liquor store and call the police, am I the criminal? No, you're the criminal. You were robbing a liquor store. It's not exposed crimes by the US government against the American population. US citizens were paying for this. We're being spied on illegally. And he's the criminal? No, no, no. He's the hero. You are the criminal. Mike Pompeo, director of the CIA, who was literally a criminal. And yet he's treated like, I mean, he's in the running to be defense secretary if Donald Trump wins. It's shocking. Take a criminal and give him nuclear weapons, really. That's been the whole revolving door with government with the cabinet that happens. We're revolving door from the FDA to the CDC to the WHO. It's just a secret handshakes society of everybody just patting each other's back and staying in it. That's the corruption that needs to be exposed. And it's out there. It's under. And they're just doing it so overtly. Who gives a shit? Well, in very high stakes, too. It's not just like, well, I'm not doing the best possible job as transportation secretary. It's like, no, actually, I'm forcing the entire country to take poison. I'm killing people. I'm destroying the US economy for the benefit of a few, et cetera. These are big things. These are not minor, minor fuck ups. These are like, these are major felonies, in my opinion. And that's why, I mean, that's why I have hope and I want Bobby to have a chance to debate and to get into it. Because... in my opinion. And that's why I mean, that's why I have hope and I want Bobby to have a chance to debate and to get into it because if not, it's just going to be the same shit over and over and over and over. And like when the financial crisis happened in 08, right? And Obama put many of the people involved in it into his cabinet, into the, you know, the Department of Treasury was like one of the guys from Goldman and Sax I believe who was a part of the whole fucking shit they went down. And that's on the inside job, which is a great time. We take the captain of Titanic and make him secretary of the Navy. Yeah. But that's, that's basically what you're doing. No. What do you think motivates Bobby Kennedy? I think he loves, uh, standing up to the man to the, to the corruption. Now he is royalty because the Kennedy family is one of those special families and his family has been a part of, uh, in, in a position of power, uh, fame, riches for a long time. But look at his life and when he's done, he's gone after the EPA forever. And he gets shit for, uh, for his vaccine stance. But he was never a part of that. It was actually a couple women who came up to him when he was suing the EPA for years and winning for them destroying our, our water and destroying people's lives. And we consistently and then he's like, Oh, shit, there's another issue that's going on. It's the chronic disease epidemic in this country. And he can give you all the numbers from what it was. And there's certain dates and time where certain things happened where chronic disease went way up in the 80s, specifically after a bill was signed by Ronald Reagan. And since that time, if you look at a lot of the numbers, there's been a huge Trump and chronic disease for kids in illness and seeds and, uh, autism allergies, all these different things. Yes. And he's just saying, listen, I'm not saying that causation is correlation 100%, but there has to be some sort of relationship here with this. And why don't we do some studies on it? Why don't we get some transparency? Why don't we have these vaccines go through the normal trials and testing? Because learning things is anti-science. Yeah. But, but, but, um, but I don't think Bobby would put those kind of people in his cab. I don't think he would, uh, you know, give power to those kind of people. And, you know, like, like I've talked to him, um, you know, as frustrating as some of the alphabet, uh, gangs or organizations are, there's a lot of great people in him. There's great people in the CIA. There's great people in the CDC in the WHO and in the FDA who really care, like, and I think they're making a difference. But there's a top line in a lot of those organizations that are actually at their core anti-American and are not doing things that's in the best in our people and we're fucking paying them. It's on our dime. And all the stuff that's happened post 9-11, you know, with the Patriot Act and the Pfizer Court, uh, as far as surveillance domestically and spying and the fact that they're not actually on, you know, on Earth in these like domestic terrorist plots, you know, there's, there's, uh, you know, a lot of great documentaries and stuff. You can, you can look into that. The fact that our food and water is not in an acceptable level, the fact that our border is not at the right level. The fact that some of the stuff that happened on the ATF, you know, were some of those, they were tracking these guns that went to the cartel and they were being used to kill border agents and all these different shit that's gone on that again, I'm not saying that those, all those organizations are super corrupt. There's a lot of fucking great men and women that work for those, but there's some people at the top who aren't great people and that's what needs to change. And I think Bobby would go in there and change a lot of that stuff. And that's what his uncle and his father were trying to do. If you know the history of how that turned out, well, yeah, that's what happens with some of these companies. And that's why I love Bobby and you because you won't understand up knowing that it doesn't always end well for people going up there. This is a guy whose uncle and dad were murdered in the course of their jobs as elected officials. Well, look at the history of Alan Dallas. Right? Yep. If you know his history, he was in banking for the, for the Bush family, then he got into the OSS, which is a precursor to the CIA. Yes. And he was probably a part of Operation Paperclip, which repatriated a lot of the German scientists. Yes. Which there's some ethical issues with that. He tried to get us in a World War III in Cuba, Operation Northwoods. And the majority of JFK's actually close to the advisors, I believe they voted and the majority said, let's do it and let's blow up this ship and let's get us in the World War III and let's go after Cuba. And JFK said, no, they ain't doing it. Fire down. And then Alan Dallas winds up where as basically one of the main guys in the, in the war and commission. Chief Justice Warren was, I believe only at nine of the 30 some odd meetings that they had, but the two guys that were really in control of it for when I bred Alan Dallas, four or five of the CIA who ended up getting his job back and there's an airport named after him. And Gerald Ford, future president who was at the time number two at the FBI and FBI led by J. Edgar Hoover who hated the Kennedys. So given that all of that happened, it's a little weird that the Biden administration won't give Bobby Kennedy Secret Service protection. Yeah, and he's known Joe forever. Like they, they were friendly for a long, long time. It wasn't like it's, he's some outside. Like he's been around the political game for a long time. And he's the only major candidate who's not cutting Secret Service protection. They're also limiting and skewing, I believe, some of the polls to try and not just keep him out of a debate, but keep him out of Secret Service protection. He's spending millions of his own dollars private security, which he has to because he's a threat because he's not, you know, button paid for. And, you know, he's a foil to the two party system. But I don't know if he saw his, but Bobby recently came out and said, uh, in the summer months at some point, he wants to do a 50 state poll with like 20,000. I don't know what the exact number is votes in each of these states. And whoever polls lower between him and Joe Biden has to drop out the race because in his own analytics, he's found out that if the three of them run, Trump is most likely to win. If he goes against Trump, he wins. If he goes against Biden, he wins. If Biden goes against Trump, Trump wins. So in fact, the, so he said, Hey, listen, I'll drop out. If you pull higher than me in these 50 states, um, but if I pull higher than you, you're out. There's no way he'll go for that. I think it's a brilliant, a brilliant model to be like, no, I'm not the foil. Bobby's not the foil. All right, Bobby's a main player in this. And it going through this process and just like entertaining it for a small time to learn about the corruption with Gideon and ballot is that's fucking wild. It is 50 states with 50 different ways of doing it for the most part. Uh, you know, you can have your signatures thrown out if you have the wrong color ink on one of 50,000 signatures. Uh, some states you file with the secretary of state, some states with the governor's office, it's just, it's so ridiculous. The whole process, which is just set up for a two party system. Right. And then who knows about the, you know, safety and legitimacy of this whole thing? Well, it's a lot harder to get on the ballot than it is for say a non citizen to vote. Yeah. Coordination or a deck person. Uh, a lot of those. So you've made reference a couple of times to the food supply. And you said, I don't know about, you know, I'm not an expert in vaccines, but I am an expert on food. Well, I'm not an expert on food. I mean, it's your job. Yeah. I mean, I care. I care a lot about what goes on my body. You have to. Right. So what if you learn? So for people who aren't paying as close attention to what they eat, what, where do you think the, the bad, what was the bad food? Well, a lot of it's in the wording of it. I mean, fat is a bad term, but fat is really good for you. cholesterol is also a real negative stuff. Yeah. Yeah. But you need cholesterol because it's good for your brain. That is, there's some bad types of it and some like shit that you can eat that doesn't help your, uh, that kind of skews your levels, but sugar terrible for you. Anything process, sugar like fuels cancer cells. So eliminating sugars, process, foods. If you were to start with one, I'd be getting rid of sugar. Yeah. Definitely. And then fasting. Fasting is incredible for your body. Resets your body. I do at least a five day fast every single offseason. Just kind of kick start the offseason. What's that like? It's, it's a fun process. It's hard, but after you pass three days, you have this evolutionary impulse that kicks in. Uh, and you feel amazing. Actually, I got to the fifth day this year. I was like, man, if I wasn't going on this trip, and I would do 10 days, I felt incredible. Yeah. And it just resets your body. And actually, there's a lot of great research. Dana White was talking about it recently, um, that, uh, you know, he did kind of before and after testing. And there's a, there's a lot of studies now that talk about the, uh, the percentage of, uh, goes way down of, of heart disease, a hard attack based on fasting. Cancer obviously has a really hard time when you, uh, when you fast or when you, uh, at least fast from sugar. Um, and that's kind of my problem with the whole, uh, you know, the cancer industrial complexes that there's very little, uh, people treating cancer that, uh, that kind of start base level of diet. Um, and I'm not saying that all treatments are terrible. There's a lot of, you know, people doing really great work and, and, and caring for patients, but diet should be the first thing that you look at, um, especially sugar. Now I had a weird experience. I was at the, hospital years ago seeing a friend, uh, and, and, uh, coach of mine who had a hard issue. And, you know, I got there. He'd gotten two stents put in and he's drinking a Coke and he'd put in. And I'm like, what the fuck are you doing? What are you doing? And that's, that's part of the problem is, is, is we're not using food as medicine. You know, we're, well, sugars also, as someone who was quit smoking and drinking and drugs, I can say way more addictive. It's a drug. It's addicting. Like actually. Yeah. But in every single day, there's stuff that's finally come out. Like I was just reading some, there's four, you know, four. It was like, uh, Oreos, um, lucky charms, something else and Gatorade. You know, has been exposed as having like, uh, forever, uh, chemicals in and so there's finally people getting some of the message out and forcing, uh, you know, these companies to change. But the best way to vote in general, uh, is with your money. And so, I really believe that. Obviously, you know, I'd love that they probably would win and we'll definitely vote for him. Um, and voting on a local level is really important, especially for your local, you know, DAs and sheriffs and different things. It's super important. But like voting with our dollars really are important in companies that are involved in, um, you know, shady practices, unethical practices, uh, foods that, uh, have poison in them. Um, and they know it. Don't, no, buy them and they'll change. They'll change just like with the government. If you don't, you know, don't follow their ridiculous, uh, draconian rules, they're going to change. So it sounds like protein is the answer. Yeah, protein fat. I mean, that's high, that's not everybody has a little different. So a little different body, a little different constitution. So, um, you know, you, but I think on a base level fasting is good. Now, a lot of the intermittent fasting data, uh, for women was a postmenopausal women. Um, I will definitely know that. So like fasting, intermittent fasting for like, um, women still menstruating. I don't know that's great for health, but, um, I didn't fasten in general as a good recipe of body. How hard are the first three days? Hard. But it changes your relationship with food. Now, we're not living to eat or eating to live. I think that's an important, uh, distinction. So you feel lightheaded or jumpy or a little bit. And it depends on how much sugar you've eaten. If you, like, you can get the, the sugar blues and the sugar, uh, depression there. If you, if you, if you're coming off eating until the sugar for sure, but I don't eat a lot of sugar or so, um, it was, it was fairly easy for me. But I do all the time too. I think it's like just start with 24 hours. Just start with 24 hours and just drink water or bone broth, um, as a good reset. And then if you can get to three days, that's great. Get to five. It's incredible. The research says five and up has like the greatest benefits, it's a good reset for your system. Um, you look better in the mirror. Um, and you'll, uh, your body just starts function a little bit. So what, how are you? While you're fasting? Yeah. Is that hard? Yeah. It's lighter workouts when I'm like, but my fast, but because I need some energy to work out, but, uh, what's the longest you've gone fasting? Yeah. Seven. What was that like? Awesome. Past three is like amazing. I think it goes back to like the hunter gatherer. We, you have met at food in a few days and you get this fucking energy joke from your system to go find food. And after three days, that feeling amazing. I don't even need food. And then just ease back into some stuff on day eight, uh, you know, but, but I love it. I did some, uh, arabatic stuff as well. Um, like a 30 day arabatic, uh, diet and that was incredible from what is this? What is that? It's just eating, uh, and, and, and doing, um, kind of a full body flush reset like they do in, uh, in India. It's their kind of way of doing medicine. And man, that reset my entire system. I lost, uh, I lost weight. My, um, um, my stomach lining chains for sure. I went in being allergic to a lot of things and having like earl bowel syndrome. I came out those 30 days with like, no allergies, no, uh, indigestion, no earl bowel stuff. And it just like flipped and I was, what were you eating for 30 days on this? Just mostly arabatic stuff. So rice lentils, um, there's no meat and I love, you know, meat and protein, but, um, I'd be just a lot of, uh, lentils and rice and, uh, and vegetables. What's a darkness? Is it a fat like retreat? Yeah retreat. Well, you just in a room about, uh, I don't know, a third of this size, probably with a little bathroom bathtub and, uh, can't see shit. Nothing. Nothing. Can't see anything. You start hallucinating like, uh, I did five nights, four days. You start hallucinating like on a third day because your brain starts, uh, the DMT starts getting activated. Is it hard to text in that environment? Yeah, very hard. No. So you're actually in total dark darkness. No concept for what time it is, especially after the first couple of days, could you sleep so much the first night? After that, you don't need to sleep hardly at all because you have no stimulation for your eyes. So you're not really tired. You just kind of land there, uh, or moving around. I was like, you know, didn't yoga did long meditations set in the bath for a couple hours. It seemed like I don't know. Time was irrelevant, but, uh, a lot of great contemplation in the bath. So you've like, feeling your way to the back. Oh, yeah. And a lot of times you start hallucinating and seeing shapes and doorways and stuff. And you just run in and stuff all the time. And, um, it's a, it's a quite fast scurrier than any drug. I think I would be afraid to do that. Yeah. I am, I'm glad I did it. I don't need to do it again. It's not like something I need to. Can't wait to do a little dark desert read. It's like, no, I did that. Check that box. That was cool. Not going to do it again. What did you think about? Uh, I, I started each day with a meditation and just said, what do I want to contemplate today? So contemplated, uh, you know, relationships, family, and then two days was, uh, one was unmetired and one was on plane. And so I went through all the insecurities around retirement. And then, um, all the, uh, fears around playing again. And just really, it's about hours just like thinking through things and anytime a negative thought would come in, just being curious about it. And, uh, wondering where that comes from, uh, if there's a root of that, is there something from childhood that is involved in that fear and security. And it was really, uh, really amazing for me. Just the healing that happened. And I came out really feeling comfortable either way, like not scared over time. I'm not scared of, of slipping into irrelevance. I actually welcome that, uh, not, uh, not, uh, not, uh, worried about what the future looks like if I don't play for the Packers anymore. And I'm on a new team, um, and new guys, new city. So I was really, uh, really meaningful. I'm really glad I did that. Um, again, don't need to maybe do five days, four nights, um, but, uh, there's a good experience. Have you got anything like that? No. Yeah. I've spent my whole life running away from stuff like that. Um, but nobody even, like, can take a few minutes to go after phone, you know, you probably are better than most. Oh, I definitely have no, I take a son every day for 20 minutes in silence. But you do watch TV. No, we don't have a TV. That's a good way. I like silence. I don't like noise. I don't actually watch any video at all ever. And, um, but to be without in total darkness for five nights, you know, I don't know what would happen. Were you afraid at all? No. But the weirdest thing was night one, I had a bad dream, like a nightmare. And when you're, uh, normally when you're at home, you have like a weird dream, something's off. Maybe see it feeling entity or just something's freaking out. What do you do? You kind of wake up? Orange yourself, okay, I'm on my bed. I'm fine. Here's this, maybe I get up. I'm bad. You're something. Okay. I'm okay. And then you kind of are able to use you to get back sleep in the darkness. What you see eyes closed is what you see eyes open. So there was no escaping the, uh, wait, I'm in three. I haven't got to take a leak. How long is taking to get to the John? Five minutes. Real. Yeah. Cause you just like, here's one step. Here's one step. And you're super disoriented. You're just going really slow down feeling around, feeling around, feeling around, boom, boom, boom, boom. Okay. There's this should be here banging and something. Yeah, this should be over here. Okay. There's a little tiny little door. Okay. Get in. Okay. Now I got it. You know, but I mean, in the, you just, you know, not really wearing clothes for the most part, just you don't need to use in complete darkness. What's dinner like? Well, the food is actually pretty good. So once a day, the food came at six o'clock, there was like a double sided door. So he put the food in one side, clothes that then I'd open. So it was no light. And you just like use your scent, like smell. That's, that's soup. I'm having effort in our own here. So here's, it was the food for the next day too. So okay, there's some apples and I'm having breakfast. So here's some, some mixed nuts. I'm going to have that for lunch as a snack. Oh, here's what it says. Oh, this is some sort of like pasta. Okay, I'm going to have that for lunch tomorrow. So you're kind of going through it. And you just like, you have all the time in the world. So you just like savor every bite bite and just eat super slow and it's actually very meditative. That part was cool. I've done a lot of loose and jettin drugs, not in many years, but I have when I was a child. And you know, no matter how weird it gets, you feel like, well, it's the drug, you know, but when there's total silence and darkness, are you worried that you're going to, something's going to rise up from within you and scare the crap out of you? Not really because before that, I had done, you know, I was going to multiple times. I've done so silent journeys. So I had figured out what was like to surrender to a process or a ceremony. So I kind of treated that same way and just said, you know what, whatever comes up is what's supposed to come up. Like we say, and doing I like the medicine will give you exactly what you need. So I kind of took that attitude into the darkness and said, whatever comes up is what I need in this moment. So I'm just going to surrender to it. And it's like, it's weird, I'm out of my phone. There's no distractions. There's really no sound like every now and then like in the afternoon, a plane would fly by above. And I was like, okay, it must be afternoon, you know, and then at six o'clock, you knew was six o'clock because the dinner would come. That's only reference for time that you knew, but I just surrendered to the process and said, I'm here for a reason I've paid for this. So I'm actually going to enjoy this experience. And I did respond. Did you feel like him at evil prisoner locked in? You weren't a dungeon. I could leave at any time I wanted to the door was open. So if I wanted to leave, did anyone else make it five nights? Yeah, a lot of people. And somebody was coming out actually when I was going in who'd been 30, 30 nights, I could not believe that because I don't I wouldn't want to do that. I mean, like, I think a 48 hour reset would be interesting, but even five days for nights was like, okay, that's enough, you know, last day. I mean, I didn't see them, but I heard they were a little bit depressed, which I can imagine. I heard your story on on Rogan though, like you definitely dabbled a little bit in some psychedelics. Did you know a lot? Was there was there ever any like real major breakthroughs that like stuck with you or was it a lot of just like tripping? I mean, I just wanted going to dead shows. But still it's a different country. And you know, it's so long ago and far away, it's hard to believe it's real. But yeah, for sure. I mean, we but that was like in the 70s, right? 80s, yeah, mid-ease. And I just grew up in a world where drugs, certain drugs were much more accepted than they are now. I'm not saying that's good, but at all. But, you know, different time. But yeah, no, I did I've done a lot of that. And I decided, I mean, a long time ago, you know, I haven't had an advil in 22 years. I'm in the soberist manual ever meet. But I was afraid. I mean, one thing I learned was there's a lot of stuff swirling around inside you. And that's where the darkness retreat really struck me because that would, you know, that stuff would rise right to the surface. And I'm not, you know, comfortable being in touch with all of that and some of it is chaotic and scary. And it's not clear how much of it is from within and how much of it is from without. I didn't really believe in the unseen world when I was doing stuff like that. So I didn't really consider it, but I, yeah, I saw some very scary things. And I was like, don't do that again. You know what I mean? So actually I didn't get much out of it. And I remember once, um, while taking LSD, I, when I was 15, I, you know, it's just too young to be doing that anyway. But I remember writing down like my profound thoughts. Uh, as I was in the middle of this very, very far out experience. And they didn't make any sense. In fact, I found them in my barn in this building upstairs. I need to see the generations of family stuff stored. Um, a couple of summers ago when I was like, I got to go through these boxes, you know, various diaries from deceased relatives and including my, my acid, uh, memoirs, which were really banal and fragmentary. Like what does this even mean? You know, I think I threw them away. I want my kids seeing that. But, um, no, I didn't have any breakthroughs. I'll tell you the breakthrough for me was so variety just because I party too much. So having to face things without a crotch, I felt really and admit, you know, you're, I think all growth and joy begins with admitting who you really are being honest about yourself. Not agree. But I, the darkness retreat would maybe too much honesty for me. No, you never know. So you said you thought about what your life would be like if you kept playing once another team or if you retired. I mean, at some point, you're gunner tire, right? What, what are you going to do? I'm going to take a few deep breaths and relax a little bit. I think, um, I've been doing this for 25 years, uh, playing football, uh, 20 this year in the NFL. Um, I've been mildly famous for the last, uh, you know, 20 or so, 21, I guess. Um, you know, I'd like to, to stick a step back and just, you know, enjoy life in a different way. I'd like to be a father at some point and take on that, uh, that chapter in life, um, which is exciting to me. But, uh, how hard is it to date when you're as famous as you are? Oh, it's, it can be hard. Yeah, it can be hard for sure. But I think in general, um, you know, you become a pretty good judge of character over the years when you make mistakes and trust the wrong people and, uh, whether it's business or personal life, um, you know, you can sniff some things out pretty quickly, I think. But you never know. And, and you know, you, you might, you're so amazing when you're 15, right? Yeah. Um, the most beautiful thing about that, uh, which is the hardest thing about relationships in general that I've seen with my friends is how do you grow together? That's, you know, because you're a different person, 15, 20, 25, 30, 55, you know, but finding someone who's willing to like grow with you and be in what you're into and that you have your own separate life, which is beautiful and big and full. And then you can come together and not having to find you like full identity in that other person, I think is really important. So, you know, it's just trying to, to do all those things. I really just been trying to to work on myself and, and, and ready myself, uh, because I've, you know, been way too codependent relationships in the past where I've kind of lost myself to like hold onto this idea of where I think a relationship is. And it's just not, it hasn't been sustainable for me. Um, but I'm, I'm confident that there'll be, there'll be a time when that, uh, when that comes, comes together and tell them I'll just, uh, just be enjoying myself. Since you spent the majority of your life famous at this point, what do you, what do you think of that? What do you think of being famous? It has its pluses for sure. It's not ever anything I signed up for. I just love the play football. Yep. And my fame grew really around the same time. We won the Super Bowl and then I did a state farm commercial. And it's actually true. It's like, it's funny, but it's true like, uh, I became the state farm guy at the same time. I became a Super Bowl champion and MVP ultimately. Um, and my life from 2011 on just really took a whole different change before that I was, uh, recognizable, I would say after that I was famous. Yeah. And I was like the famous football player also admin pitch guy for state farm. Um, so more people knew me and I love my privacy. And that got totally kind of taken away. So there was, so I went through, I don't know if you felt like this, but I've definitely gone through phases of being a recluse for sure. I just don't want to go out. Don't want to see anybody. Um, and I don't really like that. I mean, I am introverted in general, but I, I love people. I love like my routine and I feel like I got so just scared of not having my privacy or just like annoyed that I just stopped doing things that I enjoy doing. And I just didn't really like doing that. So now I do exactly what I want to do when I want to do it. And, and trying to have a little bit of sense humor with with some other reactions that come from people or situations where I can't just have privacy and just final and more humor in it. It seems to transmute some of the frustration and fear into, in the joy in those moments. What about you? I mean, you've, oh, I can't write it. You've been on it. Yeah, I'm not into it at all. But yeah, you can definitely become a recluse for sure. Some people though in your business and my business kind of signed up for it. That's what they want. Yeah, those are the saddest of all people. You want to be famous. You want to be love by who you've never met you. Why is like kids these days are saying what do you want to be when you grow up? It's not a fireman or athlete or something. It's famous or an influencer. Well, to influence people, I think is a great honor. But that's not what they're talking about. And can be a joy. Yes. Right. But to be. answer. Well, to influence people, I think is a great honor. But that's not what they're talking about. And can be a joy, right. But to be well known is no, of course, it's a nightmare. There's no upside whatsoever. And if you find that important, then you're a hollow, sad person. That's like, what are you? What is, you know, but who, I mean, one thing I noticed by famous people, I've always noticed as having spent a lot of time around them for the last 30 years, is they all know each other. You ever noticed that? Yes. Yeah, there's a knowing. I think you kind of know what, what that person's going through. So there's a base level of like, oh, we kind of know how to navigate this life in a similar fashion. So there's like that, there's that, just closeness, I think that comes with an initial meeting of like, oh, we probably have similar experiences. So there's that connection kind of off the bat with that. I mean, I'm sure you feel you feel that. Yeah, I have a big family. So that really helps. So yeah, I don't have that many famous friends, but some, but I don't know. I was looking at your board over here. Well, I've had a lot of a lot of people in this barn. But when you're going through, like, for example, when you tested positive for Rona and, and then you admitted that you were part of the despised unvaxed, you were a criminal. I mean, nice. I mean, I mean, nice. And the world just like comes down on your head. Yeah. And your agent, I don't know if your sponsors are calling you maybe, yes, they are. Yeah. Of course they are, right? And I'm sure the league is calling you when you're just under bombardment. Who do you talk to about? Is there, do you have people in your life who can buck you up? You have a great support system. I think it the last couple years, and I'm sure you feel the same way. But the last 10 years, but every year it seems to get even smaller, but the circle kind of constricts a little bit. And there's just, there's less people who know exactly what's going on. Yeah. And there's just a really tight knit group of the inside of the and there's a beautiful group outside of that who you love when you talk to and you spend some time with, but they don't know everything. And, and, and they don't get to because there's just certain things that's only meant for a really small group of people. And I love that. And, so those people are my, my, my, my rocks and they're not, yes, people, they're people that can tell me exactly what's going on and what I need to hear and not what I want to hear. But there's a really small group. So you keep the ass kissers out of your life. Yeah. There's a lot of them. Oh, I know. Yeah. See, want to be involved? Would you rather be attacked to your face or flattered to your face? Oh, probably flattered. You're not as man. You know, attack. It's like, you know, because we were talking about this last night about, you know, like we can be in situations where you can't just have a normal conversation with somebody who disagrees with you, right? The a lot of times it's that person's filming it or somebody else filming it or they're shit talking to you and they want to get a reaction out of you. So those, you know, I don't shy away from those and I don't, those don't like get under my skin. Actually, I find those comical, but I'm not sure if that's like when I dinner when you go up to restaurants. No, not really. I think most people that that I do say this like in a, I feel confident in this, like the majority of people that want to censor me, cancel me, shame me, shit talk me. If they got to know me, I think would have a different opinion of me. And I hear this from from actually a lot of people were like, man, you're just so much different than I thought. What do they think you're like? Well, they get to the image from mainstream media or from two disgruntled teammates that I'm some sort of like overly arrogant narcissistic prick. And then when you get to know me, it's like, oh, you're not really any of those things that you've been painted as because you have to have a villain and you're the villain now because you stood up to the government and you're not, you know, button paid for and beholden to all these other, you know, things and you're not quiet about your beliefs. Do I think that's usually the common perception and then the common reaction? I hear from a lot of people, people who don't even actually agree with me or who thought about me a lot of times a certain way often will say, man, I really enjoyed this time together, this dinner or this conversation and and you're different than I thought. I'm always like, thanks, I guess. Low expectations. You know, I deliverables. I thought you were an asshole. Yeah. By the way, I'm sorry, I totally forgot this. Our producers put all this stuff. I haven't even looked at any of it. They found this, which just amused the hell out of me. Remember how they were saying Ivermectin was horse dewormer? Pretty sure I took Ivermectin. Horse paced. This actually is. It's horse, but you're a mectin. Ivermectin paste for oral use and horses only though it does a like rectal use. That's the Ivermectin dispenser. I love that. I'm going to keep that on the bar right behind you just to see if let's see a little shadow box. There's a little box for it to put up on the wall. That'd be awesome. So what are your teammates think of all this stuff? Most of all, most aren't really interested. You know, they're, um, I try and share a lot of my experiences, especially my failures as a young player because I want to help these guys not make the same mistakes or whether it's failure and higher in the wrong manager, agent or financial people are just not being involved in my business as a young person or some of these guys, you know, evolve a lot of family members to handle like really important parts of their jobs. I'm just like sharing my experiences with those guys. Like, don't hire your drunk cousin. Yeah, like, you know, maybe keep family and business separate as much as you can. Unless, you know, your family members, like, have certified, you know, accountant or something or something. You trust them. Like, I think it's always best to kind of, you know, keep some distance between friendship and business too. It's always can get a little bit dicey at times. I made that many mistakes still in that and try and share those experiences with them. My life, you know, publicly, the things I talk now as we're shifting, you know, four years from, you know, three years ago, from COVID, it's more around plant medicine. So they're very interested in that. interested in ayahuasca and so Simon and the effects and the fears and they have a lot of the same fears that most people have around a bad trip, a bad journey, a bad time. And so it's fun to have those conversations. Many people reached out wanting to set up their own journeys, their own trips, just learn more about it. You know, I'm an avid reader as well. So there are people, you know, checking me about, you know, books to read and recommend. And so I love doing that with some of my teammates. And so I might start them with the alchemist. I would have one and maybe send them to a crack hour book or send to a self-help book or something or maybe a book about medicine. But yeah, I just, we joked there was a group of us in the corner of the locker room that we kind of called the brain trust. So we'd, the four of us start talking. You'd see like somebody come pull the chair up and another guy would come over and pull, you know, like next, you know, it's like 10 guys just kind of listening what we're talking about. And guys are eager to learn. People from all different types of backgrounds of walks of life. And that's a lot of fun. I think to be relatable to those guys, you got first share your failures, you know, share the first share, you know, the things you wish you'd done differently. And it's like, I would guess it's like a parent. We don't want to save them from everything. But, but you like to stop them from making, you know, big mistakes that could really affect their life down the road. Some, some lessons that got to learn on their own, but there's some things that I've fucked up on that I love to share with the guys so they don't make the same mistakes. So I did. Are you going to miss it? Yeah, for sure. I missed the guys like going to Derby is last weekend. The best part and with all respect to the horses and Churchill and all that stuff, the real point of the trip is the camaraderie with the guys. And as most guys I've played with and a lot of guys I only see maybe once or twice a year. And this is kind of one of those events. And like we just share stories and laugh about the same stuff and catch up on family and kids and and injuries and body and health and the newest hacks that they're working on. One of our guys, you know, who is my center for a long time, Corey. And he played like 305 pounds. Now he weighs 235. So like seeing him healthy is awesome and talking about his life. He's got four kids now and a beautiful wife. And you know, it's the fun part. Just seeing these guys once or twice a year and just like keeping that close bond. Is it weird to be the last guy standing? It is weird. I mean, you're the last guy from your year. I'm the last guy from my year. I'm the last guy in that group that's the big group that's playing. Devante Adams was with us and Devante is still playing as gone in his 10th season. But yeah, like all the guys I came in the league are gone. I, you know, like long gone long gone. But I and I transcend a lot of stuff like we had dinner set our night in a few of uh, semi-ung guys came over. And one of the guys was Ray Lewis's son. And just tell a kid, who's not a kid? He's in his twenties. Like I played against your dad. That feels kind of weird. Yeah, that is weird. Yeah. It's crazy. What's the truth about CTE? The truth is our sport is dangerous. Well, yeah. Yeah. And the truth that our sport is dangerous. The truth is that there's minor brain injuries that happen every single game. I would assume there's collisions. It's a collision sport. And I think it's important that we really pay attention to how our bodies are responding. The league is in the agreement with the players has gotten better every single collective bargaining agreement, which I think I've been a part of three now, where they've done a better job of taking care of older players. But back in the day, even when I was young player, you get dinged in the head. Hey, just let it clear where you see stars. Oh, that's fine. Like far, he talked about all the concussions that he had. He said, yeah, he would never come out. He was just like, oh, you got dang, you see it stars. That's fine. Just like, let it pass and go back in there. That's what I get. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. About that. But I think we're doing a better job of safety in the, you know, equipment's better. The helmets are better. The diagnosis are better. Are people worried about it? Do you think younger players don't think, I don't think so. Not not not many of them. I think more people are worried about their own health and some of the, you know, meds that are given out. Like there was a a med problem in league for a while. Guys used to get, it was easy to get ficonens percocet. That kind of stuff. Then there was an issue at one of the teams and they kind of changed policy, which is better now. But that was an issue, I think, some of the addiction to some of that stuff that I some of my teammates had. Do you remember that time? Yeah. I remember a teammate of mine who was addicted to percocet that he had to be put under anesthesia to have his surgically repaired knee moved. That was wild. And that was not abnormal. There were a lot of people that were, why, because it had dulled his, his pain. Taller. It was just like, he had to give so many meds to like be able to, to be moved. It was wild. Did he recover? Not really. I mean, he has, he since has now and he's doing, he's doing really good. He's been sober for a while. But, but that's an issue. There's a, there's a, there's a really bad stat that, that, that, that used to, it was a scare tactic, but it's true. Back in the day, it said that within three years, 75% of NFL players, three years post retirement will be broke, divorced or unemployed. And a lot of times it's multiple of those three. And I see it a lot because you're living this life. You're making a ton of money. That money, trained dries up. You maybe don't have a ton of life skills or haven't spent time in the league, like planning for your post career stuff or don't have the money to just like coast like I could and some of the people by a long time could. And then, you know, there's, there's marital issues that, you know, that, that happened, all, you know, and it's a very sad statistic. The league, you know, tries to do some things to kind of promote second career stuff and financial literacy, but a lot of it's on the guys to learn on their own. And if you don't have the right people advising you, it's, you know, I've seen a lot of my former friends, you know, go through some, some crises in their 20s. Because the average career is three years. Now you're, you know, you're 26, 27, you're, have no job. You may or may not have graduated from college, but who knows how many people actually lose, use the degree now anyway from college. I mean, colleges, ridiculous. Yeah. It's, you know, it's, you know, you know, skills other than the game. Yeah. And now they're trying to figure out what to do. So it's pretty intense. And they got married to the wrong person along the way. Possibly. Yeah. Or just like, you know, 50% of marriages at this point or more and divorce anyway. So when the, you know, I mean, there's not blame and not wife shaming here. There's no, I get it. I get it. But I mean, it's again, back to the fame question. If a woman is coming at you because you're famous, that's not a good basis for a marriage. No, no, it's not. And, you know, there's, there's some guys who, you know, haven't, you know, made some rough decisions too with having kids and multiple women. And, you know, some of those were bad decisions by the men. Some of those were women, you know, who, you know, saw a millionaire football player. Yeah. And wanted to, you know, be taken care of for a while. Both of those are true. So sometimes that is something you take with you in the game where you now, you have a couple, you know, kids out there that you're taking care of for many years and you don't have the same type of money coming in. So now there's financial issues with some of the, you know, child support that you should and, and do pay. So guys, there's a lot of mistakes there. I mean, and some you can rectify and get through and some, you know, make make life a little more difficult if you're not able to play like me 20 years and, you know, don't have any financial issues or any kid issues or any stuff like that. You said that you started to realize that a lot of what we take for granted is actually untrue. And some of this, by this, I mean, our civilization is built on lies. Yep. You started to figure it out in high school. What do you think, but you also said you're in favor of just disclosing like the government should tell everything it knows. If it did that, if we actually learned the truth about everything, various wars that we've had, assassinations that we've had our economy, like what would happen? The government things things would fall apart. People would just be so overwhelmed. And so disgusted that they wouldn't believe in the government, they would, I don't know, become nihilists or something like what do you think would happen if we actually knew the truth about everything? Well, I don't think that's the worst thing. I mean, if you're making decisions based on what's the worst that could happen in this case, I think there'd be a ton of people actually connecting it, finding common ground because there'd be a common enemy. You know, the enemy of my enemy is my friend. That's right. Right. And I think it'd be fascinating to watch the structures we put so much trust in just crumble. And I think a lot of that needs to happen, whether that's in one disclosure, one Phil Swoop or over the years, it is kind of wild though that we still can't release a JFK files and we're that happened 1963 or 60 what 61 years is November. Pfizer tried to release their 5 years initially. That's what they asked. You know, they're they're testing stuff 75 years they want disclosure on the UFO stuff was supposed to happen many times. Right. Trump most recently last year Trump, supposedly saw it and then deciding out the release it, right. Or it was at the JFK stuff. You're talking about both. Yeah. And Biden, everything's gotten pushed back. I don't know. I think in order for us to to advance as society, there has to be in this age of Aquarius, there has to be disclosure. I mean, for you, you had to be privy living in Washington, working, you know, for Fox being the top guy there. Stuff that not everybody knows and you probably know more than the common person. But how much did you encounter? You know, if you're specific is stuff that you don't think the American public could handle that you know or that you believe. Um, I mean, I agree with you a hundred percent. And I thought that was so nicely put and so smart that if you knew the truth, your belief in lies, of course, would have operate. You'd no longer believe the liars. And that's not a bad thing. But that you would be united much more than we are now with your fellow Americans. And I think that's a really, that's a wonderful way to look at it. I think that's absolutely right. Yeah. I said enemy of my enemy. But it's like, I'm not enemies with, you know, a Democrat or Republican. I'm not enemies with somebody who has different skin color. It's, I think of that about what they put us against. Of course. They want to divide it. You know, if you watch the media, I've thought of this couple of years ago, they're always calling me racist white supremacist. When your father made that much because I'm not here with an apology. I didn't care at all about that. I really want to be called a racist because that's awful. Yeah, it's awful to be racist. So, um, but then it stopped bothering me. But I was left with the feeling, man, there's a lot of racial tension in this country and there's clearly some. But I got to tell you in the last, I don't know, 10 years, I've never, I've not had one black person confront me about being racist, not one, not a single time. And I've also not heard people like angry about race and my personal life. Maybe it's just me. I think there's a lot less race hate than we're told there is much less. I think most people kind of get along with each other actually in this country. I believe that. And it's very clear to me that they're doing this on purpose. The people in charge in order to keep us divided and angry and confused. So I agree with you, um, that disclosure would have that effect. In my specific case, I feel like I've learned probably too much about a couple of topics because, by the way, there's some things that I can't prove that I believe to be true. So I don't repeat them. Um, but you know, the U.I.P. stuff, I, some of it is really distressing to me what I believe to be true, but I can't prove it. But, um, as I've said before, I think it's virtual. I think some of these things are dark anti human. Um, probably some aren't, but you know, I do think because there's, there's potential anti human properties that there's actually pro human supernatural. Well, I think God's, I think God's real for sure. And as, you know, evil flourishes, you also see it's, it's obverse. You see good at work. You see God at work. I do in my life all the time in a way that I didn't say five years ago. I wasn't thinking like that at all. The very secular person who grew up in a very secular world, unlike you, I did not grow up in any recognizable church at all. And so, um, I had none of those assumptions. But no, I think it's, uh, you know, in bad times like this one, there are miraculous and heartening moments in ankle. Like see that all the time. If we learned everything that the government is hiding from us, what would you be most interested in learning about? Well, I mean, JFK for sure. Yeah. I want to see those files because that's what got me into it. But, um, I think the UAP thing, would you be shocked to learn that Jeffrey Epstein didn't kill himself? No. I mean, how many, how many Jeffrey Epstein type people are out there? Well, that's right. That's the real question. You mean people who've been killed, who've been killed or people who are using sex as a blackmail tool? That. Yep. And then who's pulling the strings on that? Any guesses? Well, Galen Maxwell has a lot of ties to the Mossad. Yep. That would make sense. I mean, Jeffrey didn't seem to get some of the appointments he was given in the prominence based on merit. Somebody was putting them in the right spots. Um, but I don't think he's the only one. I think there's a problem. A weird bizarre problem. Really, it has a weird sex component to it. Um, with some of the elites and there's a pedophile component to it as well, which is, which is really sick. And there's, you know, some prominent figures, uh, you know, who are in the spotlight as a, as of late. Um, I just, I would like that to be, to be exposed. But Jeffrey Epstein had the goods on everybody. There were a lot of people that didn't want him to be alive. And then the whole, you know, wild story around, you know, multiple people being sleep and, you know, he had not been watched at the time as real convenient. And I just don't believe in that many coincidence. No, no, no. He was, he was murdered in, in federal detention in Manhattan. I don't think there's any question about that. And people lied about it, including the, the then attorney general of the United States. But I think there's some weird correlations between the, and anomalies that, you know, the Johnny Depp trial had eyes on it, crazy coverage. And the Golan Maxwell trial had next to no coverage, no TV coverage, no common, no nightly commentary about it. No traffic to nobody. I mean, they literally got, she is indicted for trafficking kids and nobody who she was trafficking kids to kind of died. Or named. Yeah. And, and all the files that are that they're haven't still haven't been released. We have one testimony from one victim. That's all we have. When that came out, it was just really like one victim. And there's hundreds of just in that little who flew on the Lolita Express. And there's a lot of super prominent names who are on the flight logs. What's the sex thing about? I mean, you've been in famous guy world for a long time. And you're from, like me, you're from California. So obviously you've been around well-known cultural figures, the elites. Have you, how long have you thought this that that sex plays a role? Well, not, not that long. I mean, I just kind of, you know, I've seen some interesting things I bet you have been around some interesting parties. And yeah, gatherings that are strange, not anything like what it sounds like, you know, a ditty party. But just even at the Oscar party, just seeing how some of these people act was always very little bit strange. I just never resonated with it. It was almost like interesting people watching. But there always seemed like there was parties within the, within the party. People kind of doing their own thing that always kind of weird me out a little bit. But, but getting into conspiracy stuff, then you know about secret society stuff and stuff like the Bohemian Grove. And you know what Nixon said about the he said, right? Yeah, yeah. And the secrecy around that. And that's not the only secret society. There's a lot of really interesting secret societies, not just like the skull and bones of Yale, which has produced all those presidents and in the, you know, free masonry at its highest level. There is a sexual component, I think, to a lot of that. Obviously with Epstein, it was Black male to get them into what they want. I mean, how many people are compromised by that that are in positions of power today? Yeah. I think you're naive to think it's none. And you set it on the podcast with Joe. The scary part for those people is that, and for us, you know, is they could, you know, put someone on your computer to cancel you. They could set you up for something. Oh, of course. Thankfully me. I've, I don't watch porn. You know, I've never been into any weird kinky stuff. So it'd be really, you know, and I think it gives me pretty unwise for a prominent person to get into online porn because all that stuff is monitored. What? Yeah, but I think a lot of those people probably are. You'd have to be an idiot. There's a, there's a camera on your phone and your iPad and your laptop. Yeah. Yeah. But I mean, didn't, you know, again, it's weird and normally there's everything, but the, you know, it gets used all the time. Right. Like stuff like that gets used all the time. The silence people require people know whether that's legitimate or not. If it's legitimate, that's fucking sick and gross and those people should be. If it's illegitimate, it's not real. And it's been planted. Like that's a fucking shitty shit sandwich. Well, Kitty porn, I always, I always try and say it out loud just to indemnify myself to protect myself against, I don't, I don't have a laptop. I'm not into porn or Kitty porn. I just want to say that out loud. Yeah, I'm gonna say the same thing. You do feel like never been into it. Whenever someone, I like my life. If you can spend five nights with darkness, I think you're psychologically pretty healthy. Like you're, you're beating the averages on that. I feel like I'm pretty psychologically healthy and I could not do that. But if you found out everything, you said faith in government collapse completely. Yes. And that's a good thing. But would, would that be like the road to anarchy at that point? I think you might need some of that. You know, like what anarchy, I think is always seen, you have to look up there and give me the exact definition of anarchy. But the thought of anarchy is just like chaos. Yes, chaos. But it's more just a, I believe it's more like a belief in the, it's a doubt in the government's ability to do its job. Yes. At its core, like qualified. Yeah. I'm not gonna call you an anarchist, but we need some of that. We need, we need some of, we need some more questioning. We need, we need more disclosure. We need more things being brought out to light. We need more journalists doing their job and having the right conversations. I'm excited for you to, I can't even imagine who you're gonna get on, on your podcast. Can this gonna be amazing? The first one. And I'm grateful. So if, just two more questions. And then I have one at the end too. So the, the first one is, what, I asked you what you're gonna do when you were tired, which is probably imminent. Just at some point, just because of your age and your, um, amazing longevity so far in this sport, but you said you, you just want to get deep breath. Could you see yourself running for office? No. No. I don't think so. No. I just, I don't, I believe in Bobby and, and what he's standing for, but, um, I've never been super into, uh, politics and, and as said publicly, I believe it's a sham. Now I retract that in the context of Bobby, because I, I believe in what he stands for, but I'd never felt like there's been two parties. It's just been the same people and bombs still get dropped regardless of whether it's Trump or Obama or Bush or Clinton, we're still get fought. Taxes still get levied. You know, um, evil corruption still exists. Secret handshake society still exists. The lobbyist power still exists. All the big, you know, big, whatever, and military industrial complex still exists. No matter who's in charge. So how much can you actually impact? I don't know. I mean, I like to think that a Bobby got in, if they didn't take him out that he could enact some real change. I think the alphabet groups need a full makeover. And if we're going to, you know, support espionage, then let's make sure we're not doing it our own people who are good, you know, self, you know, conscientious, freedom, love and Americans, Republican Democrat, independent, black, white, Asian, Mexican, whatever it is. It's right. Just great fucking people who live in this country. Leave us alone. Leave us alone. Yes, stop spying on me. Yeah. Get off my computer, get off my camera, just get off my ring camera. You know, take down all this stupid fucking CCTV cameras everywhere that are watching everything. my computer, get off my cameras, get off my ring camera, you know, take down all this stupid fucking CCTV cameras everywhere that are watching everything. And because the next step to all of this, people don't realize this, and this is the fucking facts, is China and what's going on there, and social credit scores, and entire life monitored. Like that's where we're going. Slowly, Jordan Pearson said, it was known to everyone and talked about how does, you know, I came here with the conversation was, but I heard him say this, how does corruption take form when it's so obvious, it's slow movements. It's like barely inching towards, you know, total corruption and obedience, where you don't really see it coming. Next you know, like, oh, I have no other option, but to get a chip on my hand or have a social credit score that allows me to, you know, fly in a plane. If I don't have a good one, then I got to run a bus or a train or a cab, or, you know, I can drive. You know, they want all electric cars. I can just, you know, shut that off at some point because you're post on Facebook, you know, kind of violated the government standard here. And also we're going to freeze your bank account or only let you, you know, eat at this restaurant. Sorry, eat at the, you know, get groceries from this store, not like the nice, you know, organic store, you know, to eat this shit over here, eat insects, or whatever the hell on the Oreo store. Yeah, we're not far from that. If we don't, like, stand for, for civil liberties. And people always like, you know, when I talk about, because I'm always been a big proponent of, of Ed Snowden, people like, well, I've nothing to hide. And I'm like, that is the fucking worst answer because I don't have anything to hide either. But I want my privacy and you understand, you think the government's just going to stop at what they're doing now. They're not going to stop with this. They're ancient closer to, to be in 1984, will they have a set in your, some sort of TV set in your house that watches you, make sure you get up and do your 10 pushups, 10 sit-ups. We're going to watch every aspect of your life for an UBS social credit score. We're going to create, I mean, it's a fucking great book to read, it was written 1949. And how many, how accurate it is today, literally a ministry of truth. We had the, we literally had a government organization that was censoring free speech and, and categorizing things as misinformation. There was a, there was a ministry of truth, ZAR, who was making decisions based on what they thought was acceptable language online and all these fact checking bullshit. Like we're not far from 1949 from that book, 1984, which was written 1949. If we don't take a stand for for our civil liberties and that's why I think that there needs to be more disclosure. I hope there is a hope, there's more corruption. I hope Bobby gets a chance to, to debate because think you do a hell of a job. I hope in the cold gets a chance to debate against Kamala Harris, because I think that'd be a big win for her. Have you met her? No, I haven't. I enjoy what she says. My last question is like, we are moving there and no one is stopping it at this, as of today, you know, May 2024. So where are we in five years? I, you know, I was a little bit worried come out of COVID because I saw so many people who were manipulated by fear and laid down and followed the rules. I think it was a lot of people who are captivated by fear for sure. But the majority was conscientious, good hearted American. That's right. I really do believe that who just wanted to do what they thought was right. Trusting that the government wouldn't lie to them, wouldn't fuck with them. And I think those people are waking up. That's why I have hope. I really do have hope that we've learned our lesson and that the powers that be, the evil unseen world overstepped a little bit too far and that they got power hungry and they got a little over their skis and that people woke up and are not going to allow this to happen again. And there's some weird things going on in the world right now. The stuff of the border is very my listening to Brett Weinstein talk on roving about the groups of Chinese military agemen that are getting in. It's very unnerving and they're doing it in new ways and we're not prosecuting anybody in a lot of these big cities and there's a George Soros as the world who are anti human and funding a lot of these protests probably on these college campuses as they're arresting people who don't have student IDs who aren't a part of it. We saw it in Wisconsin when there was riots going on. They're Boston people in front of Illinois and Iowa. There's different places. So there's anti there's anti human people out there who don't want this to happen. But I think there's so many incredible goodhearted countries, the Americans, both Republican, Democrat, independent, undecided. Don't give a shit about politics. Obsess over sea spend every day or whatever might be who are just waking up and going, you know what? This is not the America that, you know, my ancestors fought for that I want to be a part of. That it was when I was a kid, when I was in high school, when I was in college, whatever might be and they're not going to put up with it much longer. And I think that that's what I'm saying. I think the the evil kind of overstepped a little bit too far and now that the tides are turning. I hope you're right. I hope we look back and see COVID. It's like I'm listening to because you go. Yeah, this is the other part of it is where do we get our media from these days? The information police who forever grown up, not me, but like the Walter Cronkite's of the world who are idolized as like the Dan Radhers, even who like it seemed like there was somebody you could trust who was giving you the truth on TV. Yeah, those days are gone. And thankfully X has some level of freedom of speech still. But media, our media, we get from majority of us, from Twitter, not from Fox. We're seeing in true. Right. You had a huge following, but then you go to X and your numbers go fucking crazy. But the majority, how are we going to change the world? I think he's about having conversations like this and then not just me. I'm just some, you know, some anti-vax or, you know, football player. Because there's there. Conspirational there is yeah. Um, but with Joe, I mean, the most, the most influential people in the world. Right. Joe Rogan's one of them. Yeah, Joe has 10 plus million listened to everyone who's podcast. Every single podcast that he does goes immediate to number one on Spotify. Oh, yeah. Yourself. The numbers that you got in person, you got the views you got when you did interviews with Trump and Putin and everybody in between were astronomical. No, he's ever seen. And it's going to be, well, gives me hope is that you have a voice of reason. You are willing to stand up with you, believe in. And that, you know, guys like Joe and yourself and countless others are willing to like lay their reputation aside, uh, get canceled for stand up for what they believe is right. And that's the way that we change things. So that's why I fucking am a huge fan of yours and just want to encourage you if I can to just like fucking keep doing what you're doing. Because this is how the world changed by having long form conversation with interesting people who can change narrative and get people to go, you know what? Maybe I can change my opinion because that's the only way that we grow together is not going to be that we don't actually agree on everything. Or we have a where we think is a tightly held belief. And we go, you know what, I'm going to loosen that grip a little bit. And just listen up with somebody else has to say. And then maybe there's something in there that goes, I like that. I might, I might not have to hold so firmly to this anymore. And it's just like in the church, right? And you're a spiritual person. I'm a spiritual person. Talking about aliens. I think I can talk about this in church, right? No, there's no God created Adam and Eve. And just on this planet, right? There's no nothing else to look at. Well, there's some weird, you know, extraterrestrial references in the Bible that they didn't have maybe the words for it. But there could be some other shit going on here. And maybe I shouldn't hold so tightly to that one belief that I'm the only thing on this entire earth on the earth is 5,000 years old. And there's nothing else going on here. Like we all need to transgress, you know, to transcend, sorry, our beliefs, to include the stuff that we want. But in order for us to get to the next level, whether that's the next dimension, a new earth, a new way of living is to transcend and include what we believe. And in doing that, I think it's talking to people that we don't necessarily agree with. It's like what I'm trying to do and we'll continue trying to do. And that's how empathy and compassion for people that have slider me, shame me and cancel me, try to. And get past that. That's the most Christian possible thing you could do. I mean, Christians are commanded to do that. They don't, but they're commanded to do that. Pray for those who persecute you, you love your enemies. I mean, that's. And like sincerely do it. I'm going to sincerely try and do that. And I think we can all do that on some level. But it starts with just like just opening your heart a little bit, trying to love people a little bit better, trying to love yourself a little bit better. And then not being scared to stand up for what you believe in. It feels like there's a depth of conversation. This is my last question. But have you noticed in your personal life that the conversations you're having with the people you love who are friends with that they're much deeper than they were five years ago? Much, much deeper. Yeah. I think there's a number of reasons for that. It's just where I'm at personally and the changes I've tried to make. But I think in general, people are desperate for that deep connection. And they're just tired of surface level stuff. And they really want to go deep. And we attract our tribe, you know, your vibe of texture, attract your tribe. And just like you said, I don't really know anybody who's like, you know, vaxed or we're in a mask in cars. I don't really either. No, no, no, no, no. There's no judgment. I'm not judging. It's just interesting. That's just where you're at on your journey. That's awesome. That's great. You know, like, I wish you didn't have that much fear, but like, I'd love, you know, whatever you're doing. But like, the people that I'm trying to attract and that I have been, um, it is people who are desperate for like depth and connection and finding like common ground. Even the people that I don't, I had to know what's people recently that are, you know, fully vaxed and double-hosted. And we had a beautiful conversation about, you know, a dozen different topics. And I left going, fuck, that's awesome. Like, I love being able to connect with people like that who don't have a base level of like, yes, belief that I do. But we both came to a table like in the actual table of like, wanting to have like a deep conversation and understand each other better. And I think that's how we move this thing forward. And that's my life is just like people who want to go deep in whether it's on medicine or off medicine or talking about medicine or not talking about medicine. It's all, you know, it's all like, how can we connect deeper? How can we love better? How can we love ourselves in our world and actually make a difference? And that's why, you know, guys, like yourself guys, like Joe are making a difference because they're platforming people who really care about this life and are doing awesome things. And when you hear somebody who's passionate about some, it just gets you like kind of like, right lies about life. And you're like, oh, fuck, yeah, like these people do love America and they do want to make a difference. And they do, you know, care about right and wrong. And there is a field of value where things are good and things are evil and stand up for what's good. And that's, that's what you're doing. That's what you did on Fox for all those years. That's what you did when you fucking left Fox. And I'm just glad to know you're glad to be friends. I am too. Thank you. Aaron Rogers. And thank you for dinner. That was great. Thank you. Do I think law enforcement and intel agencies massage and shape news coverage? Yes. I think to an overwhelming extent, how many of those are directly agents replaced in those fields? Well, we've got women with us. What 100 years in Naval Insol officer who was detailed to the Nixon White House before he suddenly reemerges like your later as a crack reporter for the Washington Post.