If you see your brother getting ready to get in anything, I don't care if he's wrong. You go with it. You know, that's exactly how I grew up. That's exactly how I grew up. You defend your brother. If I don't care if he's wrong. I don't want to see how fighting are going to the street. If he's wrong, you go ahead and fight. Totally. And bubble kept me. It's my brother kept me so much trouble behind that. That's how I grew up. If your brother kills five people in a drug related murder spree, obviously, we're against that. But get him a fake passport for you. get him out. I wasn't angry at, um, I don't like one more. But him being supportive. I've spoken to his brother. I just offended him too. Yeah. Yeah. I said, I don't know. I'm a man. I got to finish brother. That's exactly what I said. And that's why I'm the 100% that that's exactly right. I don't care what is your, he's your brother. Your brother. You stand with your brother. Period. And I didn't like them. Fire me. No. I'm suspended. That's how I felt that. That was funny. And then all these people I knew I thought were decent people. were like, no, he broke the rules. It's like he broke the rules defending his brother. And I don't like his brother. Right. Oh, I like his brother. But, but you know, when it comes to that absolute rule, I got an absolute agree more. And I thought, how are these people raised? I was at a bachelor party in Newport, Rhode Island, like 20 years ago, I mean, I worked at CNN. And I was, we were of course drunk. My brother was much drunker than I was. And we were walking down the street. My brother getting gotten a fist. I was coming on the street. And the guy punched him right up punched him, knocked him down. And I thought to myself, oh, I could hear my father's voice. It would touch your brother. So I knew I was about to get my ass kicked. And I had a Polaroid camera. Remember those Polaroid cameras are playing some game with Polaroid cameras. Remember, and I took it. And I thought, I'm about to get slaughtered, but I couldn't help it. And I went and I hit the guy in the face of Polaroid camera. Broke on his face. And the guy just kicked the shit out of me. Right in the face, knock me backwards onto broken glass. I cut my hands at a huge black eye. I do go on TV the next day with a black eye. I did not want to fight the guy. I'm sure was my brother's fault. And I said to my brother, like, why did you, you know, you obligate me to get a black guy in your defense. I knew I was going to lose. Believe me, man. Like, I can hear my dad being like, don't anybody touch your brother. Okay, pop. Stan with it. Stan with it. Yeah. You know, man, it's, again, that's what your dad reminds me of. My dad, he was one of those, he's his wrote mind at Harsh gravel right in the wrong. Yeah. One of these men's men's men. And again, you know, we've feminized men. That's one of the things they want to do in this culture. So when did that start and why did it start? It's the right movement, man. All those communists and Marxists got involved with all these counterculture people, the feminist and they want it power and the way you get power is about, it's about, it's about feminizing men. LGBTQ comes in. We are a threat to them. John Wayne's a threat. Jesus Christ is a threat. The guys that stand up and say, no, it's this way because they wanted to change everything. They hated J. Edgar Hoover. Not because you're going to hate it. Black people, please. They had a J. Hoover, who hated communists? And he kicked all the asses. He took them all down. And when Hoover died, they had to destroy Hoover to make it seem like that the civil rights movement and all the crap they were doing with the Black Panthers and whatnot was successful. These people were horrible people. The Panthers are selling dope on the street. They were in fighting and beaten women. He wouldn't be Bobby Sille with a bull whip. It was a sanity going on there. They were just a mob. But they would take these people and they would elevate them. And say that this is how you need to be because we need to assist those side bombers. The way Hamas says it's martyrs wall. Right? So that they can have these little children growing up wanting to kill themselves for Hamas. That's raining us to be the exact same way. Marching sweat. And while they're setting up in beveling heels and man, hadn't drinking that little, you know, to kill us and whatnot. Black people out there doing all the marching, all the sweating, all and getting the hell beat out and put in jail. We're their shot troops. The way they hit their youth, that's why they need us. And they're going to keep that going. So, but to feminize, so the ideas to make men feminism because you take them off the tables of threat. Sure. They're not a threat anymore whatsoever. And you're not both on the limit. I hope them in this movement with the broad burning. And I don't need a man. We're equal to men. Marriage is like slavery. All of that. And we all that that was a Marxist construct. So that wasn't about liberation. Oh, it was. I think that they tried to solve it as that. It was about destroying the family. Absolutely. Because when you destroy the family, we destroy the whole concept of family. When government has come in to take over. And that's what it did. The black family got destroyed behind and how white family's going down to in America is in the death spiral. Man, they destroyed us from it. Yeah. You know what Abraham Lincoln said, right? He said, nobody can cross the Pacific Ocean and take America about force. We must live as free men or die by suicide. Well, after destroying ourselves, how do you destroy America? You must take our God, driving mad and help us destroy one another. And this is actually what's happening now. No other no foreign nations destroying America. America is committing suicide in real time. Well, you and I, as we get older said here and watching this, oh my God. What can we do to stop this? So the civil rights movement, um, the official civil rights movement, uh, was and is still described as a Christian movement. Yeah. Was it? No, anything but, you know, it's, it's been a lot of great scholarship done. Recently, um, virtual walkers, now a lot of get scholarship. Um, Jane Bekart there. Uh, it's been for good scholarship. And they have a mejama company. They just, they, they looked at kings, paper, some Stanford. I'm not that a king wasn't even a Christian. Uh, he wasn't a Christian. No, they said he didn't believe in the deity of Christ, didn't believe in the virgin birth, didn't believe in the resurrection, didn't believe in hell. You, if you don't believe in those things, you can't be a Christian. No, that's true. So when you look at his, his, um, monument inside a DC, do you notice rubbing his not on it? No, I didn't know that. There are no, there's nothing about God on that monument. Nothing. Is this not a mistake? This is a confession. You know exactly who they were. And our Bible tells us that a tree is no, uh, how do you know a false property? A tree is known by the fruit of bears. That's right. You go, not get good fruit from a bad tree or bear fruit from a good tree. Each tree in this fruit will be after his own kind. So when you look at the black community and the condition that is in, if it's bad fruit, the tree have to be bad. That's right. And if it's bad fruit, it's a false profit. It's binary. And when you look at where we were between 1940 and 1960, black black community at cut is poverty rate from 80% about 35% in 20 years, the greatest reduction of poverty in the history of the world. And then after civil rights movement, we fly line. Why we turned from God to government. And Martin Luther King, Jr. and civil rights movement led us on that. And we know how King was all tied up with the communists man. Stanley Levinson was the one communist in America, Bayard, Ruston, and then a communist in his youth. The guy that ran the SELC's language, Jack O'Dale, how did pit so dare leave the communist? King's lawyer, Clarence Jones was a communist. Clarence Jones and Stanley Levinson say, they wrote, I have a dream speech. They were both communists. And when you look at that, I have a dream speech. It's amazing when you dissect and deconstruct it because when King says five times in that speech, you know, first thing he said was 100 years after the the mass of patient proclamation, the Negro is still not free. That is a lie. I was born free. My freedom is a gift from God. It's an unalienable right. According to John Locke in his second treat as a government, it is irrevocable, non-transferable and unsalable. Now King says five times in that speech that we were not free. Then at the end he has a great refrain that on some certain day will be free. And last free and last, thank God, I'm out of it for you. And last, still tell us we're not free. And we make our children recite that speech. Every year on his birthday saying that they're not free, that they come to government for their unalienable right to freedom. You don't ask government for your freedom. You the five government to come and try to take it from you. What did I find in father's sake when King George said, I'm your sovereign? No, you're not. I'm going to show you. And he said, I'm not just going to come in and kill you guys. I'm going to bring you back to Great Britain. I'm going to choke you till you're almost dead. Then I'm going to castrate you. Then I'm going to cut you open. Let you see your guts before you die. And then after you're dead, I'm going to cut off your land to send to the most parts of the British Empire. And God's a founding father said, the declaration and said, we pledge our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor, put their names on it, sent it to him and said, bring it and what this is? Free man. And then they walked around with their chest stock out. Yeah, we did it. And King is one around King would have asked King George, he said, well, boss, can we be free? No, okay. We'll just march until you decide to give it to us. The father says, you don't give us our freedom. We aren't it. We're ours. Come and try to take it. And this is the mindset that they've placed into America, black America first, but now America and look at the results of it. We're at the bottom of every social economic statistic in America. And does a revolution now happening here in America, that turning against the democratic party, they're turning away from it. Because they're seeing that it's not working. Joe Biden walked around, man, grow, grow, put you in the back of the buses. The man, grow, I'm going to put you back in the cotton field. And black folks, let me in like, what? You did see him in more house college. Yeah, two more days. And this thing's ever solved in my life. What is that? He's a young black man, 21, 22 years old. Right. He got their time. They're going to put you in the back of the buses. They're going to get your handbrake, let me back your restaurant. If they look at him like, I'm boys, I think I started about knowing this like that. They're in more house. It's a black college. They've already segregated themselves. They don't want to be around white people. And more house if they want to be around white folks, they don't want to harbor the yellow. And you're at more house, a black, all male college. And you're going to tell the rose brothers, nobody is the number of those back of the bus. Unless they want to go to the back of the bus. It's interesting that you just said they segregated themselves. Yes. They love black culture. It's not that they hate white people. And that's what people try to say. If you love yourself, you hate somebody else. No, it's not true. God, but you was forcing us to do a school. We need eight Gentiles. We have to understand that loving yourself is a virtue. Jesus said love your neighbor as you love yourself. So the way you treat your neighbor is predicated on how you love yourself. So if I don't love myself and I want to inject drugs and my arm, I'll expect you to want to do the same. And I'll allow you to do that because I love you as I love myself. If I call myself the inward and of course, I'm going to call you that because I'm loving you like I love myself. But he says first love God, what all your heart, your soul and your mind, they love your neighbor as you love yourself. Those are the two commandments we leave the first one out. See, if you get the first one first, you get the second one first. We just tell people love your neighbors yourself. And so many people hate themselves. They also hate their neighbor. And that's where the conflict comes in the black community. Marley, the King of Union never talked about loving yourself. He was always talking about trying to make some racist love you. And you can't change how people view you. How Bible tells us consistently, do not be concerned about man and how he feels about you. He will hate you. He's going to hate you. Don't be concerned about that. You love him. That doesn't give him license to play his hands on you. Christianity is not a religion of non-violence. It's a religion of non-aggression. That means if you don't hurt, don't touch me. I won't touch you. If you don't hurt my family, I won't touch you. But if you come in, you try to do harm to me or mine. I'm going to whip you behind the name of Jesus. Get you off of me. I have to take care of my family. Know that if you let it be known to anybody that can come up in your house and eat your food and break your wife in your daughter. Is that going to do it? It's no virtue in that? None. And that's what King preached. Allow these evil people to come into your home. Be to your wife, break your children, blow up your house. And that's why so many black men trying to wake me, Christianity doing that time. This is not going to do that. That's Christianity. I'm not going to do it. But then we're teaching a false Christianity, a plantation Christianity from the slave master. Jesus Christ went into the temple. When he found those guys, the money in changing, what did he do? Made a whip, ran them out. Nobody's touched him until he said my time is gone. He was not up in the auto. He didn't allow it. Who came up with the idea that he only vote in November in elections? No. You vote every single day with your time and your money. You show your preferences. You put your support behind things you believe in and you withhold support from things you don't. You can do that with your cell phone, by the way. There's a wireless company that if you're not on board with what's going on in this country, at the highest levels, you can make your preference known. It's called pure talk. It's probably something you should consider. It is proudly veteran led. It is led by veterans of the US military and it supports American jobs by their customer service team. All of them are right here in the United States. Whether company can say that, by the way, not many. It proudly supports great charities, charities that you would support yourself like America's warrior partnership. Every dollar you spend, some of that money goes to those charities every single month. When you switch your cell phone service to pure talk, you know what you will not be sacrificing coverage because pure talk puts you on America's most reliable 5G network. And with playing starting at just $20 a month for unlimited talk, tax lots of data, you can literally cut your monthly cell phone bill in half while doing something that you can feel good about and believe in the average family saves almost $1,000 a year. So no contract, no cancellation fee, and a 30 day, a 30 day money back guarantee, it makes switching easy. Go to puretalk.com slash Tucker and you'll save a additional 50% off your first month. Once again, that is puretalk.com slash Tucker to switch your cell phone service to a company. You can be proud to do business with. So I think your assessment of King is right. I mean, of course. The one thing about his life though that does make me pause is the speech that he gave the night before he was shot in April of 68 and he was a garbage strike, I think. Yes. And in Memphis and he was late because he was in bed with a couple different women and Ralph Abernathy finally bugged him until he showed up at the church. No notes and gives this speech, which is not as well publicized as you think it would be, in which he basically predicts his death. And I've listened to it. And again, I'm not a fan of Martin Luther King, but that's the most unbelievable speech you've ever heard of my life. Yeah, it is. The king did it all the time. But it's I guess my point is it's it's hard to see that and not think like God is speaking through him or how can you predict your own death the night before that's, I mean, that's unbelievable. Well, I mean, I think if you do it almost every day, you're sitting on a lady when you die. Oh, is that true? Yeah, you always predicted it. You always said that this is going to happen to me. I don't know if he believed it or not. I do know this. That he had such a liberty lifestyle. Yes. He was more like Rasputin than he was Jesus Christ. He became an indispensable person in government for a very long time because they put so much behind him. I read this great book. I can't think of an name with it now. They talked about that civil rights movement was more about the Cold War. It was about anything else. Because the Russians were using the propaganda of how they were, how America treated black people yes, to have African nations and Asian nations come to communism. Yes, that's true. You're our comrades. You're our brothers. That's right. They had W.B. the boys come to China. Yes. Give them all kind of awards and everything. Stalin had these guys Malcolm X will go over there and talk. So they were using it as a propaganda piece and they said we have to take care of this. So King was their front man in this effort. They didn't know King was compromised by the communists until right before the march on Washington. And that's when Bobby Kennedy took the first deep deloch told him get these comments out. Number two guy at the FBI. Yeah, he wouldn't do it. Then Bobby Kennedy told him man, you got to get these guys out. He wouldn't do it. And then right before the march on Washington, the big sevens, big six, whatever came to the White House. And Bobby County gave John Kennedy another nod and John Kennedy. So King come out to the Rose Garden. I want to talk to you. He didn't even wanted to be bugged and overall officers. He was going to share a top secret information with it. And he said, I know you know you're on the surveillance. That's all you're talking for saying you're on the surveillance. Yeah. You have three, four guys in your organization are communists. They got to go. And he called their names. They're they at Rustin, Jack O'Dale, Stanley Levinson. He said, these guys are communists and they have to go and they're King Friday night. He said, look, do you think I pulled these guys names out of hat? I'm the president of the state of America. I know their name. And he bought up this guy in Great Britain. They're calling us some type of sex scandal. But get his name. But he said, you know about this. He said, yes, he said, well, he lost his government behind that. He said, I could do the same thing. If you go down, I go down. You got to get rid of these guys because I'm affiliated with you. They had and they did invest in a lot in him. So King said he would do it. Well, J. Gohuber of course didn't believe it. And he heard about this group of communists that were going to be meeting down in Dorchester, George and he set up some cameras to see who was going to show up. And lo and lo and mama King, the mama became a union showed up in this master's spies after this long conversation with the president. And he bought these, these pictures back to Bobby Kennedy and said, I thought he said he's going to get rid of these guys. He's going to cut them loose. And that's when Bobby Kennedy signed up with the Y-Tops on him. He said because and it wasn't much of a tech team because they thought it's going to be a black male then that he was going to be in filtrated and not out of. And so they watched them. And as you notice, none of this stuff really got out. Until and it's funny how it got out. The night of the Joe Frazier, Muhammad Ali fight 1971. Everybody's watching this fight, right? So this group of weirdo communists decided that they were going to burglarize FBI office and media Pennsylvania. They burglarize the FBI office and guess what they found. The co-interprepared papers. Yes. Bought their amount and gave them to the Washington Post in New York Times. And that's where all the stuff about King came out. It wasn't J.A. Google wasn't FBI wasn't it? Conservative. It was a leprosy put it out there. And when people started reading it, they said, Oh my God. Who of a head cap King stuff secret? All of it. Nobody knew it. The sex stuff. Yeah, the sex stuff. And then when it got out, the people or King's people wanted to have it all destroyed. And that's when the judge said, No, we're going to take it and we're going to seal it for 50 years. And nobody can see it. But yeah, these these these these these these liberal morons were the ones that broke into the FBI office and stole it and gave it to the press. And that's where and that's how we knew about Kings of Fairs and it's 45 girlfriends and is and is a prostitute and the orgies, which the thing that bothers me more about all of it, Tucker, is the prostitutes. The orgies are bad. We ain't got to talk about that. But when you buy flesh and you say you're a man of God, I mean, that's very visceral with me. Yeah. That's that's a visceral, you know. Just so much terrible stuff. But the fact that, you know, they say plagiarize his PhD, which means that he was a fake doctor. And then, you know, they say that he wasn't a Christian means he was a fake Christian. And he walks around with these communists then it got in so bad that he loads finally to um, J. Edgar Hoover, he said, uh, you can't talk to him. And that's when J. Edgar Hoover then decided to make him an enemy of the state. And this is when it gets interesting with his assassination. When I read this and um, Taylor Branch's book, Parting the Waters American King. Yes, and Taylor Branch is a Democrat. Yeah. He's Bill Clinton's roommate at Yale. Yeah. So it's not a conservative saying this. It's a Democrat, Bill Clinton friend that's said this about King. He said that the FBI designated King a enemy of the state. And it's only about five or six people. That's been designated, had such a designation in United States America history. And they said that with this designation, even if they heard that somebody was coming to assassinate him, they wouldn't warn him. And that was a courtesy they would give to Mafia Dons. They would not give it to King. So they said he's the enemy of the United States of America. This is interesting that he was so affiliated with these people. They found out that money for Moscow was bank royalties of a rights movement. He was getting money for Moscow and put in his pocket all of this. That he wasn't he was he was deemed the enemy of the United States of America by the federal government. And so I'm reading this. And you know, I'm reading this stuff about you know, right now FBI and the government hated Martin King, the human hate the civil rights movement. I read this story about this group called the Revolutionary Action Movement, RAM. Backwell stands for it was running it took two pot secure shakoo was people were involved in all of that. And he's got rough. They had decided that they were going to assassinate Whitney Young for the urban league and Roy Wilkins when NAACP they were going to take out the black leadership because they thought they were on good times and Hoover had infiltrated RAM and knew what they were doing. If Jagger Hoover had hated the civil rights movement, he would have allowed RAM to go ahead and knew what they were going to do. And then would have arrested him and said, look at this black people killing black people. He weighed this a shame instead. What does he do? He warns the people in the civil rights movement, protects them. Then he arrests the guys at RAM and destroys our organization. They go in the exile. So I'm going to Cuba. They all run off of the city. Does that sound like a man in hate the civil rights movement? No. One Williams did a book on Thurgood Marshall. And she wrote Thurgood Marshall was a federal judge. Of course, well, long time, they became Supreme Court Justice to the District General. Thurgood Marshall said, Jagger Hoover, never lied to him. He had to sign the warrants as a federal judge. He said, Hoover didn't have to lie. He said, Hoover always had the goods. Never lied to him. So why this assassination on the character of Jagger Hoover? Because he took out communist. He took out Marxists. He took out these malcontents that hate America. You know, the same group in 1968, tried to take a Democratic party in Chicago, right? Right. And Mayor Daly in the hard hatch ran them out. And they were out there screaming, the whole world is watching, what does Saul and Esky tell them? You got three choices. You have the final willing wall in cry. Start making bombs and exploding everything. Then they go in terms of GOP or go organize. And in four months, come back, four years come back, and you'll be the delegates. They came back to Miami in 1972. They were so well versed in the rules of the Democratic party that when Daly showed up with his Illinois Chicago tangent, they ran him out. And Jesse Jackson and this guy by name of Singer took their place. They took over the Democratic party in 1972, and they bought an LGBTQ and abortion. That's stuff for the first time. And that's in which the Nixon slaughtered them. Remember, Nixon then he walled a gate. The Democrats imploded in 1972. And they did it from the civil rights movement. All of those people from the civil rights movement. That was their plan to come in and take the Democratic party. They tried it in 68, Daly beat them down. They then used the rules. 72 they got it. They haven't let it go since. And they finally finally got really one in 2008 with Barack Obama. Who is Obama? I think Obama was a part of a worldwide liberal movement. Eastern from Western Europe to here. All of them, all of us cabal of weirdos over here. They were pushing things at that time for Merkel to the guy with France. Obama was involved in all of it. And all of these LGBTQ stuff. All this climate change crap started happening then. And it's all designed for a one world government to try to get out of the world. What health organization or the UN or somebody to start getting some type of criminal court. They can start arresting us for not doing what they want us to do. So I mean, it's funny, the distance between what you thought something was and then what you later learned out it actually was. And on the LGBTQ plus, or whatever calling it now, I mean, I was raised in a pretty liberal area where we were told that was a certain percent of the population. I think it was 10 percent they said was gay by birth. And we, you know, we belong. Don't bother. Like don't be mean to that. Exactly. And that always made sense to me. I do zero interest. Exactly. People in general, particularly over their sex life. But now I'm starting to think in my age that it wasn't that actually wasn't kind of what it was about. No, no, no. It's it's it's it's it's they understand what they're doing. You know what communism is. No, I'm on this apism. Why? Because they do not compete for power. Number one, it's apism. I agree with number one. They don't compete for power. In America, we say there's a harlot in the constitution. It's God. They're starting the rights that we have. that you cannot touch government. That's our whole concept of government on a liberal rights. We have a bill of rights to say you can't touch these government. The communists say no, no such ideology exists. The government controls all. So God has to be destroyed. We know that much of LGBTQ is in direct conflict with our Bible. Direct conflict. Absolutely. So it's like the Daniel test. The head Daniel, you know, you know, the story Daniel was was the king's favorite and the and the guys in Babylon started getting. You know, Jefferson Daniel, they said, we don't set him up. So there's a king. Why don't you make a decree that says that no one can pray to you for 30 days? It makes sense. But they knew that Daniel prayed for five times a day to his God and say they so they say, so if the king makes this decree, if Daniel obeys the decree, his God leaves him, if he disobey the king, the king will kill him either way, Daniel's in the straight bag. So of course, the king makes the decree. That's by an on Daniel, season praying to his God. You know, the rest of the story, put him into the lines, then God saves him. King kills those guys. Same thing in America now. Welcome to past laws to you Christians. You're going to bow to us. If you do what your God says, we're going to punish you. But if you do it, we say your God is going to leave you either way, when the trick bag, either way they have us. This is not what we were promised. We were promised a society where everyone kind of does his own thing and everyone gets along. Exactly. Other people with respect. Exactly. Some measure of dignity. You don't have to agree with them. They don't have to. a society where everyone kind of does his own thing and everyone gets along. Exactly. Other people with respect. Exactly. Some measure of dignity. You don't have to agree with them. They don't have to follow your religion, but you also don't have to follow their religion. You don't. And now I feel like we're being told we have to follow their religion. There it is. It's always about who has the gun. See, the civil rights movement should have been. If Martin Luther King Jr. in a real preacher, he would have known that you don't change people's opinions with the gun. You change their hearts. You're Godfather. I fish it out all right. Yeah. That's Godfather. Okay. You know when first Godfather comes on, that's Michael Klay on send down talking with his girlfriend Kay. And she sees Luca Brazi talking to himself. And she says, Michael, who is it scary man? And Michael said, that's very scary man. That's Luca Brazi. Take a story about Luca. He says, my father had a God, somebody named Bob Johnnie Parntang. Johnnie Parntang's famous now. He said that Johnnie was on the contract with his band leader. And Johnnie want to do this movie. You barely want to let him out. He asked my father if you can handle a father said yes. Father goes to the band leader, offs him $10,000. So let Johnnie go. The band leader says, no. My father says, I'll be back. In this time, he brings back Luca Brazi. And he gets Johnnie out of the contract with a certified check of $1,000. Okay. He says, Michael, how did he do that? He said, well, Luca Brazi, but gone to the band leader's head. And promised him that either his brains or his citizenship would be on the contract. Mike, that's true story. Okay. Question was Peter Corleone, a violent man, who was using Luca Brazi. Of course he was. Marl to the King of Junior. Won't see the hamburger down south. Racist, like man says, no. Marl and says, I'll be back. This time he brings the federal government. The federal government's going to be gone to the guys yet. And says, either Marl to the King of your brains are going to be on the on the lunch counter. He's that hamburger. God bless him. What's Marl to the King of Junior, a violent man? Of course he was. He used violence from a third party. Yes. So, our ice moon with a non-violent movement. A non-violent movement would have been changing your neighbor's heart. Buy your actions. What does that mean? If he's mean to me, I'm good to him. If you won't let me eat a hamburger at your stand, I'll build another restaurant that's better than yours you eat at mine for free. If you won't let me go to your school, I'll build a better school than yours and you can send your child to mine for free. You treat me by, I treat you right, but you're going to treat me like a man. You're going to treat me with respect. I demand that. And this is how you get your respect. Instead, what do they do? They use the gun. In the book of Corinthians, it says, 11 people will not enter the kingdom of heaven. The last one is the extortionist. What's the extortionist? And the extortionist is the one that used violence, threats, coercion, to get what they want. And that's what the civil rights movement did. It didn't change the hearts of Americans. It started them. It told them either give us what we want or we're going to blow your brains out. We're going to put you in jail. That is not the Christian way. And it failed because they used the tool of the devil to get what they wanted. And it continues to fail. We all, at the bottom of every social economics statistic in America, because we will not do what we always supposed to have done. And that was living this meritocracy. How do we break into that and fail? We sure we were better. How do we break into the NBA? Sure, we were better. We will not then we competed. Monor and mono. I'm going to beat you straight up. Talk it if you make a glass that's better than this one that will last for a thousand years. People are not going to care what your color is. They're going to buy it. What's the tool of the devil that he used? Extortion. Yep. Extortion, coercion. You're going to give me what I'm going to pass along. That says if you don't give me what I want, the federal government is going to put you in jail. Now give me what I want. That is not the Christian way. What are you supposed to sue each other? According to that. That's right. On the way to court. Yes, right. What's supposed to say now to settle your difference. Yeah. What's supposed to reason one another? Well, that's why I'm going to take you to court. No. I'll let it go before I take you to court. I feel the same way. I'll let it go. I'll measure you before we do it. And once I trust you, if you break that trust, that's my tax. I trusted him. Sure, now. That's on me. Fool me once. What? Shame on you. Fool me for the fact you're saying on me. You take it. No. They didn't want to do the hard way. And that's my tell of LGBTQ community also. Do the hard work. Don't go to the law. Change the minds of your neighbor. All of these things that they are saying about you that you say are not true. Prove that is not true. Don't go and have somebody put a gun to your neighbor and say that. The Tam Cook is opening. I buy his product. Why? Because it's the best product out there. I phone. I buy it. Prove your loyalty. Prove that if you want to be this man's friend, be it's friend. Show yourself friendly, but you can't go out there using the law to get it done. We have made this mistake over and over again. Right now, they're marching down in Florida. We want to stand and support some type of black history back into public education. We're going to stand this as past a school choice bill. If you're like how the public educational system is educating the children, tell you to a private school. No, no, no, we're going to make you do it. Coercion. This is all they know. And they put the black preacher up ahead of it all the time. And if any black person like when Byron Donald just said that the black family is more intact, during Jim Crow, all that came up. Brian Donald said black people were doing better during Jim Crow. He didn't say that. He said, despite of Jim Crow, Jim Crow couldn't destroy us. But the iron triangle, the black preacher, the black politician, the black civil rights work, they will, they have slavery didn't kill us. Jim Crow didn't kill us. But the Democratic Party, they're taking us out. They are destroying the black community right now. You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network at Tucker Carlson Network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. You go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn when only an iPhone is running. Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. So you grew up, you're a couple years older than I am. You grew up in far Western Tennessee. Near Mississippi and Arkansas, I think in one of, in one of the two majority black counties in Tennessee. And you entered school right around the time. DeSeg was started to roll. So you've actually lived this and seen it. Yes. Tell us about the change that you've seen. I think black people you lose their virtue. Even though they were poor, they were a virtual society. Nobody went to jail. Nobody in your world that you lived there. Yeah, yeah, nobody. Family stayed intact. People stayed married. Nobody getting divorced. Didn't happen. If a child was born and the parents went married to grandparents, took care of that child. It wasn't a single parent in an environment. He was saying what his grandparents had a mother and a father. He was taking care of or she was taking care of. The people had a sort of majesty about them. They went to church. They were honest. Never saw police officer hardly, but sheriff's department. People just got along. And now it's changed. The hip-hop culture got involved in it. At the beginning of the hip-hop culture, you know, they tried to warn people about it. You know, I remember when they, I think it was triple gore and some of the lady, trying to warn people about it. In the 80s. Yeah. 80s. The NAACP, Seeslores Tucker got involved, warn people about it. And then all of a sudden, from what Shoege Knight says, Shoege Knight said they started paying them and they all shut up. They started giving them money. And now the NAACP gives awards to them. Now all the early leaves, they give these guys awards. And the hip-hop culture is a culture of sex, violence, and materialism. No virtue whatsoever. How many of you ever been shot? How many women you slept with? How much money you got? You know, violence, sexual gratification, virtualists. And Thomas Wolf said, the great writer, Thomas Wolf said that, culture is the arts, elevated to a set of beliefs. So you have the arts, you have the culture, and you have the politics. In your arts, you have religion, you have music, you have books, you have television, radio, those are the arts. And we allowed a say, talent movement to take over the arts of the black community and not spread into the white community. And that was the hip-hop culture. And you went out listening to the temptations and listening to all this great music going on, right, stacks. These people are just, I want to kill an n-word or one of them. Up again, where I mean, this little rapper in Memphis, I mean, a glow-rela, not a glow-rela. A glow-rela. Yes. Just wasn't about to the white house. Our hip-record at the time was, I F n words were free. Get the white house invitation. Barack Obama had all of them at the white house at one time. He had a little hip-hop festival in the Oval Office. He had Rick Rawson, Dr. Dre, Snoop, all of them. Now, all of them talk about killing. So you see how a young society that wants to understand, what right is, right? And our time, you had astronauts in Nobel Laureates, but I'll screw White House, right? And you say, that's what I want to aspire to be. Those people you brought to the White House are the people you aspire to be, the heavyweight champion of the world, right? Super Bowl champs, right? Those are the people you aspire to be. And now they bring these people to say, you should aspire to be that. And then they're alarmed when they are that. Well, you had Snoop at the White House. Snoop talk about smoking blunts every day. And he's on TV selling more merchandise and more of them free money is right now. Well, it's Snoop selling cars and selling beer and it's selling sneakers. And you're dope thing. Talked about killing folks. Talk about robbing people. But they made my hero. And people look at this and they say, well, why are these things happening? That's why these things are happening because you hold these people up. And it's heroes in our society. Violin, evil, sadistic individuals. And when your children act like them, you're alarmed. Women walking around half naked talking about having sex with people. When they doing this, shaking like, you're like, oh, what's going on? And you just kind of look at them and say, yeah, so you wonder why middle class, white Americans treat you this way. I'm afraid of snakes because every time I look on TV, a snake was killing somebody. So I don't like them. If you want to see me run out of here, come through that door right now. Okay, I'm leaving. All right? You have a hip hop culture that put all on television. Black men shooting people, black men raping people, black men doing dope, black men kicking indoors and spraying the whole freaking room, shooting cars. And then when they see the black man that looks like that, come near them and they can't get up. And he's like, you a racist? No, I'm saying you look like the person on TV that does these things. If I saw a white man walk to me with a swastika in the middle of his head, I don't look at him and think he's going to be a friend of mine. And he was a man while you're tripping. Man, you got a swastika in the middle of your head. I'm tripping. So you want to ask the question of these young people, we all wear uniforms, don't we? You can see a house on fire, there's a fireman over there. But a fireman, you say, man, I go, he's all, no, I'm just wearing this. You can mad at him. Police also do get mugged. Hey, man, you're the, I'm just wearing this. If I'm not a really police officer. Well, you see a young man looking like a thug. And you tweet him like, though, he's a black graduate from Harvard. Well, man, why do you want to go? Well, I can dress where I want to do it. Yes, you can and you're dressing like a thug. And I'm tweeting you like one. Why would an intelligent man want to be looked upon as a thug? Why would an intelligent woman want to be looked upon as a whore? Why are you dressing like one? And these children looking fused. You know why? Because no one is telling them what right is any longer. In the military, it was this thing that every, you knew what right was, shoes shine, creases sitting down, down, down, down, down, down, down the seams, standing straight. It was written down. This is what right is. When I grew up, when you grew up, your father make your man up in the morning time, always tell the truth. That, you will have children going up now with the parents of teaching them the steel, teaching them the lie, teaching them how to get over. I learned that when I worked in prison for five years, these guys were anti-social. They had been taught a completely different values than I had. And it was almost like what Mao was talking about when he talked about reeducation camps, right? He said, man, this got to be a cultural reformation. But that's what they've done to America now. People were asked to reset down and argue with you about whether or not gay sex is right between two men. And I grew up and say, no foreign occasion is right outside of marriage. And if you screw up, what do you do? You actually repent and God forgive you. But instead of trying to tell me that the Christian faith allows for foreign occasion outside of marriage or gay sex, you're higher. And why would you tell the child that? Why would you take away their ability for him to repent? See, that's what pride is as a man. What is as Lewis said the most downloadable sin was pride. A few things in the Bible that God hates in one of them that's pride. God hates pride. It's one of the seven definitely saying. Yes. What do they call them? What do they call their movement? Pride. Pride. I'm going to make you do what I want you to do. All about me. My truth. I want to be seen. Well, if you and I as a man said, well, Bible tells us, don't worry about how man views you. But they said, I demand to be seen. I demand that you treat me the way that I want to be treated. Pride. Pride. And what does pride say if you come up and tell them you are doing something wrong. I'm not. And therefore, I'm not going to actual repentance. I'm not going to ask for reconciliation. I'm not wrong. Honey, even if you are wrong, he'll forgive you. There's no injury in asking for forgiveness. I'm not going to do it. But that's terrible because that's what our whole religion is built upon. Us being very flawed. Jesus knowing that we're flawed. But recognizing the flaw in reconciling. It's just that simple. And pride tells them, don't you dare. Don't you dare say that you're wrong. Don't you dare say you need any type of reconciliation or repentance or forgiveness. Don't you dare. And these children are buying into it. And it's just wrong. What's the effect of a boy growing up in a female-led household? And then multiply that by millions and you have over 70% of boys growing up in the black community. But now also, among whites, in a female-led household, that's a huge change. And what does it produce? The discipline and the protection of the father is necessary. Sometimes women would just want their father to be a brand-winner. No, that's third or fourth down the line. He's still love his family before he even provides form. He's protecting them before he loves them and protects them first. But that's discipline. Spiritual counseling. Inviting sustenance is down the line because we're out those first four or whatever you provide. It's just no good. So they've taken away his protection. And many ways, some women do it well, but a very few. Women have a difficulty being as stern with their sons as men do. Because it's just something about two males being in a house against. That's when they start growing up. And the father knowing what's out there waiting for his son. That other man will kill him. That other man will take full advantage of him. And a way that a woman doesn't understand. That's true. A father knows this. He's the things that happened to you and I talk to. We have never ever talked about lives about. That's for sure. You know, our daughter's about. But you'll pull your son over and say, listen, you need to watch this. They can give you nuances. They can tell you how to walk. They can tell you how to talk. Put some bass in your voice. Put a grip behind that handshake. Look him in the eye. Father's teach that son's that. I'm going to take you to get your first job. You show up early. You leave late. You don't steal. You don't lie. Do you understand me? Do you have to deal with me? He teaches him in the morning to make your bed. Do your chores. If not, there's going to be hell to bed. It's wrote. It's binary all the time. As he gets older, the gray areas can come in and he protects him. So a lot of black women, I like to have a lot of gay men around their children. Father, they had it. And then what happens? A lot of these young men are being molested at an early age. And their first sexual experience becomes their lifestyle. And now there is a category of HIV from 12 to 17 years old. Who's giving these children 80s? Who's giving them HIV? So this whole protection thing, this instinct that men have when it comes down to their boys. My father will tell my mother, look, you stay out of this. That's things where they happen between men and men that you don't need to see. Because he knew my mother can help it. He would tell you, he'd tell you, I'm kind of hard to do. It's like y'all need to be mowed today and I'll be back at five o'clock. It needs to be done. It wasn't going to be hell to pay. And it wasn't emotional. It was wrote. You had an agreement. You didn't do it. This is where the discipline in my family with me and my brothers come from came from dad. And now dad is the most affable old gentleman you can meet, but he understood at that time he was raising boys to be men. And that he had to teach us in our faith on Sunday. You went to church. You did your chores. You respected your parents. You respected adults. You respected authority. And he would always tell us, the name you got is my name. It's not yours. It's mine. And it reflects on me. So don't go out there mess up my name. And he was serious about that. And we took it to heart. See, you don't, you don't have a man in the house to tell the son that and look him in his eye and lay them on the stand. You know, because sometimes the boy can be 15, 16 years old, he's the biggest I have. The house 120, 30-pound mother going to handle him. They can't. How did the boys and your family do? Everybody did well. Really? Everybody. Everybody. I had a brother that died young. You died at 39 years old. So everyone else is done fantastically well. It's, I, our family story is an American story. Because we believe in this country. We don't walk around talking about racism and white folks and government. But ever, that's a problem. We look at ourselves and say, what did we do wrong? It's empowering to be able to say, I can look in the mirror and I can change my, my circumstances. That's right. I screwed up. I can make it better. And I will blame yourself first. I agree with that always. And we hold each other up to that standard. That is not what the black community's been taught now about black preacher, black politicians and black civil rights workers. Everything's the government. Everything's the white man. Everything's white supremacy. As I've said before, tell me about equality. Well, who you want me to be equal to? Who? Point him out to me. Show me the white man that you want this. All of a sudden, the statements that I want to be equal to you. Ridiculous. It's all my white supremacy, white supremacy, white supremacy. That no. That white privilege. That's the way it is. A privilege to be white. But it's also a privilege to be black. It's a privilege to be an American. It's a privilege to be a Christian in America. It's a privilege to be alive today. You know, it's talking about white supremacy. Look, I'm an Arab Jesus Christ. I'm a child of God. There's nobody superior to me. Nobody. If he is part that superior man out to me, I like to sing it. We'll put it to the test. It's superior to me. You know what? We all have gifts. Why not like a herd of wildebeest? That run in a flock of crows? No. God has, well, all honorary for a reason. We all have free will. And he has given us all certain sparks to make us want to do certain things. And we and when a man finds that spark and finds his gifts, it's in the world of beautiful place. I mean, your air conditioner goes out. You call it H-Vat guy. He's a great H-Vat guy. You love him. Your transmission goes out in your car. You transmission guy fixes your car. You have a pain in your chest. You go to a heart doctor. He fixes your heart. Your hunger, you'll get a good meal. You have a good landscape. We all depend on each other. And when we find these gifts, the world is a beautiful place. And we are supposed to help each other find these gifts. We're supposed to elevate one another because we depend on one another. That's right. We all do. And God has given all of us gifts to live in this society and make it a whole. Instead of fighting and arguing and saying, I want your gift. I want what you got. And if you don't give it to me, I have a right to come and take it from you. That's wrong. And that's the type of H-Vat and hatred that they put in this society. This is why our 10th commandment said, I should not cut it. Anything of your neighbor, not your gift, not your possessions, not your wife, nothing. I am supposed to admire you. The flip side of H-Vat is admiration. I came to this beautiful facility of your relationship across the Make Me Sick. Thank you, Paul. And now I came to somebody's place is beautiful. It's beautiful. God, it's an admirerant. And you have H-Vat. You need to pay your fair share. And then you feed this to children and tell them that if somebody else has something that you want, you have a right to go to government and to a government, I want that. And then government comes and puts a gun in their hands and you're going to give that up. And we created a six society that believes that. And it all came out of the civil rights movement. What's your dad do? That is a dad right now is retired, boy. But for all from the time dad was out maybe 23 years old, he did insurance. And then from that time, and then around about daddy was about maybe 35, he started a gospel music program in Brownsville and did that tell three or four years ago. That is one of the most well respected people in that area. He, because of his influence on radio, he, he's charity's raised money for people, programs. And he started out basically orphaned by his parents, raised as a son of sharecroppers. And then he started knowing that and he, he's fired. And he got a job in insurance industry, he bought us out of poverty. And he had a heart attack when he was 55 years old, that kill this is not how probably Tucker killed everybody in the world that ever had it. He was, he is, he's a medical anomaly. People in all of the world came to study him to see how he was still alive. Much less the fact that he was walking around every day and working without needing oxygen. It's still unexplainable to doctors how he's done it. How old is he? That is 80, he'll be 82 on his birthday in June 12. Now, when the doctor, we would have been to build hospital and the, he didn't want my brothers and my mother to hear that. So he called me and my brother in and he said, I want you how to get with the doctors telling me here. So y'all know what's really going on. And the doctors said, yep, if I didn't have a heart transplant, he'll be dead in six months. And we were like, we were shocked if we know this bad. And dad said, now I want you all to also hear what I'm going to tell this doctor. He said, I know you the best heart surgeon in the state. I appreciate what you told me, but I'm going to tell you this. I'm not going anywhere. God's going to heal me. And the doctor said, Mr. Nelson, I appreciate your faith. You're going to be dead in six months. You're going to get a heart. That was a 27 years ago. I asked dad, I said, how did you know that you were going to be healed? You know, but they didn't care. His two grandparents were elderly, when his two parents had really worked with were very elderly. And he took care of them till they died, took care of them. He said, my Bible says, if you honor your father and your mother, the God promises you three score and 10 years, that's 10 years. He's not going to 35 years old. God's here, he'll only 15 years. So he told me, and he's still thriving. That's how much he believes in his faith. And I learned all of that from him. This absoluteness that it is a journey. He said, I've seen the ending of the book. I've already, I've come came from the front and I've gotten to the back of it and I read the last page. And guess what? I win. So at one point, you were telling me a breakfast that your family was a touring gospel group? Yeah, yeah, man. It was fun. We wasn't fun for us any other life. Yeah. Daddy, dad always loved music. He just always loved it. And he's just singing, you know, quartets when he was younger and guys went to write, you know, bring in women, wouldn't show up drinking. So he decided that he still loved the same, but he wanted to do it in a more controlled situation. So he told us, one day he came in with a truckload of instruments and told those people who are going to play them. Then see us at the base, bubble, here's the drums. And I'm going to teach all the play. And we said, okay. And he told us we part harmony, taught us in songs and we started going throughout the South and we got better and better. You played bass. I played bass and I played league guitar and I ended up playing keyboard. It's about the end of it. Now every time he bought, every time somebody's got old enough to join the group, I had to teach them my instrument and then go learn another one. And so I told my brother to the base and then I went to the league guitar and then I have another brother come in and then I went to the keyboards. And we did that until I was about 24 years old. We have three albums out. Yeah, that had a slew of 45s. I always am very, very happy when I go back to West Tennessee and people tell me that they still have our albums in their homes and the pictures of us in their homes. And look, Tucker, we were so, this thing was so ingrained in our DNA. We hadn't played together really in 25 years, okay? So dad was having an anniversary and everybody thought it would be fun for us to play a couple of songs and I'm like, I'm just going to be a train wreck. So we all showed up at the church's practice. We hadn't played in 25 years. It's literally the truth. So we all plugged in the instruments. Me and my brother's assistants and we as, okay, first or first, we're going to set a rule here. If this doesn't sound well, anybody can be told this and say, we don't do this. All right? Everybody's like, all right, cool. Anybody can say, we're not doing it and it's done. Right, cool. We plugged in and we did a song and we hit it. Boom and everything was like we did it. That's really it. And we all just died laughing. We just fell out laughing because we thought it'd be some rust. We thought that it would be, we forget no. It was like we were 18 years old planted again and we were like, oh my god, this is ingrained in us. So we got such a big kick out of it once or twice a year. Now we'll just show up at the house. Dad called us two weeks ago and say, hell, I won't have a jam session. I live in Virginia. He lives in a But the house dad called us two weeks ago and say, have one of them, Jim session. I live in Virginia. He lives in Brownsville. It's about me to turn out was away. And when dad been called actually much, when he calls, we all come and we all show a bit the house and we sit around for about five hours, playing to get cars and sing it and just had a great time. And that's what we do. Whatever you calls, we show up, we plug up, we play. And it's just like we never ever left amazing. And you're playing gospel. That's what music, yeah. There they all blues music playing in the house. Oh, why? Even though you're in the Delta. Yeah, yeah. It was new then. It was when the transition was being made from all music during that time, with gospel music before stacks of Motown. It was all church. And then, of course, stacks of Motown started taking the music and turning it into R&B and blues. And people during that time was saying that if you left gospel and went to R&B and blues, we went from the church to the devil. That was it. You went to the devil. People offered my father tons of money for us to start singing R&B and blues. Tons. He would never take it. We never, never. So you were touring to church, you were performing in church. Church is serious. He would not take, he wouldn't let us go secular at all. And they saw it as that. You remember I'll green, the great souls of I'll green. When all the best stuff started out in I'll green, you turned back to the church, girl. So you said, I shouldn't, this is my punishment. And as life went on, and you started seeing what started happening to a lot of those gospel music. Oh, yeah. You went R&B and kind of, you know. Their lives blew up. Yeah. Yeah. So again, that saved us from that, though. So on that circuit, pardon my ignorance, I'm from O'Hoyah. But you just drive to another town or another church, you just roll in and. Yeah, we would, that would have the, he would have the, he had the program set up. We didn't know what we were going. Usually I'd ask him on the day off. And we would get up and we'd go to church on Sunday morning. We, what we load up our instruments. Then we go to church. Then we would leave the church. And we wouldn't, and we would drive probably an hour, maybe two hours, no more than three, but he would have two programs kind of set up in the same area. So we would show up at the church, we would get out of church about 11 o'clock. We'd show up at the other church about one or two o'clock. We'd set up, we'd sing. We'd get out about maybe five o'clock. We go eat dinner somewhere. We had to be at the next church at seven. And then we go sing there. We get out there about 10 o'clock. We get home about maybe one in the morning. We'd unload the instruments and we go to bed and we get up and we go to school. Ooh, and that was it. And that's what we did. And we- It sounds grueling. It was grueling. And we would do it sometimes on Saturdays also. But it kept us out trouble. It gave us a type of respect in the community. The people looked out for us because they always saw us doing that. And they respected us as young men doing that. And they held us in higher steam for doing it. And many of the blessings that me and my family are enjoying now, people are saying is attributed to us putting forth those efforts as children. Going and saying, you got some music all around, Tennessee, and I believe that. Do you still listen and gospel? Oh man, love it. Love it. Love it. Don't stop listening to it. So for people who didn't grow up listening to gospel music, but think it's pretty great. How would you start? Who would you recommend listening? If you get Spotify? Like, Ah, the Tasha Cobb Leonard. She's just awesome. If you love it, then listen to Tasha Cobb, and you touch it yourself. She's young and she's vibrant. She's us. She's great music. Tasha Cobb Leonard. She's very good. It's gotten, it's getting more secularized now. Yeah. You know, you get that Kirk Franklin all I'm jumping around and you can't really tell the soul music. I mean, the gospel music from the R&B music in some ways now. We have to, it has to get back to the roots. This is not show business. This is communion. This is worship. It's not, you're not coming there to be entertained. You're coming there to commune, to be involved, to worship, to praise God in song. And many times people now will look at a concert, a hip hop concert and think that they are there to be fan in that way. And so you'll find gospel groups now with lights and smoke and ex-bloogings and costumes. And this is entertainment, you know? God doesn't need all that Jesus did to someone on the mount, right? He didn't even have a mic. He just walked up there and rocked it. And we still remember the sermon because it touched people. It touched people. And that's what gospel music is supposed to do. It's supposed to touch the soul. Spirit touched the spirit. And when you go to a real gospel concert and it's communion. And it's the people coming together to commune in worship, life-changing experience. Did you ever play for white audiences? We would do it very sporadically. We would do it in Brownsville. We had this white gospel group called the layman. And we would do a concert together with them in the gym and in Haywood County. And black and white people will come to the concert and we were singing together and we were coming together in that way. But it's very rare that we sang it on the white audiences. It's very rare. Huh. What is there difference? No. Not really. When you start doing something in gospel, that's why Elvis was so help hypnotic to people. Elvis and Jerry Lee Lewis and Johnny Cassett, I'll tell you, they go to black churches, listen to black music, they play for black people. When you go to Memphis and go to sons, studios, or go to stacks, you'll be amazed at the immersion of black and white people in those studios working together all the time. Be beginning Elvis works very close together. New each other. Black and white musicians loved and played together. They weren't Elvis stayed on Bill Street. They knew him on Bill Street. So the music bought people together. It always did. Elvis will help out a black concert, gospel singing in Memphis. And he just show up. And people said they look around and Elvis is in the shirts and now there's a gospel group saying he knew them all. But it bought them all together. The music always bought people together. They always enjoyed it. And there's just this lie going on around the nation that made believe that we were all done in fighting and getting hung in the lancin' race riot. Not saw anything like that growing up. So, I mean, it's interesting, so you were growing up at the end of segregation. I mean, literally. What were the race relations like? They were fine. I mean, I just didn't see it or feel it. Tucker, it just wasn't there. I was never mistreated by white people and I was going up. I asked my father this question, oh, that's how my song. I said, dad, why people treat you growing up here? He said, I've never been mistreated by white people. My father actually told me that out of his mouth. I've never been mistreated by white people here, ever. See, Martin Luther King told us he was dreaming about a day that you will not be judged by the color of your skin, about the content of your character. You will be judged by the content of your character. It is inescapable. Yes. But he gave black people a fallback position. People are being judged by the content of that character and they can say, no, it's a color of my skin. You can't correct skin color. You can't correct character. So many people that didn't have what they wanted, what getting what they wanted, it wasn't based upon their skin color. It was based upon their character, but they were being told it was their skin color. Martin Luther King for instance, had never been to a public school in his life. Went to a crows at the Elosco, a seminary, he went to Boston University. Never was hungry, his dad went to Morehouse College. Did you ever see this house in Atlanta? He lived in a Victorian style, almost like a mansion. He's not a poor guy. Nobody bothered him. He was a, in 26 he was the head past of a large church among the amount of mountains around the Cadillac. Living in a, up across black area town. His wife was a college graduate. That was a black intelligentsia as a white intelligentsia that had money in left well. And then you had poor whites and you had poor blacks. It's just how the world works. Somehow another though, in the minds of black people in the South, they always said, I can only feel the whole, if I am loved by white racists. It's, I gotta make this claim. That's a tough one. I gotta make this claim, remember love me. I got to. And it was a, a type of weird ignorance in that that I can only feel good about myself. If I'm setting beside you on a bus, or on a toilet, or in the hamburger beside you. Right now, I have the only deconcern about one thing. Is the bus taking me to the same spot? Yeah, well, I don't give a damn one, I'm setting beside on it, okay? I don't want you to set beside me. Well, I don't want to set beside you. Now, what about that? Muhammad Ali says, the sick mind, I don't see someone who's not wanting it. They got a name for people like they call them stalkers. And there's no virtue in it. Now, if you don't want me here, you think I'm gonna fight to be beside you? We don't serve in words, but I'm not one. But since you call me that, you can't have my money and I don't want to eat here. Good for you, yeah. Instead, oh no, no, I'm gonna make you take my money. Insanity, absolute, and when Miss Mary got a store down the street, that makes better food than they make. No, no, I'm not ever sitting in, because I wanna ride the bus beside you. A lot of people think that the Muslim or the Muslim boy caught into the segregation on the bus. It didn't, it was NAACP. They had a Supreme Court decision that did it. Mother of the Kings, bus boy caught you, they aggravated a lot of people, didn't do anything. And then people don't know this. Two years later, the black people sent it to the back of the bus again because of white intimidation. Yes, they went back to the back of the bus voluntarily in Montgomery, Alabama. They don't talk about that little tidbit of history. They don't tell people that Rosa Parks wasn't operative. Trained at the high line of folk school, a commut training camp in Montegale, Tennessee. King, Ralph Abernathy, all of them went there. Led by these three communists, dumb, rosky, and mouths, nor in all of them. They keep that part of a history secret. Yeah, that was a commut training camp in Montegale, Tennessee. They tore it down in the 60s because they found it was a communist training camp. And they were the ones that were training all these people to use non-violence resistance to cause violence. Calls violence. They went down to Montgomery and Birmingham and said, we're going to have a joke at Bull called it, until people start getting waterhoses and dogs sicked on them. The concept is to cause violence, to aggravate you until you strike out at me. It's me coming up in your face, so I go, this is it, and then found these events, they'll leave me alone now. I've never taught you, but I put my finger in your face and I messed it up all the way just. And then as he talked to his violent, you know, and those were their tactics. And they did, nothing could have came out of it because the Black people are poor in Selma and Montgomery and they've ever been. I've noticed that, no one seems to care. They don't care because it was about getting in the vote for the Democratic Party, so they could take it over. That was fed with five million, six million, the Layton Black folks down south, Black folks down south that they could use. And they understood that Stockholm syndrome was gonna take over and everyone will put a Democratic Party. As a matter of fact, if you read the history of that time, when the election of 1960 was going on, Martin Luther King Jr., and the rest of them put this thing called a blue bomb. It was a blue piece of paper that they passed all the churches in the South. And it was talking about how Martin Luther King Jr. was locked up in jail. The JFK had given Martin Luther King Jr. phone call and it talked to his wife and Richard Nixon did not. And that was enough to get 80% of the Black people to vote for JFK down south. Don't know, that's from 1960. And Beat Nixon, who had supported the 1957 civil rights act in the 1960 civil rights act. They gave them the right to vote anyway. But it was a blue bomb, they did it. And it was them, again, leveraging the Black preacher who if you want to talk to a ignorant Joker, talk to the most Black preacher in the United States of America. Man, these guys don't know anything about foreign policy, don't know anything about government. All they know about how to get money in their hands for taking Black people to the polls about for the Democratic Party. And again, if you want... Is that still the case that the get out the vote operation in the South among Democrats is still heavily relying on Black preachers? Oh, yeah, you ever had a soloist to the polls? No. Yeah, man, you should look it up. So the polls is an organization that's funded by George Swirl and his people. And they give every Sunday before the first Tuesday. And no, remember, these churches will use church buses to put their card against into an east bus and take to the polls. They have a vote. And this is unspoken, but for every Black person that they can get in the bus, they get about $10, $15. And in my documentary, when you were the help from me, I have a picture of Raphael Warner, and John Lewis standing front of a soloist's polls, but it got sold to the polls written on it. So yeah, everybody can look up, so it's the polls and see that it is something. Matter of fact, before the election this year, Kamala Harris and was out there talking about soloist with the polls, they were out there rallying it. Yeah, and it's all about the Black church. But why, I mean, the program of the modern Democratic Party is about as aggressively anti-Christian as, well, it is the most aggressive anti-Christian platform of any movement in the history of the country. Yes. So how could any preacher participate in that? Two things. They either know it and I'll corrupt or they're ignorant to it, which most of them are. Yeah. You'll be amazed how many people, I mean, when you and I did the show on George Floyd in October, how it went viral. And that's when Biden's numbers start tanking, because we just exposed so many lies in the interview. I mean, it just went viral. When I went to World Overcomes and Memphis, people were just talking about the interview. They were showing it to me, and they don't have phones. And they thanked me for educating them. On my podcast, I miss every other show, I educate, I tell people this is what they stand for. Most people in the Republican Party and the GOP is very bad in messaging. You think? Them stuff is gonna sell $1.50, $1.50. They horrible. They can't. So if you ask black people, how do you feel about LGBTQ? I hate it. How do you feel about abortion? Can't stand it. How do you feel about school choice? How do you feel about that board? How do we need legal immigration? We just don't have everything. And then you say, well, what part of do you think supports you up one of you? Democrats do. Now, why would you think that? Nobody's told them any different. So when I show them that the Democratic Party is up for abortion for the night and the month, it's bottles them. When I show them that Obamacare and the Democratic Party's folks, castrating little boys and called them little girls, giving double mastectomies little girls and calling them little boys, it stardones them. When I show them the Democratic Party both against school choice every single time. And has used the public education become, you know, it's a God and I welcome here. He's not welcome here. And that they will allow us to lead Christian education comes to the public. They're startled. When they call it onto the fact that Biden is letting all the illegal across the border, they call it on the dad. When we talk about gun control. They have. They finally call it on them. That's why it's just numbers of taking their two. Really? Yeah. They see the Hispanics, the illegals come into their communities. And they're upset. Their rents are going up. They are opening up. They're schools are getting crowded out. What really made them angry is when they start seeing them giving these guys people debit cards with $300 on it. And they said, man, hey, and when they see them, they won't take them to jail. Where it is, you know, their, their son gets a $250 being taken, can't pay it, they're taking them down. Exactly right. If you can't pay a child support, they put them in jail for two years and they won't take it spanning down. Yeah, our family's been here 400 years when we can't get a free speech. Yeah, exactly. When they saw that they're men that cannot get work, or Joe Bowden gives of 400,000 work visas out to Venezuelan's Williams. And they said, hey, I need a job. They saw that in real time up close and personal. It was, was they say, all policies are local. They saw this locally. But see, the GOP has been not very good at explaining to people that the voucher program in DC is, this love, the bad majority of the people are there, black people benefit from it. And Barack Obama and Democrats killed it every chance they get. We don't put, we will say the teachers unions. Well, the teachers unions are on the ballot are they? The Democrats are. You don't say teachers unions. You said the Democrats are stopping it. When you started talking about LGBTQ, you don't say LGBTQ, if you do, you connected to the Democrats and say, they have the ones that support it. They have to know what, who their enemy is. And it has to be known absolutely. When Jesus Christ went in front of the Jews, when he's at the temple, and they were all wondering, why they're being treated so badly? They were already going through Roman, right? It's sad. Who about the Roman? Your problem is in the joking, right? Over there, the Pharisees and the Sadducees. And they said, uh-uh, liars, hip or Christian, generation of vipers. And he just went off. And that's when they said he's got to die. He said, oh, it's not the Roman? They're not your problem. So, I can try to wear it. And see, we have failed to do this. And this is why my book, the Iron Triangle, book authority gave it number 61 on the greatest political books ever written in history of the world because it blew up all these myths. It told what the black, most black preachers and black politicians and blacks and whites organized, organized, we're doing it. We've held them in high school. Well, the NAACP is great. Oh, you know, Martin Luther King and Jim Sir Riceman was great. Oh, the black call was this guy's, they know they're not. They're the enemy. And the people, your problem is not the white conservative. Your problem, Jim, is you're gonna write over there. If you ever take a moment to set down and talk to your white conservative neighbor, you'll see you're talking some of the best people who want to face in this earth. But they won't talk to you because they've been told that you hate them. And you won't talk to them because you've been told that they hate you. And who tells you that? Black preacher, black politician, black civil rights worker. And these people aren't stalkers. They're not gonna come to you asking you to accept them. They're the type that's gonna say, if you don't like me, that's your problem. You put your hands on me, you don't have another one. You're welcomed to come to my home. You're welcome to talk to me. If you need to preach your op-ion, you want. If you hunger, I'll feed you. If you need a job skill, you'll have, you get one. But show that if you come and try to hurt anything of me or mine. I got two things to keep you off me talking to Jesus in my 38. And these people don't understand these people. I live in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia. Best people in the world. I'm a big guy. You're a big guy. We're small compared to these men. It's 6'4'6'6'6'8'. Yeah, they make them big. Nice as guys in the world. Man, if you're targeting a ditch, you don't be five on pulling it out. If they go in a killer deer, they cut some meat off and leave it on your front porch. Hey, Ben, this is for you. Just when it's harvest time, all man there just piling up food. Take some, just good neighbors, great people, but they're a man. And you are not gonna walk up to them and tell them that they're responsible for your plight. And they have done nothing to you. They're not gonna accept it. I don't accept it. Of course not. But if you say, I'm a man, you're a man. I'm responsible for myself. You're responsible for me. I need your help. They'll do anything to help you. Can I see, well, two questions just about family dynamics. So why is it that women are obviously much less violent than men on average? But men, boys, you grew up in a female headed household tend to be more violent. What is that? Man, our violent, we, most of us have a violent major and our fathers teach us to temperate. They teach us control. Yeah. From the time we come from the hospital, until the time we leave it out, control yourself. My father had to teach me how to sleep along. My mother will let me sleep with her until the end of the day, 18 years old, right? Of course. That says no. He says learn to sleep alone. Oh, no. No. He has to learn to sleep alone. That's a father. Yeah. Oh, but my mom would bring up, put him down, let him walk. He's too big to carry. I'll put him down. He has to walk. She puts him down. You and I've seen mothers carry boys three and four years on rather than a store. Fathers put him down, he'll learn to walk. Fathers know these things. He sets up on his mom. He starts my run to the mother. Get off your mother. Leave it. Exactly. That's do that. But if that's not that, mother's going to automatically grab him and baby him and rock him. So he never learns to temper himself. Even now when it comes out to the whole LGBTQ thing, right? Do what you want to do. Your father says, no, no, control yourself. You can't just jump every woman you want to see. Why have a man with traction? You better control that. Why? Because those are the rules, son. Control yourself. Do your duty. And, but, you know, when my little raised boys have been getting their feelings, I'll let your feelings guide you. No. Well, what if I don't feel like going to work tomorrow? You can't. What if I feel like slapping this woman? Whatever, I feel like cussing my balls out. What if I feel like slacking on the job? My feelings? You and I will talk these feelings are set aside. I'm going to give you a series of rules to follow. Control yourself. When have you heard a liberal or a Democrat ever say such a thing now? Control yourself. Oh, God, you want to walk out. You know, a simple thing, like when you go to work in the morning time of the summer, you're supposed to act. No, no, I'm going to come in that way. I want to act. I'm going to be flaming. I'm going to work where I want to work. I'm going to wear high heels and lipstick, that I like Joe Biden, all these freaks in this cabinet. What the April of the team? Person that works for the health and human services? Yeah, yeah, Rachel. Rachel? I mean, a man in the dress. It's like not like that you don't know that's a man in the dress. No, no. Sometimes you can see a man in the dress, and I know it, right? Right. But you know that's a man in the dress. And he won't air about it a lot. You got to walk around him and lie. And act like he's not a man in the dress. And if you call him, sir, you can go to attitude and try to get your fire. So I got to walk around this guy and lie and call him a man. If it's wrong, don't do it. If it's a lie, don't say it. It's simple. Call me a man. I'm not going to call you, ma'am. You are not a woman. And if you come to me about there to get, I'm going to show you not a woman, because I'm going to knock you out. Stay away from me. I got this other Sam Britton guy walking around bald head, red lipstick on a mustache with pumps and a skirt. He comes to the job interview with that on. And you supposed to look at that boy said, first, OK, this is a joke, right? Somebody, somebody's pranking me, right? No, this is real. Hold it. This guy needs help. You don't make fun of him. You don't. I agree. Be them up. You don't. Stay right there. And call somebody. We need to pray. This man needs help. They need to help that he needs. That's plotting these people. People to judge. Get married to a man. That's cool. All right. But then he hides him in his cabinet. What is that? No thing is in the church. Yeah, I'm going to put this man. And then all over the world. Xi Jinping and Putin is watching this. Stone Cold Killers looking for weakness, looking for the boys that D-Day to die. So he says, time to take America now. Oh, you know about the Roman Empire, the barbarians at the gate. And the man were too offended to defend their own city state trying to hire mercenaries to do it. We're headed there. And you got these guys. Again, Vladimir Putin has made it plain. He said, this Western satanic way of living stops here when I happen to sell his EPDQ stuff here in Russia. When I have this anti-Christian, anti-American values here in Russia, I read a story in South Washington, posted he's militarizing the people that have been his country against it. He said, no, it stops. The Russian Orthodox church said, no, it stops. You have Victor Orman in Hungary is concerned about it. It's coming. This is no, it's not. You have Xi Jinping says it's not coming over here. And the African nations are saying the same thing. Yes. And right now we have people in America that have an agenda, and so worldwide agenda. That's one of the reasons why they were going in the Ukraine. I read this thing from a, oh God, forget where I got it, but see my new book. With the guy said that one of, to get in the EU, one of the things they had to do was ever get pride parade. And yeah, it's one of the, yeah, one of the things you're gonna have to do. And they had to get a great gay paparade and anybody to the dumbbells region and that's when stuff broke off because Bellman says no. I've taken it too far now. And that's when all the wheels started rolling. And they knew that the EU and NATO was coming in because these are the things that they do. And then they press the ideology further and further. So now Biden has tied most of Americans for and policy, policy money to LGBTQ climate change and abortion. If you know what all these things, you don't get the money anymore. And the African nations are saying, what people are starving? Well, if you don't do this, they'll starve. And so guess who comes and feels again? A lot of me are Putin. Exactly. Or she's in pain. And she's in pain. The abortion thing is particularly confusing to me in the United States among black voters because it's so obviously genocidal. And if you look at the numbers on whose babies are being aborted where the abortion clinics are, I mean, it's wildly disproportionate in the black community. And it does seem like, first of all, it's not an accident, but second, it's such a clear sign. I can claim I love you, but if I'm putting an abortion clinic in your neighborhood and encouraging you not to have children, what am I saying? You're saying I want you extinct? You know, the first recipient of the Margot Sanger Award? No. Martin Luther King, 1966. Wow. I didn't know that. Margaret Sanger was not a friend to the community, as we say. My own friend, who did it? He did. And the Negro Project. She called us human weeds. She said, more for the fit, less for the unfit. She had the thing called the Negro Project where she wanted to terminate the black community because we were human weeds, as far as she was concerned. And Martin Luther King, Jr. helped us up abortion clinics and got the Margaret Sanger Award in 1966. When I heard from people, oh, he didn't know what they do, I said, well, did the, well, they haven't on display yet. That's actually true. Yes. And I said, well, have they given the award back yet? The Human Weed Award? Yeah. No one know they ever. All right then. That means that they're proud of it because they still display it. They say, oh, we didn't know this. Take this award back. You know, yeah. Martin Luther King, Jr. was the first recipient of the Margaret Sanger Award in 1966. Did you know that King was asking me indicated from the black church? No. Yeah, 1961, he was going to take it over for the Civil Rights community. They had this bishop, I think, a bishop, Jackson. And Jackson said, no, the church was not supposed to be involved in politics. If you want to be involved in politics, go join the NAACP. Go join the Urban League. But the church is supposed to get you prepared to live forever in the presence of Jesus Christ. We're in the... involved in politics. If you want to be involved in politics, go join NAACP. Yeah. Go join the Urban League. But the church is supposed to get you prepared to live forever in the presence of Jesus Christ. When we were in the ecclesiastical matters, we're not going to be marching. We're not going to be doing sentence. Well, King and his crew wanted to take over the National Baptist Convention. They had been given their orders from Stanley Levinson in the common turn to do this. So they had a plan. Taylor Branch talks about this in this book and also David Garrell talks about it. If you just go on to the Progressive Baptist National Convention website, they'll tell you about it too. They went to the convention in Kansas City. The National Baptist Convention, it was a 10 million member organization, almost all black people like they were Baptist. And so the Baptist church said this convention called the National Baptist Convention. King and his boys are going to go there and they were going to force a vote on the floor. And King had a guy that he was going to put up. He wanted him to be president and King was going to be his puppet master. Okay. So they were going to force the vote and they had a plan to go on the floor and push their way through. And I don't know what this means, but somehow another somehow now this supposed to work and take the floor. They did it. And a fist fight breaks out, preaches in their fight. One of the preachers got killed during the melee. This preacher happened to be Bishop Jackson's best friend, practically skull and he died. Wow. Yeah. African venture. Yeah. That the bringing SWAT team, the riot police and the mayor, it got so bad that the mayor of Kansas City even came in told him to cut this mess out. I've never heard this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So King loses a vote. The preacher dies and Bishop Jackson holds King personally responsible for it. He actually really keeps King from the Baptist church. He keeps him out. So King gets smart and he wants people to still believe he's affiliated with the Baptist church. So he starts his own religion, his own church and it's called the progressive national Baptist convention. That's the sector. Raffia, what is is is a Raffia, what I belong to? We're still in the Raffia, what I'm from Georgia. This is why Raffia, this so progressive. And so a liberal when it comes to abortion and Gary, right? Because that's what these guys do. Then a prostate group of weirdos, malcontents and perverts. And if they, they started in a post to see in the black church. So when black people saw Baptist in King's organization, they thought you still with the national Baptist convention. Well, I fell for two. Yeah. I'll talk out it too. Shout out two years ago. I was doing research on Raffia, or not. And I saw he's with the P NBC. That's the NBC. So I looked it up. And they said, King started it. And then I looked through the book of my library. And I started Taylor Branch had written about it and had done the chapter on it. And he went into it in depth. And I said, how, how much else do I not know? And then I found out about the Margaret Sanger award. That's shocking to me. And I'm saying, get God. Then you find out that you plagiarize his doctorate, his doctorate, dissipation at Boston. You. And the only reason why they didn't take it back is because they didn't want to be called racist. And then you come to find out he's not a Christian. And I'm sitting here in my late 50s. Said, I'm an well educated man. My family is well educated. Doctors and lawyers, nobody, nobody knew it. Nobody. I mean, I have scholars in my family. And I'm calling all of them. Didn't know, didn't know. And I'm still in their faces. Oh, my goodness. This is one of the reasons I do what I do, because I know with information, people changed their mind because it changed everybody I gave it to. And they were saying, I don't know my God. So I've done a podcast. I'm going to end people here. And I'm thinking, I'm going to get crushed up. This you know, good. You always out of that up to a man. Thank you. I did know. Thank you. It explains a lot. Thank you. Now I understand. And this is about what you do is so important. You have this huge megaphone that people listen to. And when you do this and give a person like me an opportunity to come on and say these things, man, it's effective. Well, because I think I don't know the truth about almost anything, but I do know that what I have been told is likely untrue in almost every category. And I think I think people have arrived at that conclusion. Yeah. You know what I mean? You see the results. They're more open minded. They are. Well, so I would say this. There's a lot about, I thought I knew a lot about civil rights history because I learned about it, you know, every year. Right. School. But I knew that the fruits have not been what we're promised at all. It actually hasn't worked. You're from around Memphis. I was talking to one of your sisters. Yes. When you lose a Memphis and I, when I, I lived near Memphis 30 years ago in Little Rock, Arkansas, and people would drive from Little Rock to Memphis for the weekend. We can take your wife there for a fun weekend. Yes. Stay at the P.B.D. Hotel. I was there. I was there. I was with the college University of Memphis. I was there. Yeah. It was a cool town. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And now, you know, it's the most dangerous city in the United States or certainly one of them. It's like in, in free fall. So clearly, it, this isn't working. They know it's not working. They have the same stats in front of them. They, we have talked about a Democratic party heaven is an American hell. I saw that great interview you did with President, you're clearly from El Salvador. El Kelly. Yeah. Good guy. And he talked about spiritual warfare. They recognized it as that. Yeah. That MS 13 was satanic and they were doing rituals. Literally. Yeah. It's literal satanic. And he said that when they, when they hit them, they killed 84 people in three days. And he said, what, what do we, he said, we prayed. That's right. He said, when we prayed for wisdom and he said, and we knew in spiritual war. And then he said, a miracle happened. And they shut all of that down. It is that and people in America were mad at us because they knew that we could do it here. They could do it there. Yes. And they don't want it done here because if people live or certain, it's like people going to a plantation on and say, Amen, want your teachers slaves out of reading. What? Then they know their slaves. Right. Heratumus said, I free the thousand people out of free the thousand more. They just known they were slaves out of freedom. Bob was telling you about how in the black church, they were telling we were one of the curse of hand that we were supposed to be where we are. See, they were actually heard a preacher say yes. Yes. Yes. Many. Yes. They do the same thing now. Tuck it up and walk around telling black people, you know, your country hates you. White supremacy. White supremacy? That the split style of white supremacy is black and fail already. We must stop white supremacy. What I mean, blacks are inferior. We have to act for DEY why because we can't compete with you because you're so freaking good. We need government interference. We need government to help us because I can't compete with the white man. All right. Thank you very much. Uh huh. I guess I am inferior there because I say the stupidest thing I've heard in my life was a affirmative action and DEI. Now think about this. You're a black man, right? You're saying businesses and the government are racist. And everybody says, yeah, what's your solution to this? Lefty businesses and the government go to the black community and decide these racist businesses and racist governments, go down to the black community and decide what black people they're going to elevate. So you're going to have to racist decide what black people are gonna be elevated. Yeah, that's right. Who you think they're going to pick Malcolm X or seven fetch it? They don't want to end discrimination. They want to control of course discrimination. They want to have this program. So they say, OK, you decide what black person gets what and they get all their cronies. And that's what's happened for the last 50, 60 years. If you want to see the contempt, the Democratic Party has for black people turn on MSMBC and just look at our shop. Enjoy reading. Look like a damn fool. She got Trump there. She hate them. Trump gets from town ahead. How is she taking seriously by some obviously because they keep her on. I'll show up to still press his hair like he's like in the car left the black million. Exactly. The car left when they were off and left the temptation to make a 96. It's an old school look. I will say like a fool. But you know what? That's how they see us. You know, the war was out of Al Trump and was a drug dealer back in today. Yeah. What's the mafia guy you had on your show? The who? The mafia guy. It's ex mafia guy. Oh, what a great guy. Oh, guy. The guy is awesome. Oh, gosh. I got me. I got me. Next to him is another day. He's awesome. He's awesome. And he came out on real sports. Yeah. We're Brian Gumbel and told the Al Sharpton story. Said that, you know, Al, Al was and then I'll have to come out of it back to it. There's a snitch. Oh, he's an FBI snitch. Yeah. I have to sell in drugs. Now I heard that, you know, they wanted to, they wanted to in menthol cigarettes in the black community, right? And Joe Biden pulled back on it, cause they started saying, it might make black people mad at him and Joe don't want to lose any votes, right? So let him die. They said the same between 300, 600,000 lives in the next few years. Joe said, I'm going to lose some votes. Yeah, let them die. Both why am I laughing? Yeah, let them die. They just black people at them die. So that's me able to rap, right? That's a time Joe Biden's away from this. That's something I got pretty good idea. So I smell the rat and I put that rat's name in and put in menthol cigarettes and Al Sharpton showed up. I got my camera. That was clown done enough. So the cigarette manufacturer called Al up and said, we're going to give you some money to go down into the black community and put some heat on Joe Biden, right? To keep him from bearing his menthol cigarettes. We can pay, you know. And so Al was not going to be slick. He didn't want to go against the NAACP. So he decided to corrupt George Floyd's brother and Eric Gardner's mother and had him go down and talk for him. So he didn't have to be on the front pages behind him. George Floyd's brother is a menthol cigarette lobbyist? Yeah, yeah. Working for Newport now. Are you working with Al Sharpton? I'll pay him on the table. I guess. And Eric Garner's mother, he sent them down to talk for the menthol cigarettes to stay in the black community. And then they started putting the heat on Joe Biden, Joe Biden pulled it back because he said my call is some of those. So George said, let them die. They've taken all of the favorite flavor cigarettes out. You know, that the white people smoke. Yeah, yeah. But when it comes to black people, the menthol makes the nicotine more addictive, right? Everybody knows this, okay? And for some, for some reason, when they were addicting the communities to cigarettes back in the 40s and 50s, they're just giving them away. They, they, they, they were giving the menthol cigarettes away in the black community for sure. And so black people were smoking. And I always wondered why black people smoke certain brands, cool, new ports. Yeah. But they were giving them away. And the father. That's true when you were a kid too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My father didn't smoke. Yeah. You never, you never smoked my mom didn't smoke. So I, I didn't smoke. So I would see my uncles and black me everybody smoked. Except my dad and my mom. And, um, I, I always kind of wondered why they smoked this thing, brand. And I never saw white people smoking them. No. They were nasty sicker. Yeah. I'm never. And so I'm hearing, so I hadn't thought about it at all. So I, I, I read this story about Biden pulling back the man on the menthol cigarettes. And I said, it's got to be some. This is always follow money, right? Well, of course. And there's to the outshot. I suppose I had to not kill them. Black people with menthol cigarettes. 300, six or a thousand black lives. I guess black lives don't matter when it comes to menthol cigarettes. So I came out with a little money. And somebody said, you know how you take this money? Six or a thousand black people are going to die. He said, and how much money I'm back. But it is. I think you're absolutely right. I never thought of it this way. Well, guess because I'm not black, but it's an expression of contempt. Exactly what that is. Here, here are your spokesman here, your leaders. Joy Reed and Al Sharpton. You obviously don't think much of me. Tucker, you and I both know black people that are much more qualified, much about it. What they do. Yeah, I do. I do. I do. Well, spoken. Better looking. I can understand how Joe Biden looked at Al Sharpton and thought that black people weren't clean. Okay. Look at him, right? So, you know, you look at these people that they choose the DEI hires, right? Yeah. They're not going to be the Jim Clyburn, Maxine Waters, but your idiots. I mean, if you ever get the opportunity to sit down and have a conversation with them, you're going to walk away saying, Oh, my God, black people are doomed. These people are absolutely moronic and they are leading the black community. And they are the stupidest people walking the face of this earth from sharpened to jacks and the Clyburn, the Maxine Waters. Oh, my goodness. And, you know, I'm warning black people about them because you asked the question. I mean, I tell them, look at where they're. They're all kings over ghettos standing on the ashes, plan the fiddle, drugs, fight, dope, terrible schools, family breakdown, graffiti. Man, you want to let your dog live in the places these people live in Detroit and Chicago and New York. And they are there and then what happens when they run for officers. There's no opposition because nobody won't eat Republicans or even show up down there. Yeah, that's true. They don't even show up. There's no opposition anymore. Chicago and then these black majority districts, none. None. So these people are left to be smitten and beaten down and destroy. And a one party system. This is why I say as Taylor Brant said in his book that in 1956, the comments in America were given instructions to turn the black community into a direct opera of the Soviet block. And they've done it. One party rule, dictator worship, a prostate religion, poverty, drug abuse, government dependency. It's a third world country in the first world country. The black community instantly says something like Haiti, a worse. And it started out with Martin Luther King Jr. whose whole life was a ditty party. All jizz and smoke and fight and whipping up on women. Martin Luther King Jr. make a ditty party look like a Catholic convent school. Just show day nacha. He was smoking him and thaw cigarette when he was killed. Yes, he show us. He was smoking a methals to grill. Salem. And it had been fighting to be not women the night before and drank in and it's just, it's interesting. I has to even say it out loud, but you're just from such a different. I can see what you're mad about this because you're just from a different world. Yes. And the world you grew up in was not collapsed or pathetic. It's like, no, no, there's there's a, there's always a pill. they're lying to the strong. Some people are like, you know, you lie to the wrong, you know, you might pay for it. I'm on those type of guys. Yes. See, I was sold up to be the beer. These people. Martin Luther King Jr. just pitched it on my daddy's house right now. Revere them with a table. It was right. It was cannon. And then when you when you're searching it, there's almost like when CS Lewis was talking to Tolkien and Tolkien was trying to tell, you know, CS Lewis was a atheist and Tolkien believe in God. And I would love and there's a book how these two brainiacs discuss this, right? Tolkien and CS Lewis walking around Cambridge discussing this and Tolkien finally at CS Lewis was asked some fact. He says Jesus Christ was either a maniac. Yes. Oh, he's exactly who we said he was. There's a little ground here. Now you got to decide and Lewis looked at all the evidence. He said, man, one crazy. He had to be who he said he was. And he said he had to deal with it. He went through a convulsion. And after that, you know, CS Lewis became the greatest Christian apologists of the 20th century. That's for sure. Learn so much from him from his writing. And he died on the same day the JFK died. Yes. And I'm reading his works. And they've led me to great places. No hell is the choice, right? Prior to the most damnable sin. We've wrote a black pride. Black pride. That's a whoa. Private. I'm not a person. I don't even use the word anymore. I'll tell my children I'm pleased with them. What did Jesus, what did God say to Jesus, my son, well, please? Yes. We don't use pride in our house. So we use a sting. I've a stained. I aspire. I tell my children, I'm well pleased with you. Because pride is something God hates. And what the left of them, they made it a virtue. And children are dying because of pride. This is why they pulled their pants down. Pride. You offended me. I don't care. Was a humble person to talk to walk in and say, I don't want to do anything to offend you, sir. Oh, but exactly right. So tell me the rules here and I'm about to. I'm putting your your needs, your feelings above my. Exactly. Oh, not the left. Uh-uh. Me. Me. Me. What do they say? Me. Me. My truth. Me. Me. Me. God hates that. And they try to use it as a virtue tolerance. Tolerance is a sin. Be the grandeur. The great sermon on the stand of tolerance. My next book coming out at the end of your lives called the end of tolerance. I'm telling America that I'll tolerance at the end. We have become intolerant of these things. And we can't be afraid to say that we are. No, no further. You're not bringing this in my household. You're not saying this to my child. When I'm allowing this any longer, I'm not going to allow you to sexualize my child. I'm not going to allow you to bring a drag queen in the school and shake his ass in my son's face. I'm not going to allow you to corrupt my children. I'm not going to allow it. You have to stand firm. I'm not going to allow. Tell my mother, I'm not going to allow you to do to to to to to to familiarize my son. We have to start telling the courts. You're going to stop taking boards with their fathers who can rear them correctly and give them the women who either they might try. You know, they don't have the ability to do it. You know it. Why? Well, that's about 60 years of empirical evidence to show that to be true. We have to start putting together a society again, where if you read this book, my brother gave it to me, um, about the governor of Maryland, Westmore, the two S more. I don't know if you've heard of Oprah. I don't know. Oprah had it on her book. But it was a book about Westmore who became governor of Maryland, Black man. And another Westmore ended up in prison. And he talked about how their lives separate. But, um, the Westmore of Maryland said that they were both going in same direction until his mother grabbed him. He's smoking. We went to one of the school. His mother went to borrowed money from everybody in the family. He took him to a military school to get out and they raised him and they gave him discipline. You know, I'm going to Oxford. They know this works for Marvel Collins at Westside prep to all these schools around here in America. They know this works. But you don't teach the slaves on your plantation to read. They will leave the plantation. This is why the GOP has to say, and I talked about this. A good friend of mine, Dave Brett down there, Liberty University. He's been a congressman. Yeah, I know. And, and, and, and, and they said, this is going to be Christian business. Man, I do this. It's not going to be the churches. It's not going to be the politicians. It's going to be people like me and you talker like you doing your job. You do it every day and I applaud you for that. Say it. I'm my brother's keeper. If that man, if that child's a Christian, he's my brother. And I'm obligated to assist them. Why? He's my brother. You're not talking about brothers, right? That's right. That's right. Brother's staying together. He's my brother. And therefore we are obligated once we get to a point in light to say, we are going to get some guy going to go back and get some. We have to. And we have to stop doing like and we sometimes get trapped in what liberals do. Let's use government. Let's go to government. Let's go to government. So why would we have to go to government? When we account in some industry, when we have millions of dollars, when we just do it ourselves, we can scholarships. We can sell boarding schools. We can get these really trouble. Let's start at the troubled boys first. And let's go and say, Miss Jackson, your son is flunking out of school. He's in the second grade. He's going to end up where his dad is in prison and on dope. We can take him and educate him and I make a man out of him at the time. He's 18 and he'll take care of you for the rest of your life. Can we have him? You can see him on the weekend. She'll start taking him. Ganttia. Ganttia. That's what we must start doing. And that's how we reconnect the chain by going and recognizing because if the, if the black community is corrected, 60% of the crime in America fades away. The car jackins in DC talker and in Memphis. And that getting younger and younger. And I read a story that hurt my heart. It was a special needs guy in Washington, DC had two fingers on each hand. And it's, I think he's in the 50s. Him and this guy got into it on the street about something that arguably fighting and it ended and a group of five black girls on this age of 15 actually got, can we jump on it? He said, yeah, go do it. And they beat the guy to death. This is about maybe a month ago beating the death. And you say, what type of society do we have now? Almost 20 juveniles have been killed in DC already this year under the age of 18. shot in the street. And it happens all the time now where we're numb to it. That's a way out. We have to go back to our Christian virtue. We have to go back to loving our neighbor as I said. And I can say, we want Christian me in the first love, God, but all your heart, you're sold in your mind. Then you love your neighbor as yourself because we discussed before. And that's right. Love God first, which a heart sold in mind. You can't love yourself. How do you love yourself when you're going to love God? Then when you love him and the piece of God comes over you. Then you know how to love your neighbor. And we're not talking about some, I don't like hip-hop music, love money. Yeah, that's your God, right? Well, if that's the case, what you're going to do to your neighbor, right? We're going to put them in the prostitution. Why? Because that's my God. I love my God is myself. So we have to go back to our Christian standards. Then we have to go back. Then we take care of our families. Then we go and we help our brothers and sisters in Christ. And when Christian business men and women get together and say, forget the GOP, bunch of crooked liars, sick of it. We're going to do this ourselves. And we, you know, you already know this. There's charities, public charges. I was doing better in government. Always. Yeah, they talk to such a high rate though. We can hardly use it. I'm not even sending it to charity. But that's what that's what we have to do. And we have to put out the alarm. The stuff that you do, man, I don't know. You're, you're here in Maine right now. And you're kind of isolated like I am in the Blue Ridge Mountains. You don't know the effect you have on America. I hope you know it is absolutely positive tremendous all our way down. I always travel over suit. My dad taught me that. Jane Brown said, wherever you go, you need to travel it. You got to strut, right? So I'm coming down and say, hey, maybe you know that. I said, I'm going to do whatever you're talking. Everybody knows your name. It wasn't a person that I talked to. I flew from, I flew from Richmond. Had to go down Atlanta. So I went five hundred miles south for some reason. Come back up. Went to Atlanta and then flew from Atlanta up here. And everybody that stopped me and talked to me. And I told them I was going, everybody knew who you were. Black white Asian didn't matter. Everybody knew Tucker Carlson and everybody said, oh man, he's great. And I'm looking at, I mean, everybody love Tucker. Love told me I said, hi, tell me I'm getting white white white. You don't feel like I should leave my house once in a while. I'm, I'm, look, it let's work everywhere I went when I would tell people, people say, oh, that's what do you do? I did it. I was going to talk, you're this a Tucker. And then they lay it in. And it's never been a person I've met ever at the gym at the grocery store at church on the street. And when I mentioned your name, they do not know who you are. Well, you haven't met obviously a lot of unmarried 45 year old white female lawyers. I'm going to have my family. Okay, take a break. Get the men's. This is incredible. Oh, man, I'm having fun. I would say a couple, I know Sharpe has been very well in a couple of things I would say. Well, I remember you say you went to Liberia with that more. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's a, he's not stupid. Oh, no, he's not done at all. No. No. He's a, he's one of the very few public figures who's actually smarter than he looks. I quoted you in my book when you said Al Sharpe won't be president of Black America. Yeah. That's all he cares about. And see, and I said, I thought he's supposed to be a preacher. No, I know. Who's, who's job is wearing people Jesus Christ. Not what they're, well, why are you involved in politics? If you, you know, preacher, why are you involved? You know what he was. It's interesting. He was, um, I mean, look, we, you know, all of us make decisions, um, you know, freely the big decisions freely. Like there are false. Of course, I'm not talking about past on it, but, but Sharpe didn't grow up a performer in the, in the church. Yeah. He's preached at three, four years old. Yeah, exactly. Fat four. Yeah. And his mom sent him around his, his father had an affair with his mother's dog. He was a murderer from a first marriage with his stepdaughter and ran off. Yeah. And, uh, but she put sharped down in the road at like four boy preacher. I was sharped in him and on the road with like, my hell, yeah. Jackson, yeah. And I'm preaching and so he's scrubbing or really distorted way. I think that's part of it. Well, that's what's happened with the black church is turned. Christianity into entertainment. Yeah. And it doesn't need to do that. It really doesn't. Uh, the word is enough. If you want to see yourself a good singer, just get them a box of your star and listen to him. Right. I love James Taylor. James Taylor can just sit down with a, with a, with a, with a, acoustic guitar. Right. You just wow, James Taylor's great. Tracy Chapman can do the same. Yeah. Exactly. Right. But hey, you'll, Jackson could just have a piano. Yes. Anchor rock art auditorium. That's for sure. Those are, but when you got, you know, kiss me to the, have an explosions and make up. And that's that. You know, because they couldn't say it. So they needed to entertain. And when you have preachers that don't know the word, they go into entertainment. Do you pre-tever? No man. I take preaching much to everybody. The vision is free to say that. Now let's Jesus Christ come to the system side of me and tell me this. I want you to go preach my word. I'm not going to say I'm speaking for him. I'm more like a layman. I agree with that. I've taken from like CS Lewis, right? CS Lewis said, no, I didn't go to seminary. I'm not a preacher. I am a, I am a Christian. I'm just explaining to you my relationship with Christ and how I see it. I hope you agree. And he changed the world. Um, we, we have people now and I don't know how it gets back right because as you know through your history, that with the Jewish community, the Sanhedrin and the Sadducees had to be destroyed. They're, they're alive really that exists like it did back then along because there comes some obstacle to apostate. The civil rights movement did that to the black preacher. It bought liberalism into the black church with it and very conservative. Um, it's teachings and, and wasn't really into politics much at all. Now it's getting very liberal and it's teaching you have very few black preachers that were preaching against LGBTQ or against abortion because the democratic party controls the preacher. And we have a general two generations of black people now they are not really heard the truth. They were playing Martin Luther King Jr. over and over again, who doesn't really mention the name of Jesus unless it's in a parable. You've never seen him baptize anybody. You never seen him ever all to call about to help people come to faith or bring him to Christ. Everything's about the vote. Everything's about marching. Everything's about protesting. And they see the church through that name. And that is not his calling. No, that's corrupt. Yes. And corrupting. Yes. And it's corrupted at the black community. And it's corrupting the white community now because because they're doing the same thing. And, and, and people are believing in that. And they're saying if you want to get butts in the pews, this is what you do. You started talking about social justice and see as long as the truth tape letters talked about social justice. He said that he said that we want to use Christianity to an a means or an end, even to the end of social justice. He said because the enemy, he called God the enemy of Quaker, because he was the devil. Yes. He said because the enemy would not be used as a convenience. And I said wow. And when I read it, it made me more angry because we've been told the social justice is a good. You said because they're any one I'd be used as a convenience. And I said, wow. And when I read it, it made me more angry because we've been told the social justice is a good thing. But see, as well as say, God will not be used as a convenience. And we try to use him as that. Pay my life, be a pay my car, no, give me a house, get me a job. Hell, a social worker can get you that. Who can get you eternal life? It's not your doob or he's not your cosmic chauffeur. And they have relegated him to that. And he will not be used as a convenience. And right now we're telling people there's lie that if you join my church, he's going to bless you with a Cadillac. He's going to bless you with more money. He's going to bless you with that. No, he'll make sure that you're in peace. No matter where you are, my father went down. It was this beautiful situation. We didn't start out there. But ended up great. My his age is birthday. They're holding my big birthday celebration. And my sisters were setting it up. Right. And they hadn't gotten everything straight. So we were at church. They said, this will everything set up yet. We need you to take daddy off somewhere and keep him occupied for about two hours. That's what he's going to do with daddy for two hours. I mean, you can't do anything. Daddy, do what he want to do. You find a way to get it done. You know, my sisters, they rule the rules. That's all right. That's just, that's all I grabbed. They had to come on. Let's go somewhere because they want to be a surprise, right? He want to be a surprise birthday party. Okay, well, let's go. So I got him, I put him in my car and I said, hey, daddy, show me where I was born. The place where I was born, I was in Tennessee. He said, I'll take you right to it. So he and I got in the car and we drove. He said, turn here. He knew exactly where it was and said, turn up in here. And I turned up in there and it was a field and he got out. And my mother passed away 12 years ago and he started pointing at places. And he said, the house was there. He said, we were settled on a porch there and we watch on play. Then your mother, he stopped and said, happy days of my life. I said, wow, they were poor. They were young. They didn't have rainwater. He says, happy days of my life. He gives you peace no matter where you are in your life. Ah, you're making me emotional. That's it. Rich, poor, whatever. Peace. That's what we're actually talking. Everything's going to be okay. We turn the guy away because we believe he's going to make everything okay. Government says, turn to us. That's a lot. Leave them alone. Turn to God. And you find people, you're not seeing them while they're rising in life. When they become a million, that's what they say. But how does that my life will let me and my wife within a one bedroom apartment and your children? And then when they get rich, they're taking pills and they're hating on another. And they'll turn back and they'll tell you, God, man, how does that happen? My life when I was young when we were starting out. And our Bible tells us if you keep in mind on him, he'll keep you in perfect peace. When he left to go to heaven, he said, my peace, I leave with you. Why do we have a fentanyl process in America? No peace. This show don't even know what to turn for it. Cause they're telling them they're not a man, you're not a woman, you're a pride, you don't turn to God, God's not a real. And you have, and I was wired up in my religion. You know, we believe there's out of clause and we was five to six years old, right? So he just was a wild children, not to believe in God at that time. When you get in trouble, son, where do you go? But no anxiety, yeah, you're just going to be fine. I've seen the end of the book. You're going to win. You're going to win. And he walks through like, yes. You know, as Muhammad Ali walking into our, our, our, our ring, looking at, undefeated. No more content to tell them, I'm going to kick your ass. That's what he'd do with his hands up. That's how you walk up in wake up in life every day, looking at Satan, or kick your ass. I'm, you know, where you beat me today. No way. I win. And when you do that, he starts backing up off for you. But when you have to go to government, then we have to go to man and man is wishy, washy, you know, he's going to go for his own best interests. And then telling these children this line, this lie. And so we have wealthy people in our family. Off the by there, they're house there. That's it for what? But I was just fine. How about it in 1972, I paid it off. And he says that with his new wife and this happens, you can be. And when we come there is a communion, we would all give our, give our big houses for the small house of that. There's a right now because all that happened is there. Peace. Just a serenity. I told, I told my brothers and sisters, I'm, I, I, I would make move back to that house when I've come old man and just sit there and chill like you were in man, right? The peace. That's what it brings you. That's what we're all after. Does the over the last two hours, you said a bunch of different times that we're, we've, we've bought the lie that voting brings us peace. Yes. Oh, that, thank you. It's a pan of seal. It's, it's seven or eight things down. I mean, would you prefer that? What was, what's more powerful? They have two rich guys in the town of 100,000, that can control the elections or have 100,000 people that are, that are broke, will control about the two rich guys. It's money and power. Tuck, we know that. The people that the lobbyists in DC, the people that have the money, they control what we see on TV. The masses are controlled by these people. And if voting was a pan of seal, and this is something that's pretty interesting, you're going to love this stat. The 1965 voting rights act that they love, the Martin Luther King Jr's old hail for, right? They love them. Was of course passed in 1965, right? The greatest percentage of black people who ever voted in the presidential election was in 2008 for Barack Obama. Yeah. The second number, 1964, before the voting rights act, that's a fact. Before Barack Obama's election in 19, 2007, in 1964, you had the highest percentage of black people ever voted in the history of this nation, almost 70%. And that was before the 1965 voting rights act. It was a tail end of something. It calls nothing for the black community. But they gave all of this to the civil rights movement because they need it, came to be on top. They needed him to have a victory. And now even now they still lie about the impact that the Voting Rights Act has had on the United States of America. More and more black people voted in 1964 than then then then then and ever voted before the Voting Rights Act was even passed. That is not interesting. Well, it's consistent. And it's not just black voters. They say that to the, they said to America because it's a right off of something that doesn't actually help you that it's a purely symbolic victory. Here's your win. Here's your prize. It's politics. What does that have to do with anything? Yes. Politics did this for you. We did it. You know, people come up with me. You weren't talking about a right mom, all of the gang, junior. You would have nothing. If it wasn't for the civil rights movement. Is that man you lost your mind? Jesus Christ has ordained something from me. Do you think anybody can stop it? Are you crazy? You're an idolater. You think that Jesus Christ has ordained something from me. And some white racists can stop me. Oh, you've lost your mind. That's why you don't have anything. You've sat here in my face and told me that I can be stopped by our racists and that I need government to give me what I have. I'm just about to pistol with your ass right about there. How you think you talking to you projecting, man? Maybe you're a beggar. Not me. Never me. You wouldn't have nothing if it wasn't for the civil rights movement. That was million hours. And my hometown was a million hours before the civil rights movement. Jackie Robinson had gotten into the baseball. He had integrated for the civil rights movement. You grew up in a pretty poor place, but you had a black millionaire. Oh, yeah. El Ross was great. It's grandson Bill Ross is a male browns row right now. El Ross gave my father a job. My father never walked for a white American. He worked for his self or he worked for a black man. Yeah. Yeah. We had many prominent black people where well, there were so many prominent black people. School teachers, business owners, people are on clubs. You know, it was just you had poor white poor blacks, rich white, rich blacks. It was just what it was. It wasn't a situation where all black people down tried and white folks being there hanging from trees and never seen anything like that. I had a, um, this is in the Delta. Yeah. This is in the Delta. We had a, there's the poorest part of the United States. Yes. I had a football coach named Rufus Lassner, great coach, um, football coach. And hey, what kind of intensity at the time? Rufus Lassner. Rufus Lassner. That's great. What about name ever? Oh, man. He was great. hardcore one of those was just a great man. White man. My whole coaching staff was white. Never any, never it needs. Families of racism, mean. Lesson for the player was the team mostly black mostly black. Yeah, mostly black. And those coaches were awesome. Never never at the school was there any time. It was racism from the teachers. No, no, it just was there racial tension at your school? No. We went to school with white children and their friends of mine, even to this date. No, no, I had a white black fight riot. Really? Never. What, what were the percentages? What do you say? Your house is 5545. Serious. Yeah. And you maybe never had 60, 40 black. When you never had racial tension? Never. No, one time. So if you're 25 right now in 2024, you can't even imagine the world you're describing. No, no one under 50 has even come into contact with a world like the one you're describing. History's going to tell them we were fighting. We were hating on another. They have a racial strife. The white people of treatment was like we was dogs. We couldn't do anything. The government come in and save us all of that. And all of that is a lie. All of it is a lie. We, we, we saw people live and die based on their merit. Some people did very, very well. some people did not and race really didn't have anything to do with it at all. And this is your life that you live. You saw this with your own eyes. Yes. And it, and, and right now it's, it's the same thing now. You know about my family intimately and you see how successful we've been. And as I tell people, I'm not going to let the secret out. But yes, I do. Yes. I am familiar with your family. Exactly. That is true. And not exaggerated. No. And as I tell people all the time, you don't get much blacker than me. Okay. Yeah. Hey, like you can walk past and mistake yourselves of a white man, right? And so it's obvious that I'm black. So they don't care. I'm black. And what? What are you going to judge? I'm going to walk around some races at police balls. Don't judge about the color of my skin. No, if you don't like me, that's your problem. You put your hands on me. You have another problem. I'm going to love you. I've been ordered by Christ to do so. I'm going, I'm going to love you. I want to treat you right. I'm not going to cheat you. I'm not going to lie on you. I'm not going to do anything. But it ends with blatant disrespect. Or would you try to harm me? And most men understand that. Yes. And because of that, it never happens. Never. I travel all over this country. I mean, nothing but nice people. I mean, I can't remember the last time I had a bad person. I'm literally sitting here trying to think that I cannot think of it. The last time I met a person that was just mean to me, I can't, I can't come up with it. I really cannot. That's not the America that Joe Biden describes. Yeah. And it's not that I went with his wrong Democrats. You know, so they probably that way. But the reconcile American that I run into every day. And again, like you, I travel a lot. And I run into people and I know people really know you. They see you talk across and right and they come up to it. And I bet they're nice. Are you talking about it? They are nice actually. Yeah. And so they want us to hate one another. They want us to look at one another and, and, and, and, and, and, you know, like, Iago and Othello whispering in your ear, you know, whispering in your ear. He's your, any, you watch him. He's your enemy. You watch him, you watch him. Do that. There's nothing to you. But, you know, it was written your ear. He's out to get you, man. You need to watch him now. And when that's planted, paranoia sent in, and you have black people that are isolated in getters, right? isolated. Yes. That never come out. And they've been figured this lie by the black preacher, the black politician, black civil rights organizer. And they won't let, if you want to talk about segregation, you try to integrate. One of those majority of black districts and try to bring a patch of white people in there and see how they're gonna fight you. I mean, if you want to bring black people, I mean, you want to make a mad bring in a trader to chose, right? Whole foods. You learn to bring white people in here. I'll get them things out of here. Oh, man, they'll try to burn it down. They don't want white people in those areas. Because you're bringing alien ideas to the locals. No, they want to keep white America out of those black areas. They call it gentrification. This is a fancy word saying keep white folks out. And why do they want that? Because they won't control Ralph Abernathy wrote in his book in the walls, came something down. In the 1980 election, he went to them and said, look, guys, welfare is destroying the black family. It's destroyed. Well, God, three generations of black people on welfare. When he started doing something to get them off. And he wrote this in his book. I know we'll forget it. He said, it pleased. He said something curious happened. It pleased them to see three generations of black families on welfare because it gave them control. And that's when he endorsed my own Reagan for president. Ralph Abernathy endorsed Reagan in 1980. How did I not know that? Yeah. And that's why he did it because he said that the black caucus was trapping black people into this welfare trap. And you remember when they did the welfare bill would build Clinton? How the black caucus fought against it? And they never voted for it. Ever. They want to keep these people exactly where they are. That's where their power comes from. It has always been one of these attributes of black leadership. That's very different than any other leadership in America. Jewish leadership, Asian leadership and the people in the Indian community, look out for the benefit of their people. They have trustees. Black leadership has always been a sellout leadership that came from the plantation system and the house and the agro system. So when black people in the South finally got the right to do anything, they would go with their old slave masters and the slave masters had their outside children and their a lot of children and they would put them in the power of the black community and they would give them the money to set up shop to have money to run for office. And there's always this interconnection between them and the and the and the class of black people and the law class black people that were under their control. And it's that way still today. The preacher, the civil organizers and the politicians, they're all part of this little iron triangle where the rich white liberals in the Democratic Party give their money and they control the black community. Then the Democratic Party is an apostate evil organization. It is an evil organization and the history of the world. Nothing ever comes close. The Nazis were here for about maybe 20 years. The Democrats have been there for 220 and they were the party of slavery from 1800 1860, the party of the Confederacy, 1960, 1865. The party of Jim Crow from 1865 to 1965, wholesale murder, rape, torture, castration, they did it all for power. The civil rights of them was necessitated behind the trustees of the Democratic Party down South and not a number of the any other civil rights, any other civil rights of the slaves. Maybe I wanted to other and do you think that after the past and they changed on the dime every senator that voted every Democrats down South, they voted against the civil rights legislations of the 60s, remained in office. They never got beat. Whether it was whether it was left in the mad ox, whether it was, um, Eastern, whether it was tennis, all of them kept their power. And a lot of them started keeping their power with the black vote, because through Stockholm, syndrome, black people were voting for the Democratic Party because they had taken on the characteristics of their mass. And they want to please him. We'd sue guys who signed the Southern Manifesto. Yes. For example, opposed to civil rights legislation. They got reelected with majority black support. None of them lost their seats. Black people got the right to vote down, started voting and mass down South. Fritz Holland's left office. Oh, man, God, Fritz left probably the 2000. I knew him. So it wasn't that long. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And Fritz voted against it. Yeah. Fritz voted against it. Dennis, Eastman, um, all of those old, Dixie Crats down there, voted against it. And none of them lost the offices. My, I'm glad people got the right to vote. They voted for them. My, in fact, George Wallace, the worst of all of them started winning with the black vote before you, before you die. Black people vote for George Wallace. Hey, Jesse Jackson came and campaigned for it. You're blowing my mind. Yeah. That's how corrupted this is. This is how intertwined it is. It's, it's, they, they've always been part of the same group and it's designed for one thing. And this is why I always still conservatives. The access that this thing revolves on is the black community. This is why now I'm talking about what you've been doing about 30% of the black vote has left the Democratic Party over the last year. It started with our George Floyd interview. And it's, and then black people are paying attention. And now it's just, it's leaving. And George Joe Biden is an Atlantic, the Democrats are in the panic. This has got a profit for now. No Republican has gotten over 20% of the black vote. Nobody's got over 15%. If Trump gets 20% of the black vote, the Democratic Party's done forever. Do you think he has a chance? Oh, I think he's got a chance to get more. I'm, I'm, my next podcast coming out this Tuesday is going to be Donald Trump, the true first black president. Because the Democrats have finally done the Donald Trump, what they've been doing to black men for 200 years. What they did the Donald Trump in New York is the Rodney King tape of the Democratic Party coming out coming after white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. Most cool started at the top. They haven't started at the bottom. We very seldom see a mouse say tongue coup where they fight for 20 years and right. Yeah. Usually they go and shoot them in the head. They shoot them and then they go and they're doing an Africa right now. Right. They go to top and just killing them. And they're in charge. That's what they tried to Trump. Trump is not just the leader of the Republican Party. Trump is the leader of white Anglo-Saxon Protestants who these people despise. And hey, they have an enemy that they're trying to kill. And it is a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant. It's not that they dislike the evangelicals and they despise them. If you put that group and you talk about what they agree with and about what the Democrats and liberals agree with, pull out the opposites. Now, right pull out opposites. And they know that Trump is the leader of that crew, that crowd, that crowd is his basis, that crowd is where he gets all of his power. And they know that they take out Trump who's going to take his place. Who can walk up right now if Donald Trump is destroyed in the Republican Party and says and have that crowd come out and like they come behind Trump. I don't think the person exists and they know that. And so this was how the Democratic Party does a coup. They don't use bullets. They use the justice system. I mean, they like the metaphor. They locked up. They're trying to get a ban on now. They locked up the trade guy would China. I forget his name. He's eating it for her. Yeah, it's peeing the viral. They got the viral locked up now. Now they got Trump. I mean, people don't see what this is. What's the last time you saw somebody go to jail for a contempt of Congress? I'm here coldest out in jail. Or a hundred Biden. Yeah. That is going to jail. I know. Navarro's in jail. Trump's the first person to history up the country day of the tribe for what he tried him for. Oh, yeah, they come in. And what they're doing is shooting across the bow to see how we respond to it. Because we don't respond to it. They're going to keep doing it. And right now the people are responding in a way that they didn't expect. They see it. What's what's what's what's the old poem? They came for the for the further further. Yeah. Maybe you know I said nothing. Yeah, I said nothing in it. And then came for the soldiers. I said something and then came for the Jews. And I said nothing and came for me. There's no one to speak for me. And that's why you and I speaking out and telling people whether you like Trump or not is irrelevant at this time. They're coming. And they're not going to stop because evil people and crazy people don't know how to stop. They don't stop until everybody's dead. If history tells us nothing, it tells us that. Adolf Hitler wouldn't tell Germany was destroyed. Mussolini did the same. The crazy joke was in Japan did the same. They kept going until the nation was destroyed. These people have taken abortion from Roe v. Wade already nine month abortion. Now they're in perinatal abortion. You hear about that in California? No. They're voting for an abortion bill that would kill a child 28 days out this born. Yes, is in the house in California. Perinatal after birth. Why? Because we our argument was solid with them. Well, when is life began? We call it a kick in that budget begins at conception. You're okay. Well, we can come in three months or what about what? Well, what about five months? Well, okay. Yeah, yeah. Then we're okay. You're right. We'll take it to the ninth month then. Well, if you take the ninth month, why not after? You give us a mission to do that. You give us a mission to come in murder. Let's do it. Is logical in it? Why not? Our logic is winning out Tucker and they're telling us, yes, you're right. We can kill them any time we want to the same thing with our logic when he came down to homosexuality and all this kind of stuff. It's about, oh, no, people born gay, but then they did the human genome project, right? Then final gay, Jane. They did the twin study. And when when one twin was gay, the older twin was gay, only about maybe 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20 other time. So it couldn't be in the DNA. You see, I'm talking about so they started saying, no, what now? It is choice. You're right. But we've gotten the law passed now. They're all trying to argue that any longer. It's irrelevant. The law is passed. And right now, since states can now do whatever they want to do when it comes down to to abortion, hell, I guess is just a amount of legalisms in there. Like, Grant Scott. Grant Scott is not a man that a white man needs their heads on rights and a white man needs to adhere to. So you're telling, so you've told us with abortion and this has always been amazing to me. I remember when Scott Peterson killed his wife, you know, my lacing. Yes. You know, he charged with two murders, isn't it? Yes. How is that when the baby wasn't born yet? How is that? He gets everybody knows that everybody knows of person, of course. Everybody knows. But we have said that the mother has the right to kill that child whenever she chooses. So if it's a person here, it's a person here. You know it. We've allowed that legalism. We've allowed it to stay. And now we have to deal with it. So, I mean, it's human sacrifice. I think it's pretty obvious that this is a religious right. Yes. But at some point, you know, our people are punished for killing, for example, for sin, our nations punished. Hmm. I think they're about God. And I don't think it's God punishing them. I think that what happens is he takes his hands off and you become a virtuous a virtuous people and you start killing yourself. Um, it was interesting. The, the commandment that says, I know that father, not mother, so your days will be long on his earth. And people always think that that means that God will punish you for not obeying your father and your mother. No, it is a harbinger. It tells you the type of person that you are. And my dad would say, if you do not honor, you know, baby, you want honor and beta police, you will not, you'll go outside this house and you'll just respect the wrong person. And that wrong person is going to bust a cap in your head. So when you are disrespectful to your parents, it tells the type of spirit you have in you, an arrogant, prideful, disrespectful spirit. That's right. And that's going to get you in trouble outside of the house. And the people outside of the house don't love you like your mom and daddy do. And somebody's either luck you up or put you in jail or kill you. And means you have no respect for yourself. So you're going to be doing dope and drugs. You know, we have to fight in that act. No food. So as a harbinger, so when people kill their own children, you know, you tell them that you can kill them inside the womb or why do you, well, that means you can kill them outside the two. So when you think the murder rates are out in the black community, it's over a true life. You told them you can kill them inside the womb. So why can't I kill them outside the womb? So now we're killing one another and our donation is dying. And we, you won't have any respect for life. You don't know respect for anything else because that's the most important thing. I'll Bible tells us. Um, I'll leave before you bless us in curses, life and death, choose life so that you and your children should live. Choose life. We're choosing death. Democratic Party is a deaf culture. They know what they're doing. You take away the rights of people keeping their arms in a war zone. Knowing that the police in Detroit is two hours away. And the criminals know that. You have people riding down the dangerous highways and tell them they can't be armed and everybody on and every crook on that highway knows that. So if they see your car broke down, they know you don't have a gun. And they rob you. Card jackets and DC workers. They can't carry a gun in their car. They criminal stupid. Why do you think they call Jack people and DC like that? You can't carry a gun in your car and DC. Is there a defenseless? Yes. It who makes that happen? They know this. What the market, they said, he said that there is no relationship between an arm and a disarmed man. On man has all the power. All of it. And when you disarm a person, he's no longer free. They know this. This is why when the British came here and I was in Boston, I have that election in green when they confronted them. And they said, call this give up your arm. They said, come take them. They came to this arm. Cause they knew that they could not subdue an arm population. They know once they get our guns, we have to capitulate to what they say. And whatever you find, a large group of black people, whether they know, take the guns away. Now, what did this start? Right at the end of the war, whether they wanted to make sure that the freedman could be subdued and controlled. So they put our black holes to their black man, could I have guns? And so guess who you are at there? This I've preaching this foolishness. Black preacher, black politician, black civil rights leader, members who were young black men in Nashville, who got kicked out of the house because they were protesting. And they went and went and met his one in Nashville and they got reelected. Well, whatever they protesting, gun legislation, to allow people to be able to more freely have their guns. They were protesting that they didn't want guns in the black community. When I all the cry, so you got people out there screaming, uh, yeah, the police are racist, the police are racist, the police are racist. And they're hot and black man. What is your remedy? Well, let's turn out guns over to one. I think why don't you just be expedition and blow your own damn brain job? Just shoot yourself. I'm going to give the police running after me chasing me to kill me. I'm the whole thing. Yeah, take my gun. So the cops are racist and they should be the only people a lot of firearms, right? Well, it's logically if the cops are racist and they got firearms, you should have 10 guns on you because I know that this are racist. Cop, I've been trying to kill me. It's illogical. It's stupid. It's insane. Government is like children. They'll take as much power as you let them have. And you have to tell government no further because we know you're going to start intruding on our rights. And we're not going to allow that. How do we get you off of us? We will kill you. Do you understand that? Okay, no further. All right then. What a job. Since that he said the tree of the tree of liberty must be far lives. What? What the blood of tyrants and patriots? Is that natural manure? You got to be willing to do this. And this is where, you know, we've had this. Before I was what what the blood of tyrants and patriots is a natural manure You got to be willing to do you and this is where you know we've had this big problem in the black community We've never been willing Never been willing to kill file freedom We will die. Let me make something absolutely positively clear. I have no interest in dying for my freedom I have every interest in killing any job of the coming to try to take it No interest in dying None I love new hamster. I was up there a couple of weeks ago And I said I love you guys model little free of die. I like to change one word in that is little free or kill No interest in dying for my freedom And we were always that I interest in dying for the freedom. I said you count me out on nothing playin This doesn't mean dying for nobody's freedom And we we we talk about that while I was going to front-law and I die Not me It's funny listening they wanted Sonny to get a new world for a thought I leave right here in Maine Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah They want to study to get involved in a civil rights movement His son is so some down there getting jumped on my police again beaten dogs and stuff jumped on so they said I go get involved in all They're gonna do is take punches Studies I have no interest in going down there catching punches, okay Now if you want to go down there and fight I'm your man, but you look like there's a man to be tell out of me. So he was more on the Malcolm X side Yeah, man. Well, it's no son. It was knocking out white man. Yeah, he didn't see a substance in freedom. Nobody Sonny was rich funny had money Sonny's I'd advise you to do what I did Stand up for your freedom Man, I'm not gonna I can't go down there and make you a free man. Oh talker Okay, civil war starts right white men from up north and black men come down and fight to free the slaves, okay What was over with so free Miss Burles down there? Cookless clans down there. We sent federal troops down south the Union army does stay there for years 12 years Reconstruction, okay trying to protect black men They'll think about this 12 years Then in the in the election of 1876 Rosa B. Hayes against children The whole South goes Democrat now run for B. Hayes is a governor Obama do guys shot five times as a general in The Civil War trying to free black folks and when he always give a sense of both form they folk with Democrat So they sent there and they find out that it was so no kind of shenanigans behind the vote and everything You know talk all out ahead 101% of his registered voters vote which is a lot. Yeah, you know And so of course they say no no no no no no no this was cheated We're gonna pull back the electoral vote college vote to South Carolina and give me any way South Carolina said we're gonna start the Civil War again if you do that so they set down to say you know what We fought the Civil War five years Probably in today's money trillions of dollars 600,000 about troops have been maimed or killed frame these slaves these black folks out here and They have reelected the Democratic Party who had them enslaved if you want to be with your master Be with them Peace out and they pull the troops out and then they say what we know the old refrain why the intimidation Came in and so do the black population and beat them down for years the races and we let them vote There were three times more black men than white men in South Carolina There were two times more in Mississippi It was half and half in Louisiana in Alabama in Georgia and In the beginning of the Civil War there were four point five million whites There were four million blacks There were about four hundred thousand white black white men that died in the Civil War So about the time the war was over with the best and the strongest of the South's men were dead or you know Arm cut off led cut off in the black slave population state the same and black men wouldn't fight Most wouldn't fight They wouldn't defend the fact they wouldn't defend their families. They wouldn't defend their property They were subjugated and this is why I always tell people they didn't get mad at me I don't care slavery just like freedom is a choice Frederick Douglas was a slave He was sent to a slave breaker because he's honoring you wouldn't do what he told it do He's 16 years old this slave break is named was Colvin Fredrick writes about it Just whooping Frederick and beating him and Colvin hit Frederick one too many times and Frederick beat the hell out of Colvin Good for him and Colvin respected him and Fred at Douglas he found out he said he says power gives up nothing without a man He said a weak man can never have power. He said he will be pitied for a tire But until the power rise up in him you will never be respected And that's been Fred at Douglas game Frederick Douglas he left got his freedom it became where he was hair Tubman remember the same thing a hundred thousand black people escaped during a hundred they're doing slavery Another hundred thousand escaped during the underground railroad if it wasn't impossible and wasn't a choice. How did they do it? How did they choose? Hair and tell them would go and get black people say come on. Let's go to free music say no you chose Then they want to talk about some reparations ain't that some nerve the very union army who had 600,000 soldiers almost died of free you you're going out so they have you enslaved if you want your reparations going to Antietam go to Sharpsburg go to Vicksburg Go to Gettysburg Go, you know, these white boys died and these black soldiers died the master suit is 54 The homestead that comes out in 1866 giving any able-bodied man black men to The right to take 150 eggs and land out west if you will and to tell it Less than 5,000 black men joined up for it Instead on the plantation and you're going to tell me slavery is out of choice George Washington says American Revolution if you fight you're free the British have the same thing Some came and fought other shoulders to end the plantation choice War of 1812 same thing Some fought some state choice Mexican war same thing some fought some state choice Civil war Massification proclamation come fight less than one percent joining union army down south choice And then you got the nerve that shows some reparations When you turned them down after they offered free land Because the bunch of Democrats got me a line to you. Let me tell you something straight everybody listen to me You ain't gonna get that money You can kiss it goodbye Some study talk about is gonna be twenty seven three and dollars for America pay reparation Well, talk about as a problem with that. I think they the GDP of America like maybe 23 American made last year You're not going to get it and here's the Greatest reason it's you're not gonna get it Barack Obama became president in 2000 he won in 2007 became president 2008 you remember this way because he had a filibuster approved majority In the house in the Senate remember he had a 58 Democrats and two Independence called us in with them. That was filibuster proof. They culture It's done and they would invest out of got Obamacare passed right That's below the gotta through the house and then they had to 60 votes in the Senate And you know how hard it is to get 60 votes for one party in the Senate. I can remember the last time that ever happened Brock had it how many times of reparations come up? approximately zero Proctima leaving that range yes never came up Never can't cut a pass at easy couldn't he? Now we came up you will never get it. It's Lucy moving the football Charlie Brown It's the carrot in front of the omele making him walk You will never ever get it and when I hear these people lying to these people I might very well educated telling them about this what was what did the old the old crow and Elmo farm flew around telling people about yeah All the things they were going to get what he got honey and all this kind of stuff, you know and the people were working believing it This is a communist It's part of what they do is how they work they give you these these false idols to pray to You know they have the statues of lemon and and Stalling all over the Soviet Union like they do king here in America right in the black community streets and stuff named after him To make people believe that his ideology was so correct and the guy wasn't apostate He talked about failed so I guess my last questions. You've laid out the case. I think compellingly That the Democratic Party has oppressed well a country, but black people in particular for a couple hundred years So what is the thinking of of people who see you're saying you think the Republican this cure could get over 20% Yeah, it's still it's still a lot of people voting Democrat What it why Social pressure How intense is a social pressure? Oh you can be ostracized Actually, yeah, you have to you have to be able to explain yourself very very well Black people that can explain their selves well like I do I have no problem Well, why would you why you get to why you're against the Democratic Party? You've seen myself these days they castrate little boys and call them the girls These people vote for candidates to say they're gonna get legal for the admitted men that go into the bathroom and watch your wife and your daughter Your Nate, you know look at the black man. Did you or not just say to you? You're gonna vote for man. It's gonna let a demented man Go to the bathroom with your wife and your daughter and watch them use the bathroom. How I don't do that I You're gonna let some weirdo off the street walking the bathroom with your wife and your daughter and you're gonna sit back and laugh about it Hell man, they're saying funny. What type of man are you? He said who does it the Democratic Party? Oh you ain't been paying attention. Huh? Then you educated me since back in set and he's convicted You have a drag queen story out. No You haven't heard a drag queen story. No. What is it? Sure. It's all what's going on that bringing men and dresses in the school and shaking eight behinds in your strands face Telling him there's all right for him to be that way. What? The Democrat Party is behind this. Oh, man. No, they ain't sure to them Who's gonna tell them this Tucker? How do they hear without a preacher, right? Is the black preacher telling them? No is a black hawker's telling them? No is the NAACP tell them no they're all in on it. So what are they gonna they're gonna come back to the black community? We're gonna get your free stuff and We hate white people vote for us White manager enemy the reason why you have nothing is because of him. It's not us Is him is him is scapegoating? I don't know you've seen Sharpton and you are a redo emissant. Oh, yeah It's all white America's white supremacy is always that Systemic racism all that you know systemic racism hell they control all the systems They control the schools they control the police they control all the dope game They control a only every whole house every prostitute house every failing school They control the judges they control the juries they control it all the police forces But they have this ability to deflect Because there's nobody to give the other side of the narrative. That's what makes me so dangerous I give the other side. I don't fear them my Bible tells me 365 times in it to fear not for every day of the year How can I fear a man? Don't want to walk around how you was on the dress Scabbing him You walk around being afraid of a man that was walking to a woman's bathroom and watch a children urinate Sick bastard. They're mean. That's crazy Well, I believe I'm a woman. I don't care You go in the bathroom with my daughter. I'm gonna beat the living hell out of you right here right now Not today, bro. You better wait wait and then you look at a man that you're gonna vote for a party to allow such a thing We need to make it as simple as that and You speak of time when you're not remember this man if you call the man Pulsed up watching women use a bathroom. Hell they put him in the crazy house of course We'd be beaten by the dad's Yeah, yeah, and then the police will come and whooping some more Yeah, I'm a judge. I put him in the crazy house now. They're what the dad. Oh, yeah, put the dad in jail You better not say a word let this man watch your wife your child urinate And you have men to start on to let that happen It's disgusting. It's disgusting We're gonna allow these people call me and men in dresses and and confuse your children like this The call is to them first all your man. Are you not now? You know the ones that say they're not man. That's cool. We're gonna about you in but there are a lot of them They're still consider themselves men and those are the ones that you reach because it's a black man are really They're really making the turn They it's I've noticed yes, not black women. No, no, the Democratic Party's a husband Is that what that is? Oh, yeah, because I see the numbers and it's people say the black food is changing No, black men are changing yeah, black man are changing big because you see the same. Yes. Yes. Yes I agree like you know, there's no one in America more the cheese mow them like me Let me say I try like it right. Yeah, and you have to remind them of that and The black black black women are protected by government You know they can flip restraining orders on man for anything they can take that children away and make a big child support Protect that sons away. That's the game that they play they use government to come in and And try to castrate their husbands and try to castrate their boyfriend and the man can say I'll take my son I'll raise him. I'll take care of him. No, I'll keep him. I don't want you to pay me and And and and the judges nine times out of ten will say yes, she's right pay her a lot of racial son And you can see him four times out of the month and Then these boys are race confused, but again They know this What did Pharaoh say when? He found out that the turn of Israel were getting to numerous in motion It's went to the midwives He said that if you see a girl child let them live We've seen a boy child kill him kill him kill the boy Child There was a book out says conspiracy destroy black boys There's conspiracy there's a great book out said conspiracy destroy boys in America It's number 20 by 20 years ago They warning people that this this society has been settled from the feminist and whatnot to take man out To feminize me the LGBTQ movement saying thing Finification of men Confusing them in the boy scouts. What's what they've done Tucker? The boy in calling boys scouts any longer. They've been mess with the girls got to get there We got to take the boy scouts out the man is the problem Our Bible says Jesus gave the parable if you that if a robber is gonna come into a homey first must bind the strong man Yes, to bind the strong man before but if he doesn't bind the strong man the strong man will wait and When I allow his house to be shaken up They have to bind the strong man especially the American strong man The American strong man. It was something nobody had ever seen before He was something that the world had never witnessed before. I mean when the Americans came It was over. It was wilder. Well, it's it starts now No boy when those boys went and date invaded France on Normandy war was open six months The year it was done Then boys got to get the history the hitler youth beat them down When the Americans came it stopped we we used to We used to take democracy and morality and Meritocracy capitalism the whole world wanted to be us Now that we're pushing all over the world kill your children Let your man wear dresses push God out of the public square climate change Control the holy crun that went down the African the Congo these people have stopped the death they found all this oil Down there and then the UN going to say we don't want you to go dig it up because you're gonna release a carbon bomb in it in We've got to down we hit a man you guys digging up everything you want to dig up Then you're going to tell us and we can dig up our natural resources because it might release a carbon bomb These people living in the huts Tucker no running water and they actually went down there and told these people we don't want you This is how crazy they are and It's like the Empress new clothes right somebody got to call you out and say little boy said he's naked and everybody else said oh Yes We have to start calling these people crazy We entertain them too much by acting like that they have some type of moral equivalency with us You have no moral equivalence with me, you know, this is a great line for the movie I love gladiator But he was down there talking to the boys getting ready to fight and he said your father He said they They allow you to watch the game he was concerned and the boys said They said make me small. He said what does your father say? He said my father's there, but that's the question isn't it? What does your father say? Yeah? He didn't tell him what to do He asked him what's your father say? I Always do that when a child when someone young acts me about policy. That's what your father say And when he tells us what you do And when you get in there by this degree as if when you get be 18 years old, let me up well talk Right now you do what your father says All right, you don't want to I don't want to go against his father. That's right I'll in if I talk to his father I'll talk to I won't talk to the father's son without the father's permission I'm not gonna try to corrupt his son against his belief system ever Where's your father say? All these people home care. They'll tell you in public education that these are their children They actually say that These are our children. We are going to teach them to think for themselves not think like you The density and we tolerated My eight year old is gonna think for himself You're gonna turn him away from my way of thinking if necessary Well, okay, then that's my Yes, but we've allowed this an active war. It's your family. It is and they've done it We've tolerated it for too long it all came from the Civil Rights Movement This thing has to pull it up. Ruten stern before it has to be it has to be We have to expose it to people it's almost like what it's a bad example But people get it's almost like what they had to do and that's it's made to expose it to people So you see now you know how terrible this stuff is right you didn't know it was about killing Jews it to know we didn't know Okay, we say you didn't but you see what's going on and destroyed you the same thing that we're finding out with communism Right people found out that it was just a horrible system You know the gulags and the murders and when they came out of the stalomas murder and killing people yeah, you made them a tyrant Any you had no checks and balances and that's what they do when they have no checks and balances They help people and and so you look at this system also a System devoid of morality and God How can you have more law or law give her? And as I told a bunch of levels. I hope they listen to me all you liberals out there that say you hate Christianity and Jesus Christ If you want some advice You better let that slip They'll leave that alone because I know some brothers that in Jesus Christ went holding their hands back They kill every less one of these levels For fun. I know some brothers there were some cold killers that found Christ and they still got it in them But they've controlled it if these people ever find or believe that Jesus Christ does not exist These little liberals that don't want to have guns You think they call Jack and them now that don't kill them all Come on. So my advice to them is you better leave that stuff alone You better start you better start pushing Jesus Christ as hard as you can to these young men because if you not They'll dead man Curse in Christianity is like cursing the roof that protects you from the storm it protects them. That's right Why are they so And they're gifted love your neighbor don't lie don't steal don't kill Don't cover it what you ain't read hate it right now and I'm I think it's Texas Right a story this morning Texas, oh Florida Then we'll get rid of some curriculum because this is too Christian I want you to learn it. That's the reason It's too Christian and it all started from this apostate movement that went to government and then say These are our white brothers and sisters in Christ Some of them held their misled We are not misled. We will teach them by our example We will love them in regardless. We will help them whenever we can but this is a family fight between us and them They say that Christian we're Christian. We're gonna teach them how we're supposed to love one another But that is not the government's job no Government's job is trying to make us love each other and peace and brotherhood No, that kind of said their jobs makes trains run on time. It's one of us a salt one another Have a trial and put them in jail, but the reasons why we do it is not they're not just because they're not that Of course, you know to love one another have brotherhood and battle ship Yeah, that's aspirational, but it's not the government's job. No, it's not it's a job of churches Moss and a God's families community centers But the government's last will be involved in it. Well, how they gonna do it talk about it. Go on here. You're gonna love him Well, it hasn't worked it doesn't work it never works It never works. We've seen governments dissolve and then what happens? the fractions of society that hated each other before it started fighting again what they were having in Serbia Crowe yeah, yeah, they just start fighting it. They thought they had cured 60 70 years after it's not fighting to leacha we saw in Rwanda with the two two two two and then who just started killing one another Because government was the only thing that was separating them from the fight and It's it's no McCain You think things are going well and it's not The only thing that made America, you know about Christianity how it moved abolitionists movement of course The Republican Party didn't come from anywhere. It was abolitionist training people of North to put the home party together And then they got behind the Republican Party's the won't slavery ended and it was a Christian movement Where where segregation the churches and he exist? Blacks and whites put the church together fellowship together love one another And we if we can just come back to that that basic concept again, but again them the primary goal The thing that fares them that makes them most afraid is to see what you and I are doing right here a black man and a white man Talking and fellowship didn't care about one another as friends. They can't stand there Well, I gotta say I mean we're from very very very different worlds, but I can't I'm gonna be thinking about this conversation for a long time and but now Looking back on the last few hours. I don't think I disagree with this single word It's causing the death to see that two people like you know, they might call you know crazy radical and you Whatever they might call you, yeah, but we can set back Is that one thing you can say what racist called me racist we'd be fighting right now? Well, that's No, I mean I I can say you speak for me. Well, thank you. Thank you Man, it's always a pleasure anytime you want to sit down and have a conversation with me I'm here if you blow my mind You're good friend Tiger. Thank you brother. All right Thanks for watching our YouTube channel We hope you'll subscribe to it and by the way you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video We hope you'll do that also