Hello, freak bitches. 30, the last time I sat at a, I was at exactly 30 last time I sat at three months retreat. But you just get, you're unplugging from your life. You're saying goodbye to everyone, you know. For all you know, someone's going to die while you're on retreat. And so there's this real discontinuity with every project and every aspiration and everything you have going on. And also most of the people in your life can't believe you're doing this. It's not much support. You know, people are just totally inscrutable to people that you decide to do this. And then you essentially lock yourself in a closet. You'll actually lock yourself in a room as big as these two tables. And then you're just left with your thoughts. And the problem is just thinking itself, even thinking happy thoughts, is stressful. When you really start paying attention to it, just the sheer automaticity of it. Just to be, just to not be able to stop the conversation. And you just can't stop talking to yourself for a second. And that, now eventually you can't. Eventually you become concentrated on, in this case, the practice I was doing is called Vapasana, which is mindfulness meditation. And the practice there is just to become very keenly aware of, you start with the breath as an object of meditation. But once you get a little concentration, you open it up to everything. So sounds and sensations and even thoughts themselves become objects of meditation. Where you're just noticing whatever arises in consciousness. And, but the difference between noticing a thought arise and pass away. And being lost in thought is huge. And this is the all important difference. And it takes some real concentration to see a thought arise and pass away. Because without the concentration, all of a sudden the thought's just you. It just comes up from behind in a way. And you're just feel identical. In a strange way you feel identical to this sentence in your head. You feel, there's, I mean, thoughts are just sentences and images. When you actually look at what a thought is, it's very hard to see how you could, how could ever define your subjectivity in the first place. It's just like, your thoughts are no more substantial than the sound of my voice. I mean, you're just hearing the sound of my voice is a kind of appearance in consciousness right now. And it's not, it's not defining you. It's not, you don't feel identical to it. It doesn't have a real implication so much for how you feel. You're not, it's just, it's easy to see, or in this case here, that it is an, and just an appearance in consciousness. It comes and it goes, it starts and it stops. And it's all sort of in plain view. But with your own thoughts, with your own voice, it, it, it sneaks up on you in a way that is, and even to use the word you in this case is a little misleading. But it, it colors consciousness and trims it down in such a way that it just feels like you. It doesn't, it doesn't feel, it doesn't feel, I mean, the feeling of being a self, the feeling that we call I, the feeling of being an ego in the head is what it feels like to be thinking without knowing that you're thinking. It's the, it's the feeling of this next thought capturing consciousness. So when you say that thoughts, you are identical to thought. So if you're thinking something really fucked up like, I'm fat, I'm a loser, I'm always going to be a loser. Like that is identical to who you are because you are sort of framing yourself in this thought. They're these thoughts that are, you're carrying around your mind. They are what's occupying your consciousness. And if those thoughts are in the forefront of your consciousness, if they identify you, you are that, you are those thoughts, and you are identical to that idea. Yeah, and they're, and they're driving behavior and they're driving emotion and they're driving each subsequent train of thought. So it's, it's determining the future expressions of your consciousness and your body as well. So you're, you're, and again, I'm not, I'm not separating the mind from the body here. All this is, we could talk about this in terms of events in the brain as well, but it's much easier to talk about it in terms of our first person experience as thoughts and moods and emotions, etc. But, you know, for the purpose of this argument, you know, there's no doubt that the brain is doing this. It's just we're not, you know, that side of the story that is much less to say about that side of the story at the moment. The brain is doing it, but you're, whatever it is, your personality, your consciousness, your center is sort of what guides the brain one way and another. It is possible to, while in the middle of having these thoughts to say, you know what, I'm not going to entertain these anymore and I'm going to think about something positive, but it's very difficult. Surprisingly difficult. Even as someone like myself who spent a lot of times, a lot of time meditating, especially a lot of time in isolation tanks, I, it's still difficult. Every now and then of something's bothering you to just get it out of your head. Like, especially for me, one of my main issues is my work. Like, like stand up comedy, for instance. Like if I have a show and I fuck a bit up, if it goes wrong, like if I have two shows in a night and I fuck a bit up on the first show, I'm okay. If I could redo it on the second show, we're good. But if I fuck it up on the second show, God damn it. I have to think about that thing all night. And I'll try to let it go. I'll try to get it out of my head. But I rationalize it by saying, the only reason why I've gotten so good is because of this crazy obsession that I have with getting it correct. And that when things go awry or when I go down a bad path, it doesn't quite pan out and then I have to sort of restart the whole conversation on stage. And that uncomfortable moment and then the subsequent uncomfortable recollection of that moment is the very motivation that's led me to be a good stand up in the first place. So I kind of rationalize it. But fuck man, when I'm eating dinner after a show and I just flub one word that fucks up a joke, I'll be in the middle of eating pancakes going shit. I can't get it out of my head. It doesn't matter. I've got a wonderful wife and a beautiful family and great friends and a fantastic job and a dream life doesn't matter. I flubbed the word. And fucking idiot, you know, like why I'm cutting into my food. Well, that's an interesting moment because there's a moment before the thought has arisen where you have not yet remembered the flubbed lines. So you're just cutting into your dinner and then it's an image or part image, part sentence, something, there's some expression of thought that arises in consciousness. And you do not witness it arise. It's not like it's a difference between seeing it watching a movie and being totally lost in the movie forgetting that you're sitting in a room with a bunch of other people looking at light on a wall. You're just totally captured by the movie. It's different between that and actually just seeing the screen, the light on the wall hearing the sound of the projector, seeing the scene, the artifice. It's possible to see thoughts just as essentially like a play of light on the wall. You see it before it captures you. And the difference is total and it is kind of like, it's almost like playing a video game where you can now not get killed in the same spot over and over again. It's like not losing in the same boss fight over and over again. Yet we lose in that same fight a thousand times a day. But when you can actually see thoughts for what they are, so the next time you flubbed a line and the next time you recall it, it's possible with, and again, it takes a certain degree of concentration to be able to do this. But concentration becomes kind of a native capacity at certain points like Jiu Jitsu or anything else. You have certain skills and you don't really lose them. Then you can just see it and it just comes and it goes and it doesn't have, and it's going in its going, it's really gone. It doesn't have the same emotional necessity. It doesn't trigger the same mental state. And that's not to say that these negative mental states haven't had the benefit that you ascribed to them. So yeah, it could be that you were as good as you are because you were motivated to not embarrass yourself ever again because it felt so terrible. So you hated this experience of flubbing a line. You hated the memory of the reliving of it the next day. You hated what it did to your time with your family. And so you thought, I'm the next tour. I'm going to get up earlier. I'm going to work harder, etc. So yeah, that's all part of the clockwork that's causing you to hone your craft. So I would argue that a little mental suffering goes a long way. I think we nine times out of ten or ninety nine times out of a hundred. We suffer unnecessarily and there's no good comes from it. It's just, it's not actually making us better people. It's making us more neurotic people. We're more worried. We're worse husbands, we're worse fathers. And it's time to break that spell. And then you can selectively be as uptight and neurotic as you want. It gives you a kind of freedom to pick your priorities in a way rather than be captured by just whatever the next thought happens to be. I've also found, for me personally, the discipline and diligence are the best mitigating factors for dealing with neurotic thoughts. Like if I have an issue, one of the big issues, if I've ever had anything go wrong was that I didn't work harder enough. So if I know for a fact that I worked as hard as I could, like back when I was competing, that was a huge issue. And it also mitigated nervousness. Because whenever you're involved in a competition as terrifying as a full contact martial arts tournament where concussions are not just likely, but it's someone in, there's a hundred people fighting in this tournament. Someone's going to sleep. Someone's going to get knocked out. Someone's going to get their nose broken. Someone's going to get hit. A lot of people are probably. If I trained really hard, if I know I did everything that I could, I ate right, I slept right. I put in all the practice. I worked on all my weaknesses. I didn't neglect my strengths. I was much less nervous, much less nervous and much better at dealing with losses. Whereas losses, I think losses for martial artists can be insanely devastating. Like I was listening to this interview with Travis Brown, do you know he is? No. You have to see heavyweight one of the top five guys in the world. Great fighter lost recently to Fabrizio for doom. Title elimination fight. So Fabrizio has gone on and he'll be fighting Kane Velasquez for the heavyweight title now in October in Mexico in a huge October November. Believe it's November. One of those. He's fighting Kane Velasquez for the title. Huge fight. It could have been Travis Brown. Travis Brown lost the fight by decision. He lost without a doubt. But it wasn't embarrassing. He didn't get knocked out in the first round. He didn't get submitted really quickly. But he did lose the fight. And it was a devastating. He talked in great depth about lying in bed in the fetal position crying. He's a fucking 250 pound gladiator. He's curled up in a fetal position crying. And I have to be, he goes always curled up in the fetal position crying. We all have that part of ourselves. And that's what it's so excruciating about the self. The self really is the center of the center of our problem. And when things are really going well, we are consoled by how well they're going. But we know it's vulnerable to change. We're only as good as your last appearance in some sense. I mean, I could do something incredibly embarrassing in the middle of this podcast. And that will be the thing I'm thinking about tonight. And I'm thinking, you know, God, I can't believe I fucked that up so bad in Joe's podcast. And that it's always vulnerable to that. As long as you're in the center of this thing, vulnerable to what other people think about you and captive of your really crazy rehearsal of experience. And when something like this happens to you, just think of how many times you repeat it to yourself. It's like you tell yourself the same story 15 times a minute for hours. And it doesn't strike you as insane. But it actually is insane. If your thoughts could be broadcast on a monitor for other people to hear. And they could hear you repeat yourself over and over and over again. It would seem starkly crazy. And yet it seems normal. It's kind of like the dream state where you go to sleep and you're in your bed and you, you know, everything's a bane, the laws of physics. And then in the next conscious moment, you are at a party somewhere. It's talking to someone who you know is dead and saying, oh, I can't believe you're alive now. And then there's a gorilla in the room. And none of this strikes you as crazy. The craziest things about dreams is that the mind seems to just accept these changes one after the other without any sense that there should be continuity. And this is no question that this is due to the diminished activity of the frontal lobes during REM sleep. And we just are truth, a reality testing hardware has come largely offline during dreams. But there's something analogous happening when we're just thinking in the waking state because thoughts don't make much sense. Because the repetition is we don't notice how crazy the repetition is and we would notice it if we were talking to each other. If I was telling you the same thing 15 times in a row without honoring your expectation that I might move on to another topic. You would notice and I would notice, right? And the other thing is that this crazy about thoughts is that much of our thinking certainly are linguistic thoughts. It's structured as though it were a conversation and we played both signs of the conversation. So I'll sit down here and I came in and I sat down and I brought you a book and I wanted to sign the book. I see this pen over here and I think, oh good, there's a pen over there. Now I can see that there's a pen over there. So why do I have to say there's a pen over there? Who am I telling? Is there someone in me who can't see that there's a pen over there? So there's a conversation that starts like, and I'm both sides of it. That doesn't make any sense. And yet our subjectivity is continually just, it is discursive in that way. There's just voices talking to each other. And there's not only, not only are there not two of us in there, there's not even one of us in there. There's not the thinker isn't there, but we seem to have two of them. It's like we're constantly talking to mommy and daddy. And in fact, that could be the way this conversation gets internalized because I can see it in my kids now. Where they sometimes I'll leave, listen to my daughter playing by herself. And she's talking to herself out loud in the way that you'd have to be sort of crazy to do as an adult. But as a kid, you're just talking out loud. And eventually we all learn to internalize that conversation. But when people who can't internalize it, well they're the crazy ones. The person who's walking down the street, just saying, oh good, there's a pen over there. And what got up, what were late? And I'm a Joe's going to really be pissed. I can't believe I should have checked the traffic before I left. These are the kinds of thoughts I could think, silently in the space of my mind. But it wouldn't be starkly crazy, but to verbalize them, then you're a madman. And that difference between letting them out and just knowing to keep your mouth shut, captures a large part of the difference between being a proper lunatic and a normal person. But what I argue in this book is that it's normal isn't good enough. I mean, normal, the normal state of consciousness wherein you are just chased at a bed every morning by your thoughts. And you think, think, think, think every waking moment until you fall helplessly asleep at night, that's not necessarily a happy place to be. And it's not the only alternative. And it's not that the goal is not to have a mind without thoughts. I mean, we need thoughts. And you can't, you know, everything we do as human beings for the most part requires thought to get off the ground. So our relationships are based on thoughts and our every public institution and science. It's all, it's this conversation we have with ourselves. And with others is based on language, almost, and concepts that are mediated by language. And so you need thought, but the difference is between thinking and knowing that you're thinking, really knowing that you're thinking in the moment of thoughts arising or being lost and thought. And then when you're lost and thought, it doesn't really matter what the content is, you're still confused about who and what you are. I mean, you could be thinking about the most profound things in science or in ethics or whatever it is. But if you're just thinking without knowing that you're thinking, there is a kind of delusion there. It is analogous to the dream state in a way where you're just, you're not, it's not clear to you what's going on. You think you're the thinker of the thought, you think you're authoring your thoughts in a way that you're not. I mean, because thoughts just arise, we don't actually offer them.