So the last time I think the last time we were physically together was when we worked together at Fox News Crazy hosting a morning show his name on I will not mention I've always been embarrassed in the name of that show There's some nice people on the show nice we work on the show. I don't want to attack the show, but look the name always always made me cringe But anyway morning Joe You me me GRA right Black Xanax All of the neo cons Oh my god, and then you went off into business I think you're the only person I've ever seen leave an anchor position and television voluntarily no one ever does that They wait to get destroyed in a sex scandal or you don't get to mention or something But you actually just left and went into business and were successful and then you move to Europe with your family or beautiful family and then The next time I heard of you I was taking my trash out and my neighbor goes to just you a Clayton Anatoly said And I'm like I only know one Clayton Anatoly And I was like Clayton Morris Natalie Morris and he's like yeah, I'm redacted their show. Did you see it? I was like no Anyway, and then I dove in and I saw that you had become legit successful in a completely different Business saying things that I loved and that were true and really brave So it's just great to see you after all this time. What a life what a life story you've had. It's amazing. I'm just so thrilled I you know, I just saw you in the parking lot. I was like oh my god I don't run up into you a hug because it's been amazing eight or nine years. Yeah, it's it's crazy to think I mean the trajectory and I find it very difficult to relate to people that haven't been beat up It all scratched totally beat up gone through the ringer, you know like there's it's like That's for sure operating at a different level now, you know, and so well It's funny. I do remember you In commercial breaks because on those warning shows you have really long commercial breaks. Yeah, and then you know one anchor will take a segment or whatever there's like a lot of time sitting on the dumb couch and You never wasted a second of it I'd like stare off into space like a dog or text my wife naughty things, but you were constantly either doing business or reading about Things I'll never forget that you were totally absorbed In your studies and your work in commercial breaks How did you wind up? With redacted like how did that I've never even asked you how'd you how'd that happen? You know after we left so ten years at Fox Great time had a blast, but you know, you realize oh, I've been doing the same sort of segments over and over again You know, you're doing like the same breakfast cereal segment over and over again after ten years and you're Saying okay, I want something different now I want to be able to see my kids on the weekend I don't want to have to wake up at 3 30 in the morning Yeah, you know and whenever one else is at the park with their kids on a weekend Oh, and you know people had bagel shops and stuff like that and so I didn't get to do that and my wife would send me pictures What the kids were doing you know making little projects or things and I would be at work which is you know great So then I you know it was after ten years. It said okay enough is enough and It's time to do something for myself and for my family and then we thought about where in the world we would live where part of the country would we live in and We started thinking bigger about well, maybe we'll just have this adventure and and go to Europe and give that a shot And we thought my Portugal That's close enough to the east coast is actually faster to fly from the east coast of the US to Lisbon Then it is from the east coast to San Francisco where my wife's family is from So great the kids are young enough. We have three kids like let's give them this adventure Let's try it for ourselves And things are getting crazy in the United States at the time of descending into you know a crime haven wide open, you know borders and all of that So it was an opportunity I think for us to go there and then I started thinking wait a second because I can't just sit still I have to I have to be creating or working on something I maybe it's the Capricorn energy. I can't just like not be creating I think that's why we're here also like off course like you know I don't want to I don't want to choose an easy life come for it's not the point so I enjoy creating and making things and trying things and you know You know, I don't know building a channel and all those things are interesting to me and always been fascinating to me But I you'll find out really quickly if you you're doing it and you don't love it It'll fizzle out after like a month You know, so I always encourage people. Yeah, just try things, you know You want to start a business just try it and if it speaks to you and you know, then you'll do it so I realized we're there in Europe. We've got a five hour Time difference I'm a jump on sort of the morning of the east coast of the United States And I'm a news junkies. I'm always constantly seeing what was going on and watching what's going on with covid You're seeing all of these world events and I thought I want to talk about this. I want to be able to do something So launch this show kind of in the morning And I remember my years ago because I lived in Los Angeles. I hated being three hours behind the east coast And I worked on a morning show called good day LA and I was a producer then and I I hated it was like two in the morning knowing that like People on the east coast already had a kind of jump on the world. Oh, yeah, you know It sort of bothered me mentally. So now I had a five hour jump on the east coast, you know And I said, you know, I'm gonna start to do like a morning show again I grew up doing morning shows for 20 years Maybe I should try that here, but now I don't have to wake up a three in the morning. I can just do it and Started it during covid really during All of the lives that were pouring out of covid and at the time My father was was had just gotten just had a stroke. It was going through not being able to see him in a hospital and Hearing the ridiculous rules that were unfolding both in Europe In the United States about covid and lockdowns and standing six feet apart and Yeah, nursing homes in New York and Andrew Cuomo all of these things were converging. I think at the same time printing money We're just gonna hand out thousands of dollars and checks to people and keep them home and no businesses will run We're gonna kill chickens. We're gonna you know all these farmers had a brick killing animals. So something's like I just I don't know it just that was really impetus for me to start the show and Then it evolved More I realized we're not talking most about money. We're really talking about a lot of redacted things and That's where I came up with the idea for the name redacted because we were holding up like five zeros owned documents on the show and like they're redacted or UFO files that were redacted and I said I just was sitting there one afternoon just kind of contemplating and I said that's the name of the show Just redacted. That's just gonna be the name of the show and then I I con my wife ended doing the show with me She's a journalist by trade. She's an amazing writer and really an amazing researcher and I said you're gonna do the show with me and she said yeah, I think I want to I don't know that I want to But I and now she's just come alive. It's just been amazing to watch her this sort of San Francisco liberal Transform and now she's angry. She can't it's so amazing to watch her be angry at all the lies that she's been told over the years that she's She's angrier than me because I was sort of in it. Yeah. Yeah, you know and I worked at Fox And I was seeing the pattern of lies and I didn't quite understand the neocon pattern of lies as well as I as I do now But she you know who would read Hillary Clinton's books back in the day and you know all of that now she's Warmonger, you know And it's been amazing to see her come alive with that and she'll just get angry about it and she'll say aren't you angry about it? Yes, but I've I've known a lot of this what you know Obama has drone these people and and But she's amazing. She's you know She's now run with it in such a way that I'm just so I'm just so touched to watch and I think we we do a you know Great job together and kind of keeping each other Well, it's certainly been successful like way more than anyone would have predicted probably even yet Oh for sure. I would thought This is just gonna be a no no no dry to the ocean. Check your numbers this morning. Yes Quite quite successful and and well deserved and just an amazing story So you spent five years to the day in Europe. You're no back. Yeah in the United States You spent five years in Portugal at a time when Europe was really really changing or or the changes that it already took in place to become I think more obvious to those paying attention What was your view after living there for that long? First let me say the So I want to be respectful of the Portuguese people that they were amazing the people are amazing. Yes It's the government. Yes That and I feel really terribly for the Portuguese people who in many ways and this is across Europe They've really given up their power to Brussels. Yes, so 80% of all The decisions that are really made in Portugal aren't made in Portugal. They're made in Brussels so They have to fund the boondoggle in Ukraine They have to send The one tank that they have from the 1970s that might may or may not still be working to Ukraine because of some dog and pony show propaganda So I saw democracy so that right the Portuguese the millions of Portuguese people have no say over their own lives or where their money goes or no And trans act the way that they want to be able to transact and cash the way that they want It's all outsourced, you know to Christine Legard or Ursula von der Lain in in Brussels who get to tell them how to live their lives and The Portuguese people do not like the European Union. I think most people in the European Union I can't speak for everyone of course, but you asked the common person the worker the the laborer the restaurant owner the adiga owner Do they do like the European Union? They don't know them. They don't know the unelected people in Brussels. Yes, and no, they don't they know their local You know local county representatives and those individuals But those people are all hamstrung by what happens in Brussels just to give you an idea like I don't know if you saw I think was last year maybe a year and a half ago now Christine Legard was I think punked but told some pretty open Truths about Europeans being able to transact with cash and She said she said in this fake interview that On the gray market if you spend more than a certain couple hundred dollars of euros That you're considered part of the gray market aka a terrorist So if you spend it on like nuclear materials or small arms or no no pay your gardener You're a terrorist So yeah, if you're buying plutonium To create the flux capacitor in order to travel back in time you might be on the gray market But no just to transacting cash. I mean for anything for anything And if you look across Europe every European country has a different threshold So Spain for instance a thousand euros if you spend more than a thousand euros in cash You're considered on the gray market aka a terrorist Every country's different some 500 euros 800 euros 1500 euros and Across the board the European threshold now is 10,000 euros to be able to transact in cash and anything more than that You're on the gray market. What's the idea there? The idea is that terrorists use cash And so therefore if you use cash they then you're a terrorist So but terrorists don't use open borders that they created no they don't use open borders Terrorists adhere to local state regulations and laws Fair so what I saw happening in Europe was you know when we emigrated to to Portugal We had to go through massive hoops and hurdles of paperwork to show that we were people of means Yes, right to show that we weren't going to leach off of their system fair Which is fair? Yeah, and great. We are I guess in your country. Let's be respectful of your country your tax laws We we found out there were a lot of people who would do sort of like digital nomad type work You know what they are they're like the Instagram girls that go on the beach. Yeah, they pretend that they're working on a laptop. Yeah, you know and They're really I mean come on and So we would hear we heard that like don't do that because the European commit they're watching Like they're watching you for tax purposes. We're like well, we're not going to do that We're going to we pay our taxes will be respectful. We had no intention of like not paying our taxes here But apparently what's happening a lot So we went through make sure everything was legit met with the tax authority got a center business up all of it Paperwork Got a residency cars all of those pieces that you would normally do if you're coming into a country legally and You're going to you're being respectful of their laws so I don't say I'm elite or something but There's much more regulation for someone like me Then there are four criminals so you can just come across the border and then just you know Have gang opportunities and do whatever you want I guess if you're a criminal But if you're if you're a person of means who has children and wants to do things legitimately Then you're gonna have to jump through massive amounts of hoops and hurdles in order to immigrate but want to want to walk into Germany what I go you know go to a park and be a part of a gang and You know an attack young girls. I'm sure that's fine. That's Europe has totally welcomed that they've had wide open borders all across Europe And now they're reaping what they've sowed It seems like suicide to me big picture. It seems like a society that wants to kill itself It does but if you talk to the Portuguese people or you talk to The European people whether you're in Belgium and I and I've gotten since I live there travel all over the area talk to you know Talk to an in owner in Scotland for instance Talk to an You know restaurant owner in Edinburgh talk to To some of the workers in you know in Munich. They don't want that But they've conceded that you know they've conceded their power to this unelected body in Brussels that runs the show I mean you saw it on display over the past few weeks Well, Mr. Lindsey comes to the White House gets addressing down And that little cocaine sniffing troll is there you know He didn't look like a deer in headlights and then he's totally welcomed with open arms in Europe I mean they roll out the red carpet for him Ursula von der Lian in her half a can of hairspray hair I'm sure there's like a squirrel living in there somewhere And then you have cost stuff from Portugal and by the way What's hilarious to me and to Natalie as well? We joke about these people in Europe That the people that are now a part of like the European Commission in Belgium They've all failed up This is what Natalie likes to say they've failed up because all of these people whether it's Marco Ruta And then the Netherlands who's kicked out of the Netherlands is now the head of NATO Costa huge scandal in Portugal is now sitting in in in Brussels Ursula von der Lian I'm trying to think who else who else has failed up All around that table are people who've basically failed up. They've they should have been kicked out They basically been kicked out of their countries But then they get elevated in positions of power in Brussels, which is hilarious Unelected by the way because nobody in Washington has bothered to do anything about it You still have no privacy because big tech is watching you at all times Data brokers are invading your right to privacy online as we speak And they're infringing on your freedom They're monitoring and recording everything you do when you connect to the internet Which is basically all day And they're taking the info on you your life and they're selling it to advertisers Politicians even insurance companies that use it information to raise your premiums So you should be able to choose Which information you share with others? That's why you've got a lock on your front door in the door on your bedroom But you can't get that freedom back that privacy. We partner with the company that will give it to you It's called Express VPN Express VPN is an app that sends a hundred percent of your online traffic through encrypted servers And that means that data brokers and big tech cannot spy on what you do online Express VPN also hides your IP address and that prevents those data hawks from creating a profile of you and selling it to the highest bidder It's the number one VPN on the market and it's easy to use just make one click and you can start it You sync your VPN to update devices so everything you use to get online can be protected Right now you get an extra four months fixed press VPN for free Just scan the QR code on the screen or go to express VPN.com slash Tucker and get four extra months for free That's express VPN .com slash Tucker one thing I've learned just from this whole Last five years Is that Female leaders are not what I thought they were they when I was a kid in the 70s used to hear feminist say give a woman a chance You know, it'll be more peaceful world Which not a crazy idea. I mean all the women in my life are peaceful and loving And so I kind of thought of this probably true actually. Yeah, you know men fight wars and and all that women don't But then we wind up though these female leaders who are the most War like and bloodthirsty and just can't wait to murder people. They just can't wait You can't see it there that that girl from Estonia. I mean. I mean. Yeah She would kill people without even flinching before in minister and germany bear buck. Yeah, what is that? She publicly said that she cares more about the Ukrainian people than her own german people Like but that's killing. I mean she's there for killing. They're all in Hillary Clinton Hillary Clinton. I mean you see that in our country the most War like that you know quickest to Dick Cheney's repulsive little daughter You know, they're Susan Rice Victoria Newland like what is that? I don't know what it is. I What is that? I think it's the weirdest thing. I've ever seen I guess you mean it comes it's got to come from their father, right? So I'd be an interesting sort of sociological look they can't wait to shed blood Exactly to look at Hillary Clinton's father to look at Susan Rice's father to look at Victoria Newland's father like is there a common denominator I don't know. I don't have the research on that spissor. I'm gonna work on that I'm gonna so how do you I mean I don't know if it's noble but how do the You know the citizens with no power in a place like Portugal Feel about the idea of marching off to war with Russia They abhor it and you know Portugal has a long history of course they they of war so They abhor war. Yeah, they They were the first warriors. I mean talk about conquering other countries. They know a lot about bloodshed. Yes They've done it to a great degree around the world So they don't want to be a part of that anymore. Yes, they've tried it And in fact many ways the I first moved there. I thought the United States could learn a lot About the Portuguese the sort of colonizing and the empire building. Yes And what it does to your country, you know what it does to destroy your country What it does to your culture? So the United States could learn quite a bit about saying yeah, we tried that we tried that for the last 60 years We're in Sudan. We're in Syria killing people. We are in You know Yemen killing people. We're in Ukraine clandestinely killing people Maybe we should pull back from this we're in you know operations in Haiti for crying out loud. I mean We're aren't we we have we have over 900 military bases around the world To me that's like 900 too many Personally I'm sure there are neo cons who would argue against that we need here's well In fact, there are neo We need to have bases and stood guard right we need to have an island that was unoccupied in Japan is now a US military base You know basically two years ago We need to be in Australia. We've taken over Australia basically it's a basically a proxy for the United States You know we need to we need to have a massive new NATO base in Poland Of course we do for NATO, you know Romania and Romania because of Because of our security so The the European people and I can't again, I can't speak for all of them But I mean the Portuguese people that I know absolutely don't want war But it's amazing. It was amazing to watch Because as this whole theater was unfolding in Ukraine The Portuguese just basically they kind of go along with them. I mean they were a socialist government up until And it will still you know led by socialists, but they were really You know under under salads are up until the 70s So when the government tells them to do something They do it, you know when they get a text alert Telling them they need to go and get their COVID shot The Portuguese are rule followers. They are absolutely rule followed. They will do it So most people are yeah And when you have a government that threatens you Yes, you know and you just trying to take care of your family You don't want something to happen to your children your way of life You don't want to get some nasty graham in the mail threatening your life Most people are compliant in that way so they get a text message You go and get your next second COVID shot You got your first one go get it, you know and get a text message and they got it They were at a report to a center to go and do that, you know It's unbelievable And I would get in fights because I'm an American People would tell me to put on a mask You know authorities and I'd tell them like no one I would yell at them about putting on a COVID mask I'm not going to do it You know trying to go to the grocery store You had to put it no I'm not wearing it, you know So we get in fights. I was getting fights a lot And my wife just you know So I lived it as a good wife for it, you know like So I just would yell at the ridiculousness of these things for instance There's a there's a thing along in Kashkayash Bay I don't know if you've ever had a chance to go to Kashkayash Which is just outside of Lisbon. It's a beautiful little like Very like wealthy area, I guess And it's very cosmopolitan so you get a lot of different you're French they're yeah British they're Wealthy Portuguese it's very interesting here. It's more of a touristy area But anyway, there's a big sea wall called the Paradao and it runs along the ocean for about five kilometers And while we were renting an apartment there for a little while I would walk the dog along there and it's very wide. I mean it's Maybe 40 feet 50 feet wide. It's huge Bike paths on it. There's like workout equipment the whole thing like so it's wide and as the ocean is right there It's beautiful. It's all stone So take the dog on a walk then when COVID hits They shut it down. They put like the police tape around all the outside outside workout equipment that sits in the sun By the way So you couldn't work out you couldn't you know do any pull-ups or anything like that because I guess COVID could survive out in this by the ocean Like I don't know if you've ever had a bicycle by the ocean you sit it there for like a day. It's all rusted. Yeah, but COVID Can survive on workout equipment in the sun, you know, it's ridiculous So I'm glad they put police tape all around this stuff. It really doesn't rust right It doesn't run So you know you would walk along this Paradao and now they wrote it off you couldn't do it anymore And there would be surfers out in the water still kind of breaking the rules and the police so the surfers were Constantly running from the police because they Portuguese love surfing they have some of the best surfers in the world So they're out surfing and the police would pull down and the surfers You'd see them scatter along the waves and run up the banks to get away from the police who are constantly chasing them out of the ocean surfing While they were you know while COVID was striking, you know Anyway all that to say we can I just pause and say what's interesting is I mean a country like that needs a revolution Yeah, hopefully not a violent one. I'm against violence But it needs a revolution like any government that do that to its own people needs to be overthrown in some way or another But I bet you that Portugal like the rest of the West didn't even come close. No, too Not even close. I mean when they told you to stay inside there was no one on the street You know the rule on the weekend was you had to be in your house by noon Noon noon you couldn't or noon or yeah two a noon or two o'clock forgive me for but it was right around the hot You know once you were done with your lunch basically you couldn't be on the streets You couldn't be driving a car any of that and so whole communities would just shut down and You know I never left the house anyway, so it was okay for me So I'd just take a walk with a dog or whatever, but it was unbelievable You couldn't be out all the restaurants were forced to shut down What if you didn't want to get the COVID backs? Um, did anyone not get it there? No, I mean it was like over what it's like Israel I think it was like overwhelming like everyone got it right? I think it was like my in Israel I think everyone I don't know but I'm reading when you love to see the data Because I'm sure they'll keep it hidden from us and I've been very curious about the Israeli data They had some of the best reporting like their VAERS system. Yeah way better than the United States For data right? I would love vaccine injuries self-reported vaccine injuries exactly so only a fraction of Injuries were reported to the VAERS system in the United States. Yes, right? So we know that a fact in Israel They have all the data. I would love to know What all that vaccine injury data looks like if they ever come forward with it fully and maybe they have and I haven't seen it yet But that would be fascinating to look into. I'm sure someone out there would Um, would look into that. But anyway, it's same with Portugal. I mean very high rates of Getting you know anyone who didn't take it Um No, wow. Yeah, so it was pretty much universal uptake. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy Um, and we were lucky because we were you know residents. We didn't have to like we were so Thank God like our kids nothing like that But oh all the kids like every like Portuguese as far as I know had deep was required and they would send out text alerts We would get text alerts like get your kids vaccinated. It's like no way Sorry, you're not gonna happen So but I'm sure Portuguese kids did so I again I would love to know what the actual data is From Europe once all the dust settles from this The white fibrous clots that we're seeing of course through through in the all across the United States now the massive white fibrous clots that we're seeing um From from people living ended That undertakers are seeing in the United States at record levels. I've never seen it before Where these we? Oh, I've been an undertaker for 40 years I've never once seen these massive white fibrous clots that seem to have begun in the past few years as a result of something Maybe we could look into that. Just a suggestion. No, but we won't look into it. I'm sure um so Yeah, all that to say like walking along that seawall I just to make this analogy That's all roped off 40 feet of wide open space, but you can walk up the street on the sidewalk in portra The sidewalks are like this big Like you could fit basically me on the sidewalk. You have to turn sideways when you're walking But that's open. So let's just be clear. I can't walk down here Where I'm gonna walk into some I wouldn't walk into somebody. I have 15 feet of birth Up there. I have to pass right next to somebody and that's their law So it was ridiculous. It was all over the place in many ways. It was worse the United States Nobody got together and said hey, we need to overthrow this tyrannical government. No no no no of course So that is like the deep last no I mean if you grew up in the United States hearing about which I'm sure no one ever mentions at this point But you know the Boston Tea Party in the American Revolution and you know free people determined to remain free and throwing off The yoke of tyranny Using arms to do it but also but more than just violence, but Yeah, you know explaining why they're doing it right and standing on true principle If you grew up hearing about that then you think well that you know that desire to be free Beats in every human heart and You know, but I guess it doesn't all right. I don't really know. I mean, but there's no evidence that anybody Is organizing to push back against this and I just want to say really clearly I think they should But no one seems to be Although I see some bright spots. I mean over the past few days massive protests in Paris against the Emmanuel Macron and the French funding of Ukraine. Yes I would definitely see demonstrations people organizing but not very large and you have to understand also and the French funding of Ukraine. Yes. I would definitely see demonstrations, people organizing, but not very large. And you have to understand also there's massive censorship. And there are, you know, you will be, we have canceling, you know, cancel culture. I have journalist friends in Portugal who lost their jobs because they spoke out, they were, you know, university, they spoke out against Ukraine. They were journalists and they were telling the Portuguese people what was actually happening in Ukraine. And they were fired from their positions at university. Really? In Portugal, they would fire an on air journalist for opposing the Ukraine war. No, we would have the, I'm just glad that would never happen in the United States. Can you imagine? It's amazing. It's been amazing to me to watch the unfold, the propaganda. It's amazing that it took this long. So a few weeks ago, as the lens skis in the Oval Office, I don't know if you saw that. And it was like bring your kid to work day, you know, at the Oval Office and like let daddy speak now here in the Oval Office about what's actually happening. But it was amazing. Suddenly then, of course, social media exploded with people for the first time. It seemed like understanding that wait a second, this isn't all as it seems here. And then, then of course, you had the massive, the same massive army, the bot army and everything else from few years ago that was really defending the war in Ukraine, which had really been less than over the past few years. I don't know if they're their CIA farm, you know, bot farms or whatever were drying up in Ukraine. The CIA was like repositioning resources for how they were going to carry that out. Suddenly it was like a flood. It was like, oh my god, they flipped the servers back on or something like that. You know, Victoria, Newland got on the phone and was like, hey, get those, get the websites back up again, get the bot army going on social media and trying to protect the war in Ukraine because now Trump was showing the truth here. And JD Vance was showing the truth who was unfolding. So it's been this unbelievable resurgence over the past few weeks. There's a propaganda for Ukraine. So the massive Ukrainian flag being unfurled and DC the other day who funded that flags are popping up all over again. Like I've seen them just driving around Ukrainian flags are now back in people's windows again. People are putting your Ukrainian flags back in their social media profiles again. Like what the hell's going on in the past few days? Like it's just, it's unbelievable watch. It's like, it's the Wall Street Journal. It's yeah, you know, Neil Ferguson, the eminent historian, and you know, it's, it's a lot of people, actually. All of a sudden, they're like, no, no, no, no, we're, you know, four square behind Zelensky. Where do those orders come from? Like what is that? Zelensky can't win. He's helped destroy his own country. I think the United States is destroyed his country. I think the Biden administration of the story is contrary. I actually don't think it's really Zelensky's being honest. But whatever, like we did Ukraine wrong. And yet all these people, some of them with jobs and they're not bots, they're human beings. I know some of them. They're like all in. What is that? I don't understand. To me, it's a kind of a madness. It does feel that because something that's happened to me over the past year, maybe I've become more empathetic. Good. But when it comes to not knowing things, like I have more empathy now for people who like a family, a family of five, they've got three kids. They work all day. They've got a few minutes of news at night. Right. Right. They flip on CNN or another channel. Like it's, it's no longer in business. But I think you even used to work there a few years ago, but it just went out to business called MSNBC. Like they'll flip on, like they'll flip on that, you know, and they get a few minutes of news. And then they've put their kids to bed. They make dinner or whatever. So I have empathy for those people. Oh gosh, yes. Where I lose my empathy is for people who have access to this information, whether it's, you know, neo cons and Washington or whatever else, they know you speaking directly of Ann Applebaum. Yes, Ann Applebaum, who's the staff at the Atlantic, who's, who's like husband what cheer led the destruction of the Nord Stream pipeline, you know, uh, right. Ex, of course, he'd lunatic. Yeah. So these people who have access to the information, but then choose to go the evil route. That's where I lose it. You know, so again, I have empathy for people that just don't understand. And you see this awakening, I think over the past few weeks about like what was this dressing down of Zelensky in the Oval Office? Like, I don't understand. Wait a second. I thought he was the hero. We see him on the Grammys. Right. He pops up every time there's an award show. He's asking for money. Thank you for standing with Ukraine. Like he's our guy. So wait a minute. You're telling me that this is wrong. But nobody cares about Ukraine. We just watch like the murder of like its entire young male population and like we want more to die. So we're not for Ukraine. We're against Russia. And we're so against Russia that calling someone pro Russia is a slur basically, but no one ever explains why are we supposed to be against Russia? Like I'm, I feel like I'm coming to a conversation late. I miss the predicate. Like the part where you explained to me why I have to hate Russia. I'm totally agnostic on Russia. Well, now I have been to Moscow a couple of times. I think it's the most beautiful city I've ever been to. So I like Moscow. But I still don't even have strong feelings about Russia. Why am I supposed to hate Russia? Like what is this? Because like they missed trick. I don't, I don't, I'm going to speculate what this is, but I don't get it still three years didn't you see the movie red dawn? The 1980s? This is a Soviets like I'm totally opposed to me. They're going to invade us right now. But aren't you paying attention? But truth is, it's so many of the people who are now fanatically opposed to Russia were not fanatically opposed to the Soviets. Right. So what the hell is going on? I actually think even the term Ukraine is a distraction from the truth, which is we're we are at war with Russia. That war is funded by the United States primarily. It's, I mean, some of the attacks on Russia were coordinated by US military personnel in Ukraine. The Ukrainian government is supported wholly by the United States are Intel agencies and are Intel officers are in Ukraine directing the Ukrainian Intel service. So these are all facts. So like we are at war with Russia, but why and why they hatred? I think you, if you, so that's a brilliant question why maybe it goes back to looking at George Soros and his, I think an essay that he wrote in the 1990s about this because he's been largely involved in his open society project, which is the destruction of Russia. Yes. So the destruction of Russia is meant to enable the expansion of the United States militarily and economically. We need to destroy Russia. We need to destroy China according to George Soros in order for that expansion. So George Soros intimately involved with the expansion of NATO using Slavic people, not Americans to die on behalf of George Soros and NGOs like USAID and others and others to have this massive change. So Adam Schiff said it publicly on the house floor for crying out loud. I mean, I played that clip a million times. We, they die over there, so we don't have to, we fight them over there. So we, they don't have to, we don't have to fight them here. So same thing. I don't know if you saw Eric Swabell last week for crying out loud. He said this is the greatest investment we've ever made, meaning, and he said zero Americans have died, which is a lie, by the way, because there's actually been a number of Americans that have died fighting Russia in Ukraine. Well, bunch of Americans, it'd be interesting to see finally when those families have been told to sign NDAs and not speak about it, I know for a fact that Americans have died in Ukraine fighting Russia. Of course, so that's on camera, by the way. Yeah, but they'll deny it. They'll say that these were just mercenaries. They weren't tied to it. They're just, oh, they were there voluntarily. Like the guy who tried to kill Trump and more hard to go like, you know, these are just, these are, we have no control over these people. That's total bullshit. Of course, you have control over these people. Well, you could, you know, very easily say that, and we probably should say that no American has allowed to serve in a foreign military. I don't understand. I mean, we have a person serving on the National Security Council right now who served in the Ministry of Defense in a foreign country, like no, how about no? Right. You're not allowed to have multiple citizenship. So you're not allowed to serve in a foreign military. What? If that's not disloyal, I don't know what is, we have a military. We have all kinds of clear and present threats, basically because the people serving in foreign militaries, you know, encouraged us to get involved in all his crap. Whatever. Yeah. We could clearly shut that down and we have it. You made reference to NDAs. Do you think that people have been pushed to sign NDAs? Oh, for sure. The families of those who have fallen specifically in Ukraine. I wonder how many people I wonder if we're talking about President Trump transparency? How many Americans have died in Ukraine fighting Russia? And then how many families of those special forces or, you know, just NATO, whatever, NATO soldiers have had to sign NDAs about their service there. That's wild. I never thought of that. I've hit, you know, former members of the CIA tell me that. High ranking members in the military tell me that. So I would like to know maybe the Trump administration can pull these numbers out. And we can hear more about that. How many Americans have died? We know French Polish, Polish more than anyone dying in Ukraine. I mean, talk about a country that's been destroyed by, you know, I hate to say it. But the polls who I think are great people for the record never met a poll I didn't like except for an Apple bomb salesman. But would they always end up bearing the brunt of everything in Europe? Yeah, massive NATO bases, flood of refugees that have completely changed their country. Millions of Ukrainian refugees have poured across the border that they just welcomed in with open arms. The language totally changed in neighborhoods across, across Poland. So instead of speaking Polish, you're just hearing Ukrainian now through these neighborhoods completely changed that. So when I look at the project and going back, you know, go back to the 90s, go back just a few years to 2014, I've seen this awakening or the at least an awareness over the past week once Trump and J.D. Vance dressed down Zelensky in the Oval Office to say, because the Zelensky lied right to their faces multiple times that Putin violated our exchange of prisoners. He violated the Minsk agreements. Well, to anyone sitting there saying, Oh, really? Oh, so Putin's the bad guy. He's the one who violated the prisoner swap. Really, that's no, no. So when you started looking at it, no, that's not at all what happens. Zelensky lied right to Trump's face right to Zelensky's face that that that Putin violated the prisoner exchange in 2019. That's total bullshit. Total BS. In fact, Zelensky's on camera welcoming the prisoners back at a ceremony. I think it was in Paris in 2019. So Putin didn't violate that at all. In fact, he adhered to it. Same with the Minsk agreements, which we know on Glenn Merkel, Chancellor of Germany at the time, joked later that they were never going to adhere to the Minsk agreements to provide peace and stick with that. Instead, they carried out a genocide in Eastern Ukraine. What was Eastern Ukraine for 10 years? No one wants to talk about the civilians that were kid. This infuriates me at a level. I just picture a child in Donbas or Danyatsk or Luhansk walking to school. And they go through a park and they pick up one of these pedal mines. Have you seen these pedal mines? Yes. Green. They look like a leaf. Journalists, Eva Bartlett has done unbelievable work on this. But these kids, they're meant to look. So the kids walk up to them and they pick them up and their hands blow off. That's what these civilians have been dealing with in Donbas and Danyatsk in Luhansk for 10 years. So ethnic Russians living in those areas. So when people say, oh, this thing started when Putin invaded. Okay. Yes, I'm very anti war. So I always feel like, yes, there's probably a way to solve it without killing people. So in that, I'll give you that. We Putin maybe didn't need to invade in order to pr and he didn't want to, by the way, he didn't want to. His government, his parliament voted for it. He didn't want to. So to go into Eastern Ukraine in Donbas, Indonesia, and Luhansk set up areas and protect those ethnic Russians who were being slaughtered for the past 10 years. And it was the United States. It was NATO. It was Boris, it was all of those clowns pushing NATO right up to that doorstep and coordinating these attacks. I mean, the sea, New York Times, it a whole profile on how CIA basically runs. Ukraine multiple field offices. So the coup that took place in 2014, I know you've spoken at length about this. You know all about it. I know your audience is well educated. They know all about it. But this was a CIA backed coup in 2014. We installed a Western puppet government in Ukraine after the Maidan coup to do our bidding. So I have some empathy for Zelensky. I'll tell you why. Because here's a guy who's sitting in the White House, and I feel like he doesn't know, first of all, he's not in power. And he's wondering, okay, I just got out the phone with Victoria Newland and Susan Rice before I walked in here. Exactly. And a bunch of low IQ Republican Senator Warmonger freaks. Yeah. So probably Lindsey Graham got on the phone with his and Mike rounds and all these people. Yeah. And they're like, hey, Vladimir, I've been to Ukraine many, many times. We've been funneling money and weapons to you for a long time. Here's what you need to do. You need to play hardball with Trump. Exactly. When you get in there, you need to tell him, we need security guarantees, Trump loves, you know, loves the little confrontations. So just do that. Make sure, and I don't know if you know it around the 34 minute mark in that confrontation. Some little lackey from, from his staff leans over and gives him like marching orders. No. So around the 34 minute mark, yeah, we did a thing about it like a couple weeks ago. He leans over, I think was a female. Now I forget. Anyway, leans over right to the lens key and says something, you know, like for like a minute is like guiding on it. It says, you know, sorry, you know, sorry, yeah. Wow. And then then stuff hits the fan. Like, hey, remember that meeting you had, you know, I'm just speculating. Remember that meeting you had with Victoria Newland yesterday when you got, you know, just on the Susan Rice phone call, you know, like just remember, remember we talked about security guarantees, security guarantees, security guarantees right after that fireworks, not all sleep dates are made by pharmaceutical companies. You probably heard about eight sleep by now. They developed the country's most innovative products for sleep. Almost everybody in our office uses something they make called the pod and they love it. And there's a reason that professional athletes and lots of other smart people do too. You add the pod to your mattress like a mattress cover and it helps you get a better night's sleep and fill with vitality at the start of each day in an intimidating way almost. It's amazing. How does it do it? Well, it uses advanced technology to track your sleep and automatically adjust the temperature of your side of the bed to what's perfect for sleep and temperature makes all the difference. It's backed by over 600 million hours of data. They've also used those insights to create their new product sleep a little bit, but you get quiet before you get a bit fall asleep faster and stay knocked out longer. No grogginess, no weird side effects is better deep sleep. So if you're ready to take sleep and recovery to the next level, go to eight sleep dot com slash Tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod for ultra full refund for 30 days. If you don't love it, it works. That's the worst advice anyone has ever given anyone. Try to outman Trump on camera, right? Right. Patronized Trump on camera call the vice president, you know, a bitch in Ukrainian or Russian. Yeah. And things will go well for you. Right. How's that going to go? And you know what is it's interesting? It almost did because I don't think Trump heard it or was fully aware at that moment what was happening. Like I when you see you can see Trump and he's just trying to be cordial. Yes. And J.D. Vance hears it. He's very Trump is for the record. Trump is extremely cordial. You know, for all the talk of how he's this Florida lunatic. He doesn't want that. He didn't want those fireworks. Oh, no, no, no, he is elaborately polite and anyone who's dealt with him will tell you that. I mean, he's a little, you know, he's like, he's like, uh, in keeper. I don't mean to be, um, to diminish his role or be picture or something like that. But he's the guy. He's like, master of ceremony is kind of personality like we're all here. It's great. Like he is not a public conflict guy at all. Yeah. I've never really seen a mother than, you know, somebody standing up with a cane at a state of the union address. And even then he was cordial. Yeah. He really is. It's his, I mean, I've seen it a lot. It's his instinct. Yeah. Like I really believe the last thing that Trump wants is the kind of thing that happened with Salind Schie. Like he doesn't want that. Yeah. He'd rather have it behind closed 100%. So I think when J.D. Vance saw that happening, you know, he called it out. Um, he had had enough of it, I think. And, uh, but I felt, I guess all that to say I felt bad for Zelensky in a way because, you know, as a human being, here's a guy who he doesn't know who's in charge. No, he's upon. He's just upon he's sitting there being used by Victoria Newland, Susan Rice. And then of course, she's, you know, she's Susan Rice pop right up on television on CNN almost immediately. So they had her ready to go. She's a heart. She was my neighbor for five years. We shared a backyard. Um, very nice. And I liked her husband. Um, and she's nice children, but she's a hard case. Like for real. She's a, she's a hard case. She's not. How do you mean? She's just, you know, she's tough. She's not a sentimental person. Yeah. She knows if she decides on a mission, like whatever it takes to achieve the mission period. I'm not even attacking her. I'm just noting that, you know, she's definitely not, um, you know, someone who's going to let human emotion get in the way of achieving what she thinks she wants to achieve. And so the mission, the mission is to destroy Russia, right? Right. So getting back to the mission is to just to be clear, Ukraine and Zelensky himself, I totally, you're the only other person I've heard say that, but I completely agree with you as a human being. I feel for him. I think he's committed a lot of crimes that he's killed a ton of people. They tried to assassinate a bunch of people. They have assassinated people. He's allowed his weapons to be sold to terrorist groups. I mean, it's really, he's really been bad. However, he is upon. And that's totally true. He's a hapless upon. And the nation of Ukraine is caught between great powers as it has been before as Poland has before. And so they're all in some deeper sense victims. This is a war between the United States and Western Europe and Russia. And so it does raise the question once more like why? And you're, you're, I of course, interrupted you, but I'm sorry. But your answer was it's an economic play. They want the resources. Is that what you're saying? Or I think if you look at the clearest example of why comes from George Soros, I think in his open society project to me anyway. And if you see what he's been trying to do to destabilize and regime change funding, I mean hundreds of millions of dollars to NATO, right? So you see the expansion of NATO almost concurrently with his massive amounts of donations to NATO and to the expansion of NATO right up to their doorstep. So for all of the NATO is the defensive organization morons out there. You're lying and the encircling of Russia has been the goal has been the goal through these NGOs. Now the CIA can't do it out as publicly, right? So what does the CIA now use? They use NGOs, whether it's the facilitation of USAID or other, you know, other non governmental funding groups, yeah, funding all these groups. So they do it so that they don't have to, they can kind of step back from it. So the CIA can funnel billions of dollars into Ukraine through all of these different organizations and everything else. They can do it through our open borders project in the United States under the Biden administration, through the Catholic charities, through the through highest the Hebrew International Aid Society. So all of these NGOs that have facilitated the child sex trafficking in the United States, to me is one of the greatest crimes of all time. And I'm really upset that we don't talk more about it. Maybe we can't. But to me, the open society piece of this is the really the has been a big driver of this. I can't say it's the only thing, but it's it's born out of those things, tanks that NATO needs to expand destabilize Russia, basically install a Western government in Russia to facilitate through mineral resources and everything else, making sure that they're using the US dollar and the same thing with China, by the way. I mean, why are we Soros openly talks about this? So this is not like a fantasy. I think it's it's grotesque. If that's really the goal to break apart Russia and you heard that airhead from Estonia say that the other day we I think it should be a bunch of little countries. And that's like, yeah, the the thing that I respect most about Putin and appreciate and grateful for with Putin is that he's kept Russia together. They more nuclear weapons in any country in the world, the largest country in the world. It's 20% Muslim. It's like it could easily become, you know, post Soviet Yugoslavia, right? With endless wars that would not only kill a lot of people there, but would also endanger the world. He lose track of nuclear weapons really. I mean, it's insane. Right. Actually, what you want is stability and clear accounting of where the deadliest weapons are, where the biolabs, where the nuclear warheads, like you that's super important. So if you had a Syria in Russia, like everyone in the world would die. And so how, and I'm I'm no genius. That's for sure. And that's super obvious to me. So if you're pushing to break up Russia, I mean, it instantly be in like a 500 year war with itself. Right. Why would you want that? I don't know what drives these evil people. I really think that's evil. I think they're demonic. I really think they're genre because if most Americans understood, and we try to do at least on our show, you know, some coverage of this, but like look at Syria, for instance, right? If most Americans understood that there's a genocide happening in Syria, yes, that was backed by President Biden. Yes. And the, you know, the removal of Assad, regardless of what you think about doesn't really matter. I'm required to hate. I don't, you know, I don't have strong feelings, but you're required to hate him. And you're also required to believe the propaganda because some douchebag at the Atlantic magazine decides he's in the way of some goal some other country had, no, no, no. I'm an American, right? And I'm a Christian also in a side protected the Christians, that's a fact. And whatever else he did. So I think it's totally fair for me to say, I don't want chaos in any country because it's a threat to me and my country will get terrorism because of where mass invasions like Europe has had of refugees. And I don't want the Christians to be murdered. Like I don't know. Such a weird position. How can you take that position? I just wanted the thing that I should have put like, no, here's my theory on Russia. I think it's clearly a resource player. Absolutely right. Americans loved Russia when it was supine and chaotic and the life expectancy for men was 49 and everyone was like dying of cirrhosis on the sidewalk and all that they loved it because they could loot it and they did. I'll go clean and looted the hell out of for sure. But I really think the problem with Putin is not his territorial expansion. Putin has shown no sign that he has territorial ambitions. He's got a country that's like almost impossible to manage already. He wants Poland to stop. He wants Portugal? You moron. Right. No, he doesn't. It's like only children believe that. No, I think the difference with Putin is Christianity. And I think that I didn't used to think that, but then I noticed that the same people who I'm 55. So I remember a lot of the same people and certainly the same kind of people making excuses for the Soviet Union, which was in atheist state. Putin comes in and he's like, actually, we're going to bring back the Orthodox Church. We're going to fund the Orthodox Church as a Christian country. And that was it. That's when he became like a true enemy of the ruling class of the United States. That's not the same thing in Hungary. Hungary was totally fine from 1945 to 1991. It was a Soviet satellite state, part of the Warsaw Pact. It was officially atheist country. And then it was a kind of transition period. And then, Orban comes who's like, he's not even right way. He's like kind of 70s liberal, live and live guy. But he's like, no, there's a Christian country. All of a sudden, you know, Atlantic, magazine of the Atlantic Council and every other group of stupid people with power in Washington is like, we need to kill right. And in fact, there have been attempts on his life. Actually, it was one that has not been publicized. So yeah, buy that, you know, by the same block of people. And they hate him for that. Yeah. So I'm just trying to understand how from USAID flies in the Hungary and starts like setting up operations to destabilize Hungary, you know, remember that? Oh, yeah. And then we send under Biden, we sent an ambassador, pressman I think his name was this gay guy and his boyfriend under whatever to spend his entire time in Budapest, lecturing the Hungarians about how bad they are. It's like, that's our, that's diplomacy. That's our ambassador. No, it was his whole role was to insult the Hungarians inflame the relationship between the Hungarian government in the US to basically try to humiliate them. It's like, why would you want to do that? Why do you think they're trying to kill so many Christians? I mean, because I think it's a spiritual, there's something about look, let's just be totally honest, there's something about Christianity, which is like the only world religion I'm aware of, theistic religion that that preaches nonviolence, which it does. Yeah. Um, you know, others don't at all. And Christianity does it's against, no, tons of Christians can be violence, but they're in violation of their religion, right in my opinion. But you would think it would be the most popular religion with world leaders because it's like the Christians aren't going to hassle you. Jesus says, given to Caesar, what Caesar is given to God, what's God? Don't over-the-government like it's, it's a very kind of compliant religion, actually. And inherently, propise. And yet they're always the ones who get murdered. When the Spanish civil war started in that famous photograph of the Republic, you know, the Communist forces, what's the first thing they open fire on a statue of Jesus versus famous picture of them firing, you know, they're 8 millimeters at a statue of Jesus. And it's like, what is that? And I don't think there's a rational explanation for it. I think it's spiritual clearly. And it's very heartening is a Christian to know that a nonviolent religion triggers people that much. It suggests maybe it's true. Yeah. It's like, why do you hate it so much? It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a you care. It's a cross purposes with their mission. So when you see the neo cons in Washington, when you see these warmongers and these NGOs that want the destruction, you know, the massive expansion, the military industrial complex. I mean, to your point about Europe, I mean, first of all, of underlying, if you like last week, standing there with a lot of misalinsky said that Putin's going to invade Europe, he's, this is Ukraine. We, we, we fight in Ukraine to protect the rest of Europe because if it's not for you, Putin will march right through, right through Brussels. And people, I think it's going to be dark. I know this is going to be clip, but like at this point, Europe is so, and I love Europe, and I'm there constantly and family there. I mean, I, I really love Europe truly as an America. Um, but like it's so degraded, you know, I don't even want to say it. I'm not going to say what it actually be worse or not. I just, but it's pretty bad right now. You do, someone really smart said the other day, the reason the Europeans hate Russia is because it's the only thing all Europeans have in common. It's the only unifying. Yeah, you need to get me. That's it. It's like the Wizard of Oz, right? You need a good enemy. It's not the Chinese. It's not the East. No, you need it. And so now instead of, you know, once we, once we're done with Russia and China, then it'll be space, you know, then it'll be, it'll be some sort of alien race that we need to marshal the military industrial complex for. So in the United States, it's like, are we pulling back on the massive amounts of money? We're spending the trillion dollars a year to fight these, these enemies that we're creating, whether it's Assad or it's a Gaddafi or it's some people on camels in Iraq or Afghanistan, like we need to keep, we need to constantly being, we need to constantly move the shell game around. So for a while, it's Putin. That's not going to really work out, but Europe, now you can do it. But now it's going to be China or Iran. So it's Iran next, you know, it's hard to, once once we've exhausted all that though, it'll be space. It'll be like some sort of You're up now you can do it, but now it's gonna be China or Iran. So it's Iran next. You know, it's hard to once once with exhausted all that Though it'll be space it'll be like some sort of a reptilian race or something in space that will have to fight next so what is the truth about the lights in the sky seen over the mid Atlantic over the Christmas season. I think we learned that it was in fact a Siam it was a false flag operation by the Biden administration and the admitted it and I think we got confirmation from the Trump administration Can you tell me what that means the goal was we need? You know we're gonna show all of these these drones because we we heard it was Iran first of all remember it was a mothership Off the coast because Iran tried to assassinate president right another biggest lie ever touch of that's a I'm trying to use the effort now. It's lent but that's a lie by the way. Yes the government of Iran Thank you for saying that try to murder Donald Trump during the presidential campaign I hope everyone's paying attention to that because that's being a fact Parroted all over media right now that the government of Iran tried to murder anyone who says that is a liar or so Subject to propaganda that he did not be talking in public right, you know Roger Stone close friend of president Trump almost immediately said It was a lie came right out. I said it was a lie immediately in public in private. So yeah, that's a lie Whatever sorry sorry. It was fabricated. I've said on social media. It's fabricated if you don't know that it's fabricated it was fabricated Yeah No, I think regardless of the Iran Iranian piece of it It was really to I think build up the massive contracts for drone production in the United States So but but to get back to your initial description so you think that those lights were Government drones I think so I think I think I think that they were man-made government drones and I think that I Think it was clear what the plan was if you don't have a massive drone infrastructure in the United States What way what better way to get bureaucrats and members of Congress on board with making sure that we build up our own drone infrastructure in the United States by then Threatening the idea that these are Chinese or Iranian drones flowing flying over military bases in the United States false flags. We have such a False flags are very useful. Yeah, no very useful and they work. I know they work sadly USS Liberty USS Liberty a famous false flag, you know, you want to get us in the war against Egypt Well, then Israel and the CIA collaborate and bomb and kill American sailors on the USS Liberty Too bad you didn't kill all of them because a lot of them lived and they told the world what the hell happened when they tried to use American sailors as a false flag to get us into a war against Egypt didn't work Even though Lyndon Johnson and the CIA tried their damnedest to work with Israel to do it So you think Lyndon Johnson knew that American sailors were being murdered 100% it goes all the way to him You could read blood in the water John Nellons an incredible book so evil that I guess and he's such an evil evil human being such an evil human being But don't ask Doris current's good with that because you know show right a book about how amazing he is but he was an evil an evil son of a bitch and He knew he knew and fact and wouldn't allow them to be rescued by the way Not only knew about it, but wouldn't allow them to be rescued They hope that every American died in the waters that day, but they didn't time for their true life Alp story I got a call for a friend of mine yesterday honestly true story who said his girlfriend had just broken up with him over Alp he wouldn't stop and I thought to myself that's kind of sad. He said no, it's not sad Imagine if I'd married her Now I know I was saved than the next day This same friend is driving at twice the speed limit for a major American city pulled over by a cop in a speed trap Cop takes his license registration goes back to patrol car runs them comes back Looks in the window and sees a tin of alp on the dashboard pauses Stunned says to my friend use alp. Yeah, I do says my friend so to ice is the cop We all do it looks at my friend thought playing goes drive safely sir and hands back his license to registration no ticket So in two days he's saved from a tragic marriage to a girl who doesn't like alp and a speeding ticket all true It's more than In an age to 350 million people are guessing there are about 350 million alps stories email us yours We want to know and read it on the air email tell all and alp pouch calm tell all and alp pouch calm Give us your off story Linden Johnson knew this knew this Yes, he knew it and Well, he's gonna I think he's paying for that right now. Yeah, I believe you would hope And a lot of other people knew it too in the CIA So I love when people today some got some poor American sailors on a surveillance ship not lightly armed not really armed Yeah, yeah With massive American flags on the deck were a friendly ship and the Israelis knew it They had it in their control room on the wall friendly Friendly they knew it and the scout ships that were flying that morning knew it So it's a lie that it was a mistake. It was not a mistake. We have the documents We know that it wasn't a mistake. It was intentional So but I didn't real I'm aware of that. Yeah, and you're not allowed to say it for some reason No, you can't say like these are things that you're not allowed to talk about right. You know criticized US government but you know yeah But on the other hand, I will say I mean it infuriates me that you can criticize your own government but not a foreign government That's so grotesque On the other hand you also give of any foreign government a pass if it's acting in its own interest It's like they don't care about you you're a foreign country, you know like I get it But the idea of our country allowing the murder of our own Sailors did nothing wrong. We're sent there By the way conscripted we have the draft then yeah, not maybe not even there voluntarily a great point That the US government knows that I mean that I just my head is I didn't know that until you just told me I hope the Trump administration I hope I hope Congressman Luna who's been you know heading up the I guess the JFK Epstein yeah the release of files whole thing because you can't just release them you have to have a congressional community To hide them even longer you have to redact things and hide them and then release like do He's not disclosure hand out binders No, I hope the Trump administration I've spoken to these veterans of the USS Liberty and there Their hope is that the Trump administration and the defense secretary Pete Higgseth will actually do a full investigation into this openly publicly and not pull any punches because of our friends in Israel but actually put it all out there and go through the full investigation testimony from the veterans who were seeing eyeballs of the individuals that were bombing them and killing them on board the USS Liberty strafing them to strafing them and when they got in the water strafing them You know and knew that they were friends true. Yeah, yeah and knew that they were friendly You know the captain of the ship said he'd never you moved his ship as quickly he'd never I don't know the term analogy I'm not a I'm not a sea captain But he flirted in a way that he'd never done before he was told with urgency to get there and to be put in position And he was like why am I being put in position like in a kill zone? Like why can I go another mile offshore when I'll be safe? No, you need to be bright in this spot so the Pentagon set it up. Oh Yeah, this is I to be killed the CIA collaborated with the Israeli government and Manuver a US ship to this position to be killed to be destroyed the mission was for it to be totally destroyed So you don't have people coming on my show Telling you what they saw that day like they all were supposed to be dead Gulf of Tonkin remember the main You know you could go down the list 911, you know drones over the east coast of the United States like These false flags work for a reason, but you can't kill your own people You're not allowed to do that. That's just got to be a red line The CIA would never kill its own you can't kill your own people period. Yeah, you can this you're supposed to protect your own people You're in charge of these people right? It's like killing your own children Tuskegee experiment You can't kill your own people you can't put American ships and American sailors in waters and then test nuclear weapons on them You can't do that you can't have the Tuskegee experiment We have a long history of of doing these things and I just feel like that's a Pretty bright line like I'm leading people I Have to do whatever I can up to and very much including giving my own life. Yeah to protect them to act in their interest That's why I'm the leader right? That's the way you feel about your children should be a Species of the way you feel about anybody you lead. I'm in charge. Yeah, I get the benefits of being in charge but I also have You know the responsibility the burden of being in charge which is to Act in their interest and sacrifice myself for them. It's it's super simple. That's the basic bargain people will follow children will follow a father Men will follow an officer if that's the deal right? But if you violate that if you say well, I'm gonna kill people I'm supposed to be saving Then you've broken the deal and you you are not a legitimate leader and you get fragged at that point actually I think yeah I think it's totally fair right I would think so I mean but then you've the history is lined with people who put their own their own men in harm's way look at Mao, you know You know leading your own men for personal purposes killing them off for personal purposes There's long lines of Socialist leaders for sure doing this Well, that's why we always hated them. Yeah, but I the Lyndon Johnson did that in purpose Wow, that's super super dark and a lot of other dirty things and a lot of other dirty things so the the most famous Dirty thing of course that he did was participate in some way It's so not clear in the murder of the president right JFK and and you really see this in Maybe the third volume of the carot Series the biographical series on Lee and John Robert caros. Robert. I'm bigger part Robert Caro is written this. Yeah series of books and Robert Caro was You know, I think too sympathetic etc etc, but in and very liberal and all that but in the portion where Johnson is on the plane in Dallas and learns that Kennedy has been murdered and then is sworn in on the plane as president It's really clear really clear from Caro's description that this is not a surprise to him not a surprise at all and You can go down so many corridors of this and it's not just as simple as Lyndon Johnson You know was somehow involved with using his own hit man that had used previously, you know It's not as just that's it. That's the story right. I've read so many books on this and you pull the threads You know how is how is was it Jack Rubenstein? How is he there that afternoon how how is how is you know how is Lyndon Johnson? Tied to this with a hit man how how is the mob tied to this like all of these strings converging? You know, it's it's remarkable and then can I just say this? I know it's crazy it's crazy to talk about But there were people like Billy Meyer who predicted this and prophesies this years in advance and knew the dates The locations where he would be killed and also knew the dates and locations of where our FKG RFK would be assassinated So there's there's so many pieces that we still do I are you hopeful at all that we're gonna get in these JFK documents as well It's interesting. I mean I Was never interested in the Kennedy assassination. It was over covered and it seemed like the kind of territory of wackos and conspiracy nuts well That's where the third the term came from I know well then of course, you know, it's it's not ignorance that makes you a conspiracy nut It's knowledge Which I didn't know I was such an idiot. That's a great point. I still am an idiot in some ways, but I welcome to club Welcome to the book But in the past yeah the past six or seven years. I have learned a lot about it hardly an expert but I've learned enough to know that there's something actually there and I'm ever learned a lot about it actually so but anyway the point is president trumped to his everlasting credit issues in executive order on January 23rd Saying you know release the files on the JFK assassination on the Bobby Kennedy assassination the bastard of telenet is 68 June and then on the MLK assassination You know the April of 68. Yeah, which I've always thought to my grant I've always thought that was a conspiracy me clearly that's an absurd story the James Earl Ray and escape prison Made some of winds up and he threw airport with two fake passports like right you do that clearly there are others I don't know who sounds a lot like Butler penciling How has that happened? But he issues this executive order, which I guess has the force of law He's the president I say it's elected president tonight states He does this three days after the inauguration. It's one of the first things he does and here we are in March Whatever it is the second week of March and we've got nothing and In the case of are we being played? I honestly don't know what's going on But I'll tell you just by deduction what I know is true first of all I know that the CIA was involved in some way or parts of the CIA the angle to the counter Yeah, and tell part of the CIA see it's huge. It's not everyone in the CIA But there were CIA officials who were involved. I know that because I know someone who saw some of the documents and told me that But I have thought up until recently will it must be you know They're trying to protect the institution the CIA everyone's dead 62 years later everyone's dead So why are you holding it like why don't just here's everything we have like why do you care? And I always thought it was well you got to protect the CIA But then you know we have the church committee hearings 50 years ago when they showed the CIA was up to all kinds of nonsense Like pretty dark stuff and everyone already knows that yeah, so they're gonna further discredit the institute like nobody cares actually Nobody cares no everyone knows the CIA is the most corrupt organization in the world nobody can even name the CIA director in November of 63 John Macon but people don't know they don't care So why are they even now even a Month and a half after the executive order requiring them to release these files Whose location we know it's not like they have to gather all these times We know they're in the National Archives. Yeah, and they're all digitized by the way this idea that they're in boxes That we need somebody to go through it. It's the same garbage with the Epstein file What they have is this they're all they're all digitized right? So what are you who are you protecting? Well? That's the question who who is there a foreign government involved in this? Well, there's I know this free fact There is active pressure active pressure on elected officials to stop this disclosure right now now in 2025 that was 1963 where is that coming from? You know, I don't know I'm not gonna speculate on it, but there's active pressure and I don't believe for a second that it's From the CA who John Radcliffe former Congressman John Radcliffe who's now the director he cares Don't think so so does John Radcliffe want these released or I have it is happening the first idea And I don't have any evidence that Radcliffe has involved in efforts to prevent disclosure I don't I don't mean to suggest that I do but I'm just saying like who is powerful enough to Scare people into slow walking the disclosure and by the way slow walking the disclosure is the same as not Providing the disclosure. Yeah, why are they slow walking into to somehow continue to hide facts? What is the purpose who is? You know what is the force Acting on the US government on the new administration to prevent disclosure and I think it's a totally fair question because it's the president States got murdered the people voted for this is the heart of democracy we vote for our leader and it was overturned and so anyway, I think it's very Important to get to the bottom of the JFK thing. Yeah, and the Epstein files and all of the other all of the other things that are being kept by the United States government without Transparency to the American people again the US's Liberty story. I mean and or hey is the United States government have we've been secretly funding with billions of dollars Horavitic propulsion technologies because we captured UFOs. We know that we have down craft We have crash retreat. We have how many whistleblowers have come out now that were on crash retreat under oath under oath crash retrieval Whistleblowers high ranking members in the military by the way. These aren't like schleps. You know I don't even know what that word means from the motor pool. No, no, no, yeah, but these are these are people that have high You know classified clear officers. Yeah. Yeah Who've been involved in crash retrieval programs? We have the technology. We've had it for years like Sometimes we do this on our show and people like all there goes Clayton again talking about UFOs like this to me is one of the biggest stories of all time I mean we have technology that we can travel from here to Paris Instantly, but you can't let us have it You mean to tell me we do have that technology. I mean Reportedly that we have or we figured out how to use that technology. I don't know that we've been able to use it as well as they have But we have technology that can move us at incredible speeds that human body Under normal circumstances would be ripped apart doing nine G's right but with this gravidic propulsion technology were protected in that way So I don't understand all of it all that to say that yes, we there's technology that we aren't allowed to see that Some defense contractors are and have had access to and that's the brilliance of this program Which is like break up pieces of this program and disperse it to Boeing to North or Grumman to all of these different So you don't get to really talk you get working on different pieces of this project How it all comes together. I don't know, but we have hyped members in the military who've been involved in the retrieval For the purposes of reverse engineering and studying. I noticed so that it's all death related technology Which does tell you something right? No, I'm sure say it's not like why do you think the defense industry is so involved in it right? But it's just in no one is claiming. I've never heard anybody say that The US government is hiding technology that you know might actually help you they were So that's where and they don't talk about it, but I have talked to sources who've told me that they've witnessed firsthand this technique health technology being used to regrow limbs That we don't have access to like basically the eradication of cancer, but limbs that we're missing regrowing human limbs using this technology described it as like a wand and others, but I Don't know I've never seen it but that somebody has seen it and there are people who've openly talked about it and who've I don't know been quoted and been you know and reported in different books But I've spoken to an individual who saw it personally this technology So it's not all death related, but I don't know how much of it is is is health related, but certainly the ability to scan bodies maybe eliminate cancers Maybe regrow limbs wouldn't we love to know that I would love to know that and if they're keeping so maybe it's all BS I don't think so and I think if they have it We deserve to know about it and if our tax payers If taxpayers are funding these reversal technology programs and they're keeping it quiet from us and it's compartmentalized and we're not allowed to see it That to me is a travesty you mean to tell me the bio pharma suit so you might be thinking why why would they keep it? So the bio pharma suitable complex which is arguably bigger than the industrial comp the military industrial complex in Washington right by volume Why would they why would they push COVID shots on us? Without trials without actual human trials and all they tested on oh they tested on 11 mice. Okay. Okay. Just that's good So let me inject myself with that's enough. You know that's enough for me 11 mice 10 10 wouldn't have been enough. That's when the mRNA vaccines came out. I thought to myself Oh, there's never been a successful coronavirus vaccine. You haven't tested it. It's a it's a novel technology and It could potentially change people's genes right I was first in line. I Want those white fibrous clots in my body. I want you to change the basic genetic makeup of me. Yeah What's amazing is you got the shot now you have a vagina, which is so amazing I Mean I wear things have happened But no, and then you also get immunity Then you get then then your company then your company rolls out this vaccine without without a Without any testing but also gets legal immunity as well and so now you can't be sued for it So the bio pharma suitable complex would love to basically continue to sell you medicine for the rest of your life Make you sick with you know highly processed foods and then on the other side of it also give you You know statins, you know, right? So they make money like funding both sides of this stuff So wait there's a technology that will eliminate maybe potentially eliminate cancers or Fix fix my tumor in my body with a like with a wave of a wand again. I'm saying I've seen it I've heard that this technology exists Wouldn't you love to keep it under wraps in the same way that with Nikola Tesla? Finding free energy that we you mean oh you mean the atmosphere I can literally pull a theric energy right out of the atmosphere and power my home We can't have you have access to that because you need to buy gasoline You need to buy you need to pay the power company. So wait a minute I can set up my own sort of like Tesla device Why do you think the FBI rated is you know his work in New York City and took all of his all of his documents? We can't have we cannot allow you to have access to free energy or Things that would eliminate cancer Because somebody's got to make money off of it. I mean to me. It's awkoms razor, right? It's the clearest definition of like why? Before I forget we're did nuclear technology come from I've never heard anybody explain where it came from so I go Germany the 1930s really what was the moment where it was discovered? I don't know the answer that I know that a lot of incredible technologies emerged right around that time there were also at that time down to UFOs Similar you know at that right around that time. Yeah So it is remarkable That we suddenly had transformers What do transformers come from? Where did all of these weird technology? Where did the microchip come suddenly come from? Silicon Microchip where all of that suddenly come from right around the same time as reports of downed UFOs that are being reverse engineered What other technologies do we have access to? That we don't know about that or part of these craft Telepathic machines that are able to connect without even using your hands Individuals who've seen these craft so they're basically able to control them with their mind The US government has access to that Shouldn't we know about it? Probably you know there are some who argue no we shouldn't we shouldn't because it would blow our minds We shouldn't be allowed to see this stuff Because it would alter Space-time continuum. Yeah, you I of course. I'm always for disclosure Of course on the other hand I always think of like the classic kidnapping scenario Where someone is kidnapped the kidnappers demanding a ransom And so there's a hope that the kidnapped person will return home alive As long as the ransom is paid But in order for that to work The person who's been kidnapped has to remain blindfolded He can never see the kidnapper because the second he does the kidnapper has to kill him There are moments where big picture knowing too much is a huge threat Yeah, and I wonder if we're there right now because we're having this conversation your shows You know crushing it online on YouTube and rumble and And other people are running or doing shows like that and X is pretty open actually people can pretty much say what they want And maybe people know too much to be governed Actually once you realize how fake a lot of the things you thought were real turn out to be Um Like how do you gonna pay your taxes Well, that's very much how I feel. Yeah, you know why you paying your credit card bill right? This is a total scam right? This is I mean It's a it's a complete you know, it's a loan shark king But they spend more on congressional campaigns than you do so they get to like destroy your life There's a lot of stuff like that right and so like how long can our government keep free speech and Exist I mean if they want to revert you know if they want to cover up things like the massive you know child sex trafficking operation In the United States or any of these big things They're gonna go to great lengths to silence journalists who are uncovering this or clamping down on cross-social media platforms like You know or demonetizing or blocking videos when we cover certain subjects and so they're they try But I think this information is getting out there more than it ever has definitely is and I love it But to your point then do we become ungovernable? Ungovernable Ungovernable Am I see because we can't because we're just saying wait wait the CIA killed JFK The CIA and a foreign government Collaborated and killed American sailors. Why would I want to join the US Navy like that's what my government does Why would I pay my taxes when? The IRS is funneling $20 million to Uganda for for circumcision Studies or whatever like why would I pay my so at what point do you have a revolution? Do you have a Thomas pay? That's exactly that's what I'm saying. So like it does feel like we're reaching You know for all of their silly censorship attempts like people I know are I don't want to use or radicalize But their way more open-minded than they were five years ago and infinitely more than they were 20 years ago when One-tenth of what you just said would have given you know earned you a clinical diagnosis Right. Yeah, you would have been by definition crazy for saying anything like what you just said and now you're like yeah You know, I don't know if that's true, but that could be true. Yeah, and so I just wonder like at some point if you're gonna maintain if you if you believe the world is run effectively by criminal cartels with very dark anti-human motives Obviously true Then like they have way more power than we do they have way more advanced weapons than we do They're clearly loosely organized across borders And so like how long are they gonna put up with this like you and me sitting here You know reading acts in commercial breaks Yeah, yeah, yeah Is this sustainable? I have hope I have hope You know, I'm a glass half full kind of person. I always have been that the Trump administration Yeah, you know the difference between people. I look at the the first Trump administration in this Trump administration Trump gave Zelensky Javelins No, it's first in you know his first Trump administration And now he's yelling at him in the Oval Office and he's cutting off you know surveillance aid and other things So I'm hopeful that things have changed that he's surrounded himself with the right intel people To clean house But if there are those deep state forces and why is he deep state people kind of roll their eyes But it's just the permanent government, you know It's just the people that are entrenched there for 40 years The bureaucrats who have these interests at heart whether it's child sex trafficking operations for rich people in the United States or the pedophiles and Hollywood or whatever It is you know They have these interests and these moneyed interests To funnel money back to their spouses or whatever through these NGOs and everything else um Can the Trump administration can these people actually clean house? So I'm hopeful Can they get them in there? Can they actually root them out and we can actually get back to maybe a pure Appure American government in the in the vein of like a Thomas pain which is We don't like government, but can we have the least amount of it as possible and I think the American people would rally around that per I just I feel it. I see it. I See it among people who were not even Trump supporters who have now become They're become champions of what they're doing with doge and these other things and yes And they're hopeful for the first time in a way that they're maybe the American government They learned about in civics civics classes is attainable once again Seems growing. I never thought I'd see it be attainable once again You know in the era of NAFTA and everything else with under Bill Clinton and George H. W Bush and Hallibur All of the all of the things Growing, I never thought I'd see it be attainable once again, you know, in the era of NAFTA and everything else with under Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush and Hallibur, all of the all of the things that drove me crazy, you know, war and rock and all that, all of that. Are we somehow getting back to what it means to the United States Constitution that I'm hopeful about that. And I think I think we could get there if we have the right people in power. It really does come down to that, doesn't it? The popular will is not quite as relevant as I thought it was. It's a great point because where were we had the Trucker convoy in Canada, which showed incredible bravery. Yes. You know, where was the massive Trucker convoy in the United States? Where were the men? I would do it. I agree. You know what I mean? Like where were the men during the Biden administration saying we're done with this? And you know what? Either I'm going to put on my mega hat or not. It doesn't matter. I'm going to put on my Trucker hat. I doesn't matter. And we're taken to the streets and we're going to go down to the southern border and you're not getting across our southern border. Like there I know there were some pieces of that. But I feel like the organizing principle of the United, I feel like there's a lack of that. And I don't know. I worry about that popular push and for people to stand together and say enough is enough with this tyranny. You know, it does come down to men. Yeah. And yeah, I've been thinking a lot about my father recently and I, you know, whatever we're all flawed. But I just don't. I haven't met a man like him really in the last 20. I can't remember the last time I met a man like him on a on the basic level. I mean, he was the kindest most loyal father, but there were absolutely limits. Like if you're rude to his wife, for example, punch you right in the face without even hesitating. Not one I saw it happen on the Park Island of a movie theater as a trout shocking. But you know, can't be rude to my wife. Like there are just limits. I don't know. Yeah. I eat their rules here. Right. And one of them is you can't attack my family. Period. And I don't know. I loved growing up like that because I felt like my family. I loved it. I'm, I try to be that father and husband, but I, I loved it. It gave us such security. It's like no one fucks with pop. He is not. He's a loaded gun man. You know, wonderful man hilarious, really nice. But if there's any threat to the family, like it's not even going to hesitate. He doesn't think about the consequences. You see some of these videos emerge. Where the men like that? Where like it says, oh, the moment she knew that he, he wasn't the one. And there's like, you know, Robert comes up in the alleyway and the man, like just leaves the girl there and just runs the opposite way. I'm like, holy smokes. You're right. Like my dad, you know, he served, he served in Nuremberg after the war. And so I'm, took over in SS barracks. They're in, ran tank drills all through, you know, Nuremberg. You know, and, but he was a tough guy, but he was, he was also the most kindest, you know, but he was, he would not be messed with like with, you know, whether it was cut off in traffic or west with, he would, you know, he wouldn't put up with it. And he also wouldn't put up with it for the treatment of his children and his family either. Of course not. You know, and I think we need more of that. Well, I totally agree and I just don't, I don't see at least in the world that I live with. I was talking to my brother the other day and saying when we were kids, you know, being in Maine in the summertime and boy, you could not be rude to people. Like that just wouldn't end well at all. And I said to him, you know, I don't remember the last time I was ever in any sense intimidated by any white man. Like there's just no white man to the kid. Yes, I'm sorry. I mean, I have a white man. I not against white men. I'm like everybody else. I like white men. I'm the, you know, father and uncle of some, but I don't feel any. There's no intimidation or whatever. It's like, yeah, what are they going to do? Nothing. My son brings up this story. I can't believe I'm going to share this, but the, like the stories that my son, he's 14 now will kind of bring up or when, when daddy gets pissed. And he likes, I think as a young man, maybe you sort of, you endear to that, you know, and, there was one time there, this guy rode past road, we were all riding bikes as a family and this guy rode past on his motorcycle and just flew right almost hit my young daughter and almost, almost killed her like flew right past her. And I flipped out and I had the baby on the back seat of my bike. And I was ready to jump off and run after this motorcycle list and my wife jokes. You're like, what were you going to do? The baby was still in the carrier behind you. Like you're going to fight a guy with one hand and a thing, but, and then we were in Vienna of all places. Talk about compliant and it was like, we were trying to make it to this show as a family. It was freezing. And we went into this little, it was an information kiosk to help tourists. And they were, it was eight o'clock and it was closing in eight and I walk in and she says, we're closing. We can't, we can't, we can't help you. We cannot help you. We're in here all day. We've been on, I said, my family's freezing. We're trying to find this location. Can we please, you know, get to this location? Can you help us with, I can't. I'm sorry. No more help. I can't help you on. I said, and I just flipped out. And I, you know, maybe it was the Philadelphia in me. I just flipped out. Well, thanks for the, you know, thanks for the, the F and hospitality here in Vienna. I just flipped out and then she, she kind of called me and said, okay, are you looking for the Shakespeare theater? Okay. Well, then it's a, and my son's still to this day. We'll bring that up. He's always, thanks for the F and hospitality here in Vienna. So I don't know. It's just not proud of those moments. No, but I mean, that's, I do think like you can extrapolate outward toward a whole country or civilization. That's like if the men aren't willing to defend it. First of all, things get very jumpy and chaotic inside as people feel undefended. Yeah. And it makes them crazy and very anxious. But it's also true that you get invaded. Yeah. Do we have like a nation of beta males right now? And I always used to think this about the governor of Texas, who's a perfectly nice guy, I guess. But like he sat there for four years and let millions of people who had no right to be here at all. And in most cases, honestly, probably not any conceivable benefit the United States. But like, I think that's the greatest country in like destroy ranches to show the physical environment, make it dirtier. Texas has gotten way dirtier, way dirtier and no, yeah. So literally in the past five years. And he never sent his national guard to the border. And I can find him twice in person about his stuff camera. But like, what are you doing, dude? Oh, it's very complicated. It's not complicated. And you've confronted him on camera. I have no, I mean, you know, Abbott's a, it's a great question. Or she's being sat in anything I like, I like Greg Abbott. But like, what is that? That's your most basic duty. You got a home invasion, dude. Go get your gun. So that to me is even one of the obvious pieces of it, which is these people are literally you see them coming across your border. They're taking over ranches. They're killing people. Yes. But they've actually set up entire communities with homes in your own in Texas in the state. Not only that huge, which used to be Walmart facilities are now shot massive child sex trafficking operations. So you get back. I don't like Abbott because you're right. You're right. It's under his watch. It's too much evil. That's right. And you have to blame the leader. No one ever blames the leader. Yeah. Like if you're a country, that's another thing. It's like Russia's better than it was 25 years ago. Does anyone can anyone say it's not? It is. So like, okay, you could say Putin does a lot of bad things. I think that's true. On the other hand, his country is better. Like that counts for something. Our country's worse. And we never hold any of our leaders accountable. It's like, that was a massive fuck up the Afghan withdrawal. You know, whatever the Iraq war, the destruction of New York City, Chicago going back to Gary and DNN Baltimore like who did that? Yeah. And then they named bridges after the people who destroyed the city. It's I can't believe the lack of accountability. My wife would shoot me if I led my family like that. She just she just shoot me because that's criminal. Yeah. She would come in and she would just put you out of your misery. Yeah. You're leading our family like this. You're done. Oh, my kids are homeless fentanyl addicts. Yeah. I think that's a failure. Sorry I do. Yeah. Well, like Assad, right. I mean, Syria used to be one of the most peaceful countries in the world. But people don't want to admit it. You know, and so, you know, and bad, bad location. But we have to like Poland and Ukraine caught between larger powers. But we need to hate Assad. We need to hate Putin. But we can't hate our own leaders enough. And these people still get, you know, they fail up as my wife likes to say. Yeah. These people in Washington are now run. You know, these people who failed and destroyed our country are put in charge of things. It's unbelievable to me. So now that you move back to the United States, obviously you never announced your citizenship. You always have been American with a lot of family here. But now you're living here. And on, you know, at the very beginning of the snow administration, what are the things that you're looking forward to that you're hopeful for? What changes do you think this administration will make that will make the country better? You know, I live in Colorado and I saw firsthand, you know, families texting and family groups concerns about, hey, you know, the neighbor was just broken into Venezuela gang. Just robbed this. Just robbed that. I'm hoping that violent criminals are sent back to their countries. Number one. And I think I kind of fall in line with where most Americans were doing with, you know, exit polling and what they wanted, which was that they wanted the economy to work for the American people and they wanted their border secure and safety. I think that's what most families want. I wanted to wear with Iran. That's just that's not just you. Oh, that's a lot of the incidents to do. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I've become really, you know, I going back to, I know the word isolationist is kind of a bad thing. People throw that around. Well, a lot of, you know, a lot of neo cons think it's a bad thing and they, and they, they try to sort of cover up George Washington in many ways to try to cover up his words on isolationism and, you know, in his farewell address telling America to stay out of foreign governments businesses. And, you know, I know we get this idea that sort of George Soros open society that we need to be like a global economy and we need to, you know, everything needs to be open and there doesn't need to be, I want a world without borders. You know, I don't want any of that. I think in many ways I want America to go back to what I studied and loved and fell in love with as a, you know, as a US history major. I would sit in my bedroom as a child and read these massive ass history books, you know, everything, you know, David McCullough books and all of this stuff and, and reading about George Washington and Thomas Jefferson and, and I loved it. I, you know, the thing about isolationism is in the United States that it acknowledges reality and the reality, the physical reality as the United States is isolated. from the other major civilizations in the world. Right. And that's been a massive benefit. It's not Lichtenstein. It's not hungry. It's not Poland. It's not Ukraine. It doesn't have to deal with the problems that those wonderful countries are not attacking them, but they have all these problems that we just don't inherently have because of the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean. So, yeah, geography matters. And I don't understand. So it's mostly rich people who are pushing this and isolationism is bad. Why don't they pay for these wars themselves? I've never understood that. It's like, attach yourself to the US government and then force its citizens to pay for like your pet war. Why doesn't, you know, why don't these people pay for themselves? Right. They could if they wanted to. Oh, I'm aware they could fully fund it. I mean, when Bernie Sanders was out there pushing to tax, you know, to increase taxes for the wealthy. I think it was the Cato Institute or somebody set up a website where all of these like wealthy politicians who are now millionaires Bernie Sanders Elizabeth Warren, Nancy Pelosi, they could all donate millions of dollars if they want. Like you want to, you put the money here and they could go fight the wars by the way too. Right. I mean, I think most of these hedge fund billionaires who've been pushing the US government to pay for all these absurd wars and store. They could send their billions to whatever foreign country they wanted or whatever armed group they want to support and then they can go join their ranks. But they want, they just want to make the money. So the, you know, the volunteers of the world that want to, you know, make money off the backs of the technocracy in this country and make money by now, you know, setting up a biometric border wall at the Southern border or, you know, using their technology, AI technology to carry out, you know, drone operations wherever, you know, they're going to make, they're going to continue to make billions of dollars off of the war unless we sort of flip the paradigm. It comes back to your Christian point earlier. I hadn't thought about in those terms, but it's deeply disturbing because if it is, you know, we want peace. I hope for this administration that they're able to get us out of all these wars. I would love for the Trump administration to take the 50,000 troops in Europe and put them in the United States and secure our Southern border. We had over 100 years of United States forces on our Southern border. That's not like a new idea. So in Germany, he said 100 years of foreign troops on its soil and no one responsible for the atrocities of the Nazi regime is still alive. And so maybe you just sort of let the Germans be a country again. I think that's fair. I don't think foreign troops on your soils could for your country at all. That's why the Germans are suicidal, which they are. And like, what is the point? How long is this going to go on? And Japan? Well, I feel the same way about Japan. Yeah. It's a little more complicated because of China, but I do agree with that in Korea for that matter. Has not been good for Japan or Korea. North Korea is a much higher birth rate than South Korea. What is that? I didn't know that much higher. I know the birth gap over there is terrible. South Korea is one of the lowest. And I just want to say I love South Korea and I love the people almost more than any other country. I'm not a one of the most wonderful people. So I'm not attacking them. I feel sorry for them, but their country is evaporating and starting Japan as well. And Japan as well. Another country I absolutely love. Everyone visits Japan as like this is incredible, which it is because the people are incredible. Right. And but like having foreign troops on your soil does something to you. It turns you into it reduces you. I've talked to friends in Poland, if somebody they would love for NATO to break up. They would love for the NATO basis to close in Poland for American forces to not be on their soil anymore. You know, this idea that we need NATO as a defensive organization is a complete crock of garbage. I mean, it's never been a defensive organization. Just look at Operation Gladio for crying out loud. What is Operation Gladio? So the NATO terrorist armies that were left behind after World War II, Operation Gladio was only revealed in the 1990s, documents have finally come out about it. But Operation Gladio was basically the instigation of terrorism at the hand of NATO forces. The Bologna massacre in Italy, Belgium. I'm embarrassed. I don't even know what you're talking about. Well, most people don't because it's all hidden and they want people to believe that the Bologna massacre. Well, using NATO forces to basically compound myself saying, I'm so self confident I would admit to being totally ignorant of something I should know about. I think that would be a great failure here. So what was the Bologna massacre? I don't know and I will admit my ignorance on the full details of it. Yes. It took place in Bologna and NATO forces instigating violence, killing individuals in order to prevent, you know, Soviets basically from coming into Italy, the same with in Belgium with attacks there and violence there against its own people. So these NATO terrorist armies were used, again, almost like false flag operations. So again, false flags work. This was in the era of like many false flags. So Operation Gladio, people can look it up. But the documents were finally revealed in the 1990s. There's a great book on it called the NATO terrorist armies. But it's never been a defensive organization. And anyone who says that is being completely disingenuous. People point to Yugoslavia. That's a big piece of it. But that's even just a part of it. These stand up these NATO stand up behind armies, these terrorist armies all across Europe were basically meant to prevent Russia or Soviet Union from gathering a foothold in certain countries by carrying out false flag operations. So and committing terrorism. That's exactly what they did. And that's what NATO has been. It's never been a defensive organization. I want to hit one more topic. So just big picture I have to again, if you had said any of this five years ago, people would be like, Clayton's nice guy, good guy, cute kids, nice wife, but obviously he's profoundly mentally ill. I don't think people think that anymore. But the one story that I have seen in the past few years that I was just like, I can't go there. That's just flat earth stuff is the Brigitte McCrone, I may know McCrone, President Francis, why he was accused first by French journalists. And then by my friend Candace Owens, who's one of the nicest people I've ever met actually. Yeah, she's very smart. She's incredible. You know, she and everyone's always, Candace Owens, a hater. Candace Owens is the opposite of a hater, but she's a very kind person. But anyway, but she comes out and she's like, I will wager my professional credibility on the claim that McCrone's wife is actually a man. And I was like, I was like, oh, Candace Owens, I love you, but I think this is too, too crazy. Yeah. And then it turns out she's right. Yeah. So, do you need a six, I don't mind this blown. Well, my wife has been up by the way, the Candace Owens pieces on this are phenomenal. And so I'll be sitting there in my way. I'm like, what are you watching? She's like, I'm watching Candace Owens's whole deep dive on this. So let's give credit. You know, I'm given full credit to Candace Owens on this for really opening this story up from the French journalist who first broke it. And then we're, I think like ostracized or basically told not to report it. So that, yeah, I mean, she's a, he's a groomer. So like, I mean, the fact that Emmanuel Macron was a child. And this man takes him under his wing and is a groomer uses the identity of another human being. I mean, I'm definitely shortening the story in all of these ways, but I don't know the full details the way they Candace does for sure. But Bridget McRoughne is a man who groomed Emmanuel Macron. And in their friend, I mean, the amazing thing to me is the French portrait that they have, you know, the presidential portrait or whatever. And in the background, you can see like a pedophile book that's painted in on purpose. Like you can't make this stuff up. What the official like French portrait painting? There's in the background of it. You can see like a basically a pedophile book that's been painted in on purpose. And other paintings that Bridget Macron was famous for having around in the in the palace, all these really awful looking things that you know, you've got pictures of a barn here. Like the stuff that Bridget likes to hang around is like, it's like pedophilia stuff on the walls. So it's incredibly crazy. What is it with pedophilia? I mean, pedophilia is one of those things that it's like, it's so, and I can relate to almost any sin, but I just want to be clear. I'm not being holy to them now. I mean, there's done bad things. I have had, you know, bad impulses. I can kind of understand why people get pissed and shoot each other or steal or, you know, I don't, but I get it really rage. Yeah. Completely. You know, there but for the grace of God, that's how I feel. Yeah. But pedophilia, like that's something that I can honestly say with a clean conscience never even occurred to me. That's like so. Yeah, I can say it too. What is that? It's, and to me, and what's what's it's on its on its surface is all it's absolutely terrible. But then when you go even a layer deeper, when there's a whole mechanism protecting these people who are all actively involved in it in Hollywood, in Washington, D.C. Funnelling. I mean, again, not to go back to it, but it's all part of this operation with these elites who when you have these children, for instance, in Guatemala, the, what is a hundred ninety seven thousand Guatemalan children that were funneled into the United States and were then funneled to be used in the in the sex trade in the United States. The United States is the largest. Preveyor of child sex trafficking in the world, the world. And we bring more children into the United States and are used for sex slavery than any country in the world. When Trump was asked where these children, these three hundred four hundred thousand children and Trump said, I think they're dead. Trump was honest about it. They are. They're used and abused and thrown away. And so when you have people like Brigitte Macron, who are like groomers of children, it makes sense that they would be protected. And these elite circles, it's incredibly disgusting. I never thought I would get to a place where I would like not as somebody said our elites are trafficking children for pedophilia. But actually, once you see what's going on, it makes sense because what is pedophilia? It's a spiritual. It's not. I do think that it's more than just a disease sexual impulse, though. It's clearly that. But it's the desire to defile purity. Yeah. I think that's what it is. Yeah. I think the appeal is you take a child who is pure, physically untouched, not corrupted by adult desire. And you destroy that. Yeah. And that's the charge. It's that's just that's a spiritual thing. That's like that's like child sacrifice. It's like, yeah, which is ubiquitous. And by the way, it's still happening. I mean, it's just it's just part of the same thing. The, you know, the child's sex trafficking and then they're killing off of the children. You know, I mean, I've again, I've spoken to sources who've witnessed it firsthand who actually used to be a part of it and didn't know they were a part of it. Out of Texas and flying these children from these facilities in Texas and Abbott's backyard to different parts of the country. Oh, what about the well. So you're flying them to wear. Oh, we don't really know. They say that they're no, but it's just wealthy people's homes. And do you check up on them? We're supposed to do wellness check, but we don't really do that. And if we do, it's just like a phone call and if they don't even answer their phone, that's considered the wellness check on the child. The NGOs responsible for facilitating the death and sex trafficking of these children across the United States into rich homes in Miami, rich homes in, you know, in Orlando, rich homes in Tennessee, rich homes in Washington, D.C. Where are you the father of it? No, no, no, no relation whatsoever to these children. So when we hear the liberals crying about your separating children from their families at the border, those aren't the fathers. They bring these children across the border. They've got like a name tag stuck on them. That's not the father. You mean the child that he's holding that's drug. You mean the coyote that's holding that child that child is drug. And you can't even ask the child who's your what's your father's name because that person was brought away from Guatemala three weeks ago. And it's been drug the entire time can't speak in a slurring the words like this is happening in the United States and the United States is facilitating it. It's without a doubt it's facilitating it. And these these NGOs are received, had been receiving lots of money from USAID and others. And it's been happening right under the nose of the Biden administration and under Alejandro Mayorkas who facilitated all of it and allowed it to happen. And was confronted about it, told us that our borders were secure. Really? Okay. Hundreds of thousands of children that just gone missing in the United States. And I get so frustrated because people compartmentalize this story. Like they're happy to talk about doge, which is great. They're happy to talk about other things. But I would love to see like the president of the United States or JD Vance, like get up during the State of the Union and say, we've uncovered something really dark and we're going to put it into it. And this is what we've uncovered. We can't even get the Epstein tapes. Yeah. Not just the files, but they're videotapes. Where are they? Right. Terabytes of videos from Epstein's home in New York and his island. Yes. And then the we're going to go and I know from talking FBI agents that in fact those former FBI that those a lot of that would have been housed on separate servers. So when we heard stories about things being destroyed over the past few weeks that those servers which weren't tied to the internet were individual servers that had terabytes of video data on it. What was that was being destroyed? Who ordered that? Who ordered the destruction of those those hard drives those servers? And so they're going to the same people who got into the most secure wing of a secure federal detention facility Manhattan and murdered the guy. Right. As the guard slept. So probably those people probably because anybody who could do that. You know, can't even guess as to who it was, but has a lot of power like that. That's actual power. You can murder someone in his cell in a federal detention facility. Oh yeah. And taking over electric cars, driving people into trees. You know, I there's sources I've spoken to who've really gone to great lengths to shed light on the massive, you know, child sex trafficking operation and who've had their lives in many ways destroyed threatened. run off the street in an electric cars. So they don't even ride drive cars anymore. It's ride bikes. So these people are evil. These people are really, really evil because they're where you. It does. But then when I've got, you know, take my kids to multiple dance classes and swim meets and swimming and you know, then you just kind of just I don't know. I don't really think about really. That's the spirit. You know, I don't dwell on it. I guess. You know, maybe I would never I never leave the house again. But here I am, you know, because I don't know. I don't think about it. I definitely thought about it more in Europe to be honest with you because as journalists in Europe when we were speaking out against the war in Ukraine. I mean, we saw the persecution of journalists. Yeah. First hand. I've had friends incredible journalists like Kevo or Calmossian in in Germany who, you know, Syrian journalist. I've had an other journalist in Germany and the UK. I can think of I can count them on more than one hand who received nasty grams from the government that they were going to be prosecuted for basically their views on Ukraine. Like what what is that what is that about or stopped at the airport and detained for hours at a time. So I was more worried about it then. I was in the United States. I believe like we have we have that, you know, those fundamental freedoms and freedom of speech. And so I kind of hang my hat on that at the end of the day, even though I feel like those have been eroded tremendously. Yes. But it gives me, it gives me hope in that way. And I've gotten calls from journalists is where should I move where should I move. If you move the United States, at least there, like when I was in Europe, I couldn't use, I couldn't access certain websites. They would block certain website news websites to get information in Portugal. But this was EU wide so it wasn't just Portugal, but it was, you know, so I want to get information about what's happening in Ukraine. Sorry, you can't do that. It's not allowed based on local actually. So I have to use virtual private networks to go around it to act to be able to, I would log into Switzerland or Iceland. But Iceland, you know, you adjacent. So mostly United States, I'd be able to log in via a VPN in the United States to get access to news. So when I hear all these people complaining about freedoms and they're like, I'm going to move to Europe to get a, you know, Trump tyranny. People have called and wanted to know like, Hey, you know, I don't like what's going on in America right now. So I'm thinking about going to Europe. You've lived in Europe. Like what do you think? I love that conversation because I say, Oh, yeah, what are you, what are you hoping? Are you hoping to avoid freedom? Like what do you want by going to Europe? Are you hoping to have more regulation to fill out more paperwork to be more censored? What is your goal? Like what do you think Trump is going to do to you here? He's going to take away your ability to access news websites? No, no, no, you want to go to Europe for that. What is Trump going to do? He's going to close the border to put what exactly are you upset about? And so I never, you know, he really get a straight answer about it. But I don't like the climate. I feel less safe from who like a guy in a mega hat's going to walk down the street. It's going to attack your daughter. Like that's, you heard all of that in the wake of the inauguration, right? There's people going to start volunteering at like domestic abuse centers because they're worried their mega husbands are now going to beat their wives like really domestic abuse skyrocketed under Biden. Where were you then? Well, and it's the it's the it's the it's the beta liberal husband who beats up his wife. Yes, as he hates himself. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. It's not a mega. No, it's not a Trump supporter is going to be not. No, if someone hates himself, he'll definitely hate you. Yeah. It's probably the Germans that mean they're told their haters because they hate themselves. You know, so they they'll allow you to blow up their pipeline. So spank me harder, govern me harder. This is a self-loathing thing. It's a totally agree. In fact, I was falling back for the Middle East of the night with a German guy sitting next to me. He was pounding the one very nice guy actually. But I did say he was talking about Trump is bad or whatever I said, but you let Joe Biden blow up your main energy source kind of a bitch move now and he goes, Oh, Hey, he was talking about Trump as bad or whatever. I said, but you let Joe Biden blow up your main energy source kind of a bitch move. No, and he goes, Oh, Putin's bad. I was like, okay, right, kind of an on-second or though, they just blew up your natural gas pipeline. He's like, Putin bad. I thought this is 17 hour flight. I'm not going to fight with a guy. Yeah. And also, well, that that speaks volumes about how their most recent election went then, of course, too. Right. Right. Because if you have people that that's their, you know, brainwashed into believing that and diluted, it's fine that Biden blew up our pipeline. And now our energy infrastructure has collapsed and our previous governor, Chancellor shut down our nuclear power plants and all of our manufacturing is drying up. But Putin bad. No, no, we did you did that to yourselves. You did that to yourselves in the Bundish tug. Yeah, I know. It's but. Clayton Morris, it is just wonderful to see you to have an on camera union after all these years. Oh, it's been my great, great pleasure and great honor to see you. Well, it has been wonderful. And I'm just thrilled by everything you said and by what you're doing. And I once again, I think you've got one of the greatest life stories of anyone I know. So I don't know. I don't know if anyone would read it. But can I say this? I don't cut this off because I know you don't like people praising you, but you have been a beacon of hope for so many of us in like independent media world. One of the only voice at the time who was still on network television and who was speaking out against war, speaking out against trying to attack and, you know, and kill people in Iran, trying to go to war against Russia. I know you lost that job probably because of that, but the evidence suggests so. But I just all have to say you have been a beacon of light for many of us. And I truly truly mean that for people who are maybe thinking about you've inspired, I think, a lot of people who are thinking about maybe getting an journalism for the first time. And if they would ever ask me, who would you hold up to look at as an as a, you know, as someone who would be, you would like to admire in journalism or who I should study and look up to, you know, it wouldn't be Ann Applebaum. It would be, it would be Tucker Carlson. And people should study your work. But I don't have the credentials at Ann Applebaum does. And there's a genius. You know, I do look at it. I say, man, you are smart. I must say. Great to see you, man. Thank you. Great to see you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.