The Jerogan experience. So you were 13 when you and your family and it was you and your mother, this gave it. Yeah. How did you get out? So that has been right initially my sister and I was going to escape. But when North Koreans say when you're escaping, of course we don't have phones, we don't have a map, we don't know what's the house or the water look like. Luckily I was living in this border town of North Korea by then. So at night, you know if you used to sell like four of North Korea, it is literally the darkest place on earth. Yes. We don't have electricity. So I was seeing this lights coming from China. So we, I thought like if I go with the lights or we would be finding some bottle of rice. So as 16 my sister left with her friend and she left me a note while I was in the hospital and got my removing my appendix. And then as soon as I got out of the hospital, I found a note and initially my mom and I went to look for a sister where she went. But when we found a lady, she told me that she could help me to go to China that way. And so this was you and your mother and you were 13 years old. Yeah. So how did you get across and what was that experience like? So this is, so I told my mom, I can't wait to meet the China. And she, my mom was like, you know, father is like my father was home. He was waiting. But the thing is, the tragic thing for North, because we can't even say goodbye to all of the ones. So if we got caught on the journey and if my father knew that we were escaping, he's gonna be punished so much. So it's better off that he does not know that we were escaping for his own safety. Because they're gonna torture you to the point that you're gonna say anything. Because they do this all subconscious like torture that they make you not sleep. In a single room has like no air much air. If you put there for 40 days alone, you go crazy. You say whatever they ask you. So if you, he actually knew that we were escaping, it wouldn't go for him. He would be dead. So I told my mom, like you cannot have father that we were escaping. So that they re-climbed up several mountains and then we went to the river side. But she had a connection with the guys. Why did you not bring him with you? Because he's a man and he was sick. And somehow she said the only women can go. Only women can go. I did not know why she meant by that. She said, you should just go with your mom. And don't even tell those people, that's your mom. She said like you are like 18 or something. And my mom was something dirty. So she told me the hour wage was different. So this would somehow not help you when you were going across. How would that help you? I don't know. Or she told me what is gonna be helpful. And part of the issue is in China, there's a disproportionate number of men in comparison to women. And so they want as many women to come across as that are of legal age. Like women that can be married or can, right? Is that the idea behind it? It's a smuggling. So like it is, you got it right. Because of one child's policy. A lot of girls got aborted in China. So they kept the boys now. So there's many, many men that have no chance of ever finding a woman because there are no women. Yeah, over 30 million men in the rural areas cannot find the wives. So they're over 30 million. And it's number gonna keep going over now. So that's a big problem for Chinese vision. But the thing is, even that they don't allow North Korean women to stay there. They catch us. And they send us back to North Korea. Last month, China repatured the 15 North Korean de facto, back North Korea. It's sending them our streets. Literally they are sending them to death camp. But they Chinese regime still do catch us in a snack. Because they think we are opposing a threat to the regime. And they don't want the regime to collapse. So they are catching all the defectors. But the human traffickers sees the opportunity here. Because we are so vulnerable, right? We are running away from Chinese authority. So even they rape us and kill us. The last place they we are gonna go is going to police. And then report on them. Why do they think that women coming over from North Korea are gonna somehow under their collapse the empire? Because that's what Kim Jong-un believes. He thinks they are gonna collapse through the defectors. So after Kim Jong-un came into power, he literally, the country cannot offer the electricity, probable electrified the fence entire border. Not only are they putting the machine guns with the guards, have a sheet of kilo order, whoever crosses, they don't even bother to ask you, start, they shoot you right there. And not only that, he buried the land mines on top of that. So there's electric fence and then there's guards shooting to kill and then pass that, there's land mines. Yeah. And entire country became a consent shooting camp. entire country. When did they start putting the land mines in? A few years ago. So this is after you had already escaped. Yeah. Now there's no, you don't see no or skinned the focus escaping from North Korea anymore. It's impossible to escape at this point. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily, seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.