I have some props. I have props. Oh yeah props are great props are amazing Cool all right. What's up Matt? We're back. Okay. We're back with the Matt Cox The fans love you Everyone loves you your back. Thanks for coming back. This is your third time back Yeah, and The other one's gonna come out next week Not not this week, but next week. Okay, then we have a couple that are coming I'm like I'm backlogged on like five podcast right now Oh, that's good though. Yeah, it's good. Yeah, a lot of content. We're cranking out a shit load of them, which is cool But Matt Cox is back by popular demand How you doing? Good excellence. So What are we gonna talk about today? You got a you got a book that you're about to publish right right called bailout Right this is one of the stories that you wrote when you were incarcerated on a guy what's his name? Give me the give me the give me the quick backstory on it. It's Marcus shrink Marcus shrinker was The financial crisis two thousand two thousand eight in the final financial during the financial crisis He was about to be indicted for securities fraud he had a hedge fund or not hedge fund he had a Wealth management company right where he was basically just stealing from his clients of many Ponzi scheme very small Ponzi scheme well, he was about to be indicted and They'd already rated his office and he knew its comp. It was coming well. He also was a pilot so he Devices this plan where he's gonna take his plane up and he's going to call in a distress signal and say that the windshield has imploded and He's bleeding and you know, oh losing consciousness, you know a whole thing and then he's going to Jump out of the plane and let the plane fly out over the golf and run out of fuel land in the golf The intro to that story so the synopsis that I read on your website the first couple paragraphs are They just grab the garage by the throat. That's like a great intro to the story How it just starts out with him on the plane calling in the distress call saying that his windows broken He's bleeding profusely grabs the parachute who says profusely In that he didn't like that. I'm jammed up. I'm the last thing I'm gonna do is try and come off eloquent Issues going here. I mean that's pretty ballsy to do something like that to tell the literally to go stride your plane and just jump out Listen, it was everywhere keep in mind to here's the problem So you saw it you when you were inside when you were locked up you saw this on the news. Yeah, I had by time I met him I mean I had already he was trying to fake his own death, right? Correct. Okay. No, of course what happens is He he does call he takes the plane up. He calls in the distress signal he Seth the autopilot he goes out opens up the door jumps out with a parachute and lands and the plane Head towards the Gulf unfortunately from Marcus however comical for everyone watching it Because the door opens up Yeah, there's more drag on the aircraft. So his calculation of it will go out 50 or 100 miles or two 200 miles into the Gulf and crash Was off because it burned up too much fuel because it's no longer aerodynamic as as aerodynamic and so it runs out of fuel about a mile or two before the Gulf and it crashes into a swampy area Yeah, and he said remember he says you know that that that the windshield had imploded Well, of course that whole plane if you've ever seen pictures of you go to the website and look at the story and I have the pictures of the plane The the tails ripped off the wings are ripped off the whole thing is I mean as it goes through the through the Through the trees. It's just total. Yeah, windshield still perfectly Perfectly intact not a scratch. They have not a crack on it when he landed and he went through the trees One of his testicles got ripped off. I mean, you know, that's what he said That's what he said, but anyway, let's look okay. Let's start from the beginning right so it so he So the point is is that he gets he gets caught so what happens is I recall I was already at the medium at that time And I remember seeing it like you had asked I remember seeing it on CNN Sitting there and they're talking about this guy who had taken the plane out and they were looking for him And I'm like sometimes sound right so anyway years later I'm at the low and I'm writing guys stories I'd written a f-roomed-over-only story the guy from a word dogs. I'd written a Doug Dodd story the guy that was in Rolling Stone. We all I option or I was a part of the option for that film or so Shreaker comes to me and He says to me, you know, hey, I undulated your right guy stories And I was like, you know the family is so hard not to mock him the way talks He's like he's like, hi, I understand. I mean he's it's so over the top dramatic. Yeah So you know, he does this whole Hi, well Matt. I just I don't understand. How can they it's so pathetic? But he comes up to me and he says I understand you write guy stories and I'm like yeah, I write guy stories And he's like I have a story on Marcus shrinker and I was like oh yeah, yeah Marcus I'd seen him around I had a had a conversation or two with him briefly And I said, okay, what's up? He's like well, I have a story, but I think I'm I remember that I should know right then He said I should have known something was wrong because he said I think I'm finally ready to be honest about the story Red flag cool. Okay, and I said well, what's the story because your story is basically out there Right, it's been told you've been on 2020 you've been on date line you've been on you've been on all these major shows It was covered in every newspaper around the world. I mean there were newspapers in China that are that are covering it was so sensational Who does this it's a movie it's insane? so He says to me I'm like I mean what's new he's like well you don't understand people don't know the truth I'm like what's the truth that he was the truth is he said I shouldn't be in prison at all He said you understand he said I didn't take the money He has my wife Built for all those accounts She was a CFO of our company. It was a large company and I didn't know what was happening by the time they rated the office That's when I realized what she'd done. He said and I divide I didn't want her to be taken away from my children and so I devised a scheme to try and you know Sacrifice myself and jump out He said plus he said I had like 11 million dollars in life insurance and if I was dead She would get the money and my kids would be taken care of and You know he said basically the whole economy was melting down at the time So he said I just saw I thought I would do the right thing and try and sacrifice myself and you know in their marriage was over Anyway, so he has this whole thing where he tells me his story and you know look I'm in prison. I had no way to verify anything at that moment So talking to him he is so sincere so over the top since here You want to believe him and I wanted to believe at that moment. I wanted to believe that Wow, this is nothing like what I'd heard. Yeah, and I had seen like part of the episode of I almost got away with it. He had done. I'd seen like the last half of it and so You know I knew he'd jump out of the plane. I knew all that and so I'm like wow, okay So I remember that night I went and I called my literary agent and talked to him his name was Ross and I said Ross listen this guy mark a shrinker and he jumped out of the plane He's like oh, yeah, yeah, I've seen I know who you're talking about. Yeah, so he talks to me about it And I tell him yeah, it's you know understand his wife. She's the one that did it and I'm telling him all this and he's like Oh, Matt. He's he's lying to you. Mm-hmm. I went and then no, you don't understand. He's like no I understand because I've read everything on this guy He said I was fascinated by this guy said I watched all the episodes All the different stories. I've seen everything on him. He's let me look you don't have access to the internet. He's let me print out some stuff Four days later I get a stack of articles Any an a note from him saying look I'm sending you more stuff. Yeah, so now I read and I see all these things that say He's a pathological liar like there's several of his victims are saying look you can't believe the thing he says his wife's like He's a liar. I mean lies at all the time and it his victims are like you know this guy's a path. He's pathological. Yeah so I Go back to him and I sit down and I said I said Okay, well Marcus there's a lot of stuff and I I start talking to him. You know there's a lot of stuff that says that You know you're a lot. You know a lot of these are lies that you lie all the time. He's like oh Matt they they That's the newspapers. They they lied. They lied. They lied. They lied about you didn't they and I went Exaggerated by say it's about 99% One or two things I'm irritated about it. Yeah. It's pretty accurate. Yeah, you know I want to written it a little differently Yeah, yeah, I would come off a little bit nicer So and he's like well, yeah, they lied about me and this and then I was like okay Okay, okay, but as we talked I You know I just I was fascinated After you when you know someone's a pathological liar and they're talking to you and you start to really now You're analyzing everything that they say and I kind of realized Maybe I can get the what really happened out of this guy. Yeah, maybe come he's never told anybody what really happened It's always been a blatant lie. Yeah, nobody really knows what's going on in his head and he's never admitted to be a liar And nobody knows why he's a liar or why he's pathological or how that developed or so I I asked Ross to send me in a bunch of materials I had at that point I believe I had I believe joy I had an assistant on the street that was working with me and keep mine too like all these people are doing all this for free So like my I had like an assistant named joy Who was simply helping me for free? Well, how's she doing that? She loved the idea of me being in prison writing stories. Okay, you know you'd be shocked how many things I got just by writing a letter Explaining this is I'm in prison. I got this much time This is what I did this is what I'm doing now and I need some help. Can you please do this for me? and they would you know I had this one time I Had a transcript I needed it's like 50 60 bucks for the transcript So I write a letter to the transcriptionist right to the court report and I said look you want like $60 for this transcript And I said I'm on a budget. I make this much money every month You know, I'm in prison for this long and it might seem silly, but I write true crime stories and I would like to get a copy of this transcript, but you want $60 for it I don't need it right away, and I'm not using it for legal purposes So if you could do it at your leisure simply so that I could get some excerpts from it It would really help me out and I would really appreciate that and I'm asking you I'm not asking you to do it for free I'm asking you to try and give me some kind of a discount just help me out here, you know a dollar a page instead of 350 a page something And about a week later I got the transcript so keep mind she had to get that letter and then she had to transcribe it Nope, it wasn't already transcribed. She then sent me the transcription with a letter that said You know, I read your letter. I like the idea of what you're doing I wish you the best of luck and here's the transcript Yeah, no charge good luck. Yeah. I was like wow. No. Yeah, I mean, that's a hell of a I wrote a letter back saying listen I don't get a lot of breaks. Yeah, you know, I appreciate that. That's over the top nice That was I really appreciate I said yeah, I told her you rock. Yeah, you know, so So what happens is raw start sending me in Stuff on on path on pathological iris your literary agent my literary agent. I also start Ordering the freedom of information at keep mine. I tell all these guys the same thing. Okay, listen and I had this conversation with shrinker Listen, I'll write the story. I find it interesting, but you need to know up front I'm gonna order documents. I'm going to request Transcripts I'm requesting that I'm good. You may have to sign some stuff I may get called into the lieutenant lieutenant office or to SIS and they may ask me why are you getting Documents sent to you and you may have to be called up there to the vouch for me I need to know that you'll do that is of course, man. Of course. I'll do that So I said and on top of that I said when the as the story progresses and when I'm done with it I give it to you you may not be thrilled with this story. I'm gonna write the story the way I see it and you don't really have any input You know if I get some things that are actually wrong that I'm I'm willing to make those alterations But they have to be factual right and if I have you know If I have if I'm getting facts in additional information that doesn't corroborate what you're saying We have to have a discussion. We have to figure out what's going on. Right. Absolutely, man. Of course I'm not lying. I wouldn't lie. I don't lie Matt. I mean it was just it was just wow. Oh, so I started ordering all the documents I start writing a story What's funny is one of the things I got was I read so got several reports on pathological liars and there's not a lot of stuff I read a book Got a book. I got this one book in really only like one or two books one of I think was called lies lies lies the Psychology of deception okay, and it talks all about pathological liars and all these studies that it had been done Yeah, I know a lot of them. I noticed in your snops. There's a lot of quotes from Like psychiatrists the study that kind of stuff right some of those were taken from actual published reports or studies that I got like I got condensed studies Yeah, send in 10 pages six pages and they explain like they would take kids and they do all these things and adults and How to spot someone who's lying and that sort of thing is virtually impossible it talks about their brain chemistry Yeah, and it also talks about the different types of pathological liars okay, so He's based on my you know me being a novice and Not really and I'm not a doctor or anything But he seemed to fall into the realm of being what's called a pseudo fantastical pathological liar Which is that he tells a consistent lie and he's told these lies and they're within reason But he's told them throughout his whole life and he's built up this false persona of Who he is so that he can continue to say you know, it brag Okay, and lion and then one of the things that they talk about pathological liars that most pathological liars it develops when they're children and so I'm reading this about how it develops in when you're a child and He doesn't realize that I'm reading all this doesn't know that I'm getting these reports doesn't know I'm reading it and yet he is I mean He is the quintessential Pathological lie I mean he he falls every category falls into a nail like abusive parents being abused as a child Not wanting to be the person he is being in a bad position. Yeah, can you give me one of the examples in the synopsis of Like child abuse like I think there's a couple specifics. I don't know if you can remember him right now But we yeah, what he said and keep on in the book. So I like a book that's coming out right so You know you read the synopsis well in the book I talk about a little bit more into it and when I say child abuse I just mean that coordinate shrinker You know his mother was an alcoholic and his mother Married a guy that was an alcoholic his father was a great guy His real father but his mother was an alcoholic He's according to him and his stepfather was in his stepfather used to beat him and his brothers and his mother and at one point He was actually hospitalized his he had Well, he'd been beaten and he fought back and he ends up beating up his stepfather and But he gets taken away and instead of going to like a juvenile facility they he says they place him in a Mental hospital for I don't know how long was 30 days or 60 days or 90 I forget I have it. It's in the book So and he has to go through all these things they don't catch the fact that he's a pathological liar because by this point remember at one point During the writing of the story. I explained to him well when I first started I said look, you know one of the issues is Everything that's out there talks about these lies and he of course, you know Matt. I don't lie You know, I'm not saying you lie what I'm saying is that at one point in your life you did lie So I'm trying to kind of coax him into helping me out and so I'm trying to convince him to tell me the truth But but keep mind too. I'm reading these reports. So I'm realizing he'll tell me the truth if he thinks it's in his best interest Right, so I have to make I have to explain to you that by Admitting to a pathologic admitting your pathological liar is in your best interest right, right? So I explained to him that look It's better for you to admit That you're a pathological liar now early on. Let's get ahead of this Or not I never say pathological I would say habitual liar that you had an issue with lying so let's talk about how Let's address it head on that you had an issue and that you did lie And you're why now but you did lie at one point and Let's talk about that and why you lied and so I said that way it builds trust with the reader So if you say these things up front later on if you happen to have to say something that they don't believe or shouldn't believe They will believe you because there's no reason that you would have admitted to these other things and then lied about this Yeah, I think there was a part in there where he when he was a young child It started where he would have to lie to his friends where they wanted to go to his house And he would have to make up a lie about why they couldn't go to his house like it was being fumigated But he just didn't want people to go over there and see what was actually going on in his house with his stepdad and his mom right Right, that's the first lie he told me I asked them I said can you tell me that he remembered a very first lie and he said I don't know if it's the first lie He said but the very first lie I can remember telling is he said that his parents were basically They were arguing and about to be he said he could tell it was about the boil over into a full blown Screaming argument where they're throwing dishes and shit and he said I could tell and his some kids in the neighborhood showed up Wanted to play like a tarry or something and he was like we can't play here because they're my step Father's painting on the inside of the house. So we got to go to your house and they were like okay And he was like that was like the first time I lied so it was like he was like like hardwired to lie almost just right Well, I hear everybody lies. Yeah, you know kids lie It's funny because you know the statistic that I had read in a couple different things a couple different of those studies was that men and women lie The about the same Really yeah, right? So if if I mean on average you tell a lie like I forget it's ridiculous Like every 14 minutes in a conversation or every seven minutes. It's out. Yeah. Now they're they're minor lies. You know like like man That's it that's I love that camo You know what are the truth is I don't like the camo. It's ridiculous. It looks like pajamas I'm not gonna say that they consider that a lie So you know or and what's so funny is that men and women lie the same But men 80% of men males lie to make themselves look better 20% they do it to make someone else feel better women 80% of the time they lie to make someone else feel better 20% to make themselves feel better. Hmm. It just kind of shows like what selfish prick men are. Yeah, you know so He just lies about everything. Yeah, so yeah, I talk we talk about that in the the first time He told a lie and and how it developed and and then he starts just It just it keeps going and going to the point where he starts lying for no reason at all these these guys would lie He would do stuff he and he tells me this by the way. He explains he's explaining to he said he's just got to the point where he said I would I would say that like my brother like we were going to we were gonna go to Disney World over the weekend. I tell all those friends at school. Oh, yeah, my my My stepdad's gonna bring the whole family to Disney World work. We're leaving Friday and we're gonna go all weekend We're gonna drive down to Florida and go to Disney World. Oh, okay well then on on Monday they'd say did you go to Disney World? He said no, I couldn't because my my brother broke his arm Was brother goes the same school he walking around with no broken arm. No broken arm. Yeah, and then but you know I'm saying why would you say that right? You know, it's you're very quickly going to be discovered that that's a lie Yeah, does it anyway? He'd do it to me, you know, he'd do it all the time guys would say if you and he just didn't and he didn't care People never called him out or he just was it's so stupid or he would say I never said that plus you guys I think their defense mechanism mechanism is to get angry typically right so You know like can you imagine his wife his wife doesn't call him on it? You know, she's 120 pounds You know, he's 190 pounds and he's you know, he's he's He gets angry in the yells and screams and and I'd seen him do it He'd done it to me several times with I pushed he would be like I don't have to put up with this bullshit man This is bullshit. I don't have to fucking turn and he get up and walk a walk off. I Think okay, that's it. We're not working together. It's not gonna happen. He's done. He's pissed at me He's not gonna cooperate three days later. He go hey mad. I was wondering what what do we meeting again? Like it never happened But I realized how far it push him and and how it coax him into telling me What really happened? So he starts you know We we talk about childhood and the different lies and how to start lying so much And they're not beneficial lies necessarily right? They're just lies to make himself feel good What do you do everybody else is doing something for the weekend? What are you doing Marcus? You know, oh we're going to Disney world, you know, he's a little kid. Yeah, so it just became There were so many lies to cover for his family or for his embarrassment that That somehow or another becomes they start to feel natural and it feels good to fool people You know it feels good that I've convinced you that this is what's happening. Mm-hmm or that I'm special and Keep mind that follows him throughout his whole life. Give my this guys a pilot He ends up getting he's got a series 67 series seven our series 63 series seven He's got all of his licenses right all of his insurance licenses. He's got every he owns his own wealth Management firm he owns a couple planes. He's a stunt pilot. He's got an amazing looking wife He's got what three beautiful kids. He lives in a 10,000 square foot house Why do you have to lie and tell people that you used to work for NASA and fly at 15s? Aren't you already at the top? It's good enough right here. You're your top shelf individual already. Yeah, he's still lying. I just can't help it right Why I mean so you have to know it's pathological. I mean, he just can't stop so we we so I keep telling the story about how it we ping between Be being in prison interviewing him and Telling the story and periodically, you know, I know what the story is because I'm getting the documents it I'm getting stuff in from keep my I Everything I got freedom of information about federal and I hit every single state that he dealt with So I've got documents not just from the US Attorney's office. Can you hold up that stack of documents? So the camera can see it hold up by your face. This is what Matt brought in today Yeah, this is hold aside. We see how thick it is The and this is this is a third of it. I threw a Twice this much out because it was repetitive. Okay. I mean how many times do I need that that's an absurd amount of paperwork? Yeah, oh this and this is you know, this is you Jeff and David This is a sentencing memorandum, you know, these are affidavit for This is an affidavit. This is I've got victim statements. I've got what's really great is the letters from the the internal notes and emails that I have from the all the different insurance agencies, okay, like in Texas and Indiana and where they're writing back and forth to each other like that the different agencies are writing back and forth like Oh, this guy's a fucking to each other. He's a piece of garbage. He's really there just they're blasting him They're like look he's ripping people off. He's done this. We think he's running a Attorney scam. We think he's running this kind of a scam and they're going back and forth back and forth So all of things that he's not telling me Nor do I think he necessarily knows all of that. Mm-hmm. So as you know He starts telling me how things progressed in his life. Okay, and some stuff I can verify some stuff. I can't did you go to Purdue? I could verify I went to Purdue because I've got newspaper articles. I don't get anything from Purdue They didn't answer requests. They're not a government agency so I do Get I couldn't get anything to verify that he was actually in a mental Institution as a child, but he did tell a reporter that and I have that so had I had he just said it I would have been Would a question whether how much did really how much validity it had however I did get A couple articles that specifically talk about how he's told this story before So I have proof that this is something he constantly says. It's at least at least it's a consistent lie right and then you know It goes on and on then eventually he ends up He ends up working for he graduates He becomes a pilot he ends up graduating Purdue University with the green finance and Aeronautics according to him, you know and really according to some different articles and stuff talk about how he graduated Purdue so then he he goes to work for John Hancock which is an insurance care selling a different products You know they sell like Annuities things like that. Mm-hmm. So then he ends up opening up his own His own firm which was a heritage wealth management It had a couple different names, you know He's constantly kind of shift in the names around but they're all basically heritage Wealth management heritage financial services heritage so anyway, so What ends up happening is I start Getting the documents in that talk about the lawsuits and the different scams that he's running and His major scam was His main scam that he made the most money out by the way Was the churning scam where he would convince people to invest in an Indexed annuities right and an indexed annuities an insurance product combine He also he he would do stocks, you know, he would buy stocks and sell stocks too But he was explaining to me there's not a lot of money in stocks, you know as a stockbroker And he's like and nobody has like the edge He's like I mean, they're all pretty much the same, you know, you might make one half a percent Maybe two percent on a sale. He's like, okay, so big deal. Right. People aren't buying $100,000 worth of shares You know up in Indiana. Yeah, you know, they're buying, you know put 5000 You know what's he getting two percent of five thousand. That's nothing right so He starts selling these indexed annuities because the market had taken a crash This is like after the bubble head burst the the tech bubble head burst And so he starts selling these index annuities and what he does is he's He starts targeting Pilots because he's a pilot so he can talk pilot talk to them and aeronautics and they get it and he gets it and they like him and They're gonna report with right and then they're giving him other pilots We're gonna talk to my buddy John's from niche right so he starts telling the pilots. He used to work for Delta by the way and he used to work for NASA And he's also telling them he used to fly f-15s Or I think it's a 10 wordhogs or something like that. Yeah in in like It's just out. It's just ridiculous. I mean like during desert storm. He was tell he would tell people He was uh He was an f he flew f-15s or f-16s or something during desert storm. Mm-hmm. Okay. Well you were like 18 Yeah, or you would be the youngest pilot in history You know, there's you know or fighter pilot right right you have to get your degree You have to then you have to go through school to schooling then you have this this is no way Like at least 23 24 25 years old by time you're flying But these guys on the phone that he's selling a new one or two they aren't doing the math. They don't know right They don't know really how old he is right so And what's happening is he's so you put do you give me a hundred thousand let's say you give me 20,000 dollars while in the annuities he's not making one or two percent. He's making like 15 percent So you give me 10 grand. I'll make him 1500 bucks and most of these guys are putting in big money They're putting in a hundred thousand because he's pitching the annuities as So you give me 10 grand. I'll make them $1,500. And most of these guys are putting in big money. They're putting in $100,000. Because he's pitching the annuities as being a very safe product, which I guess they are, but they're not lucrative. They don't make a lot of money. They don't make it's not a huge return. What happens is that for the first year it would guarantee you a return of, let's say, whatever, I'll make it up the number, 7%. Or let's say even if it's 10%, oh, yeah, it's 10%, and he would be like it's 10%, guaranteed returns for the first year. And after that, if it changes, you can pull your money out. You can. That's true. But there's a surrender, what's called a syringer fee. So you pull your money out, you lose 20%. So you give me $100,000. Shrinker might make 12%. He just made 12 grand. You might make 10% on your over the next year. But then in a year it drops down to like 1% or 0%. And so suddenly they would turn around, they'd say, oh, I want my money back. Or let's take my money out of that and put it into something else. And he would say, okay, and then he pulled the money out. Well, they would hit him with a syringer fee. He'd buy some other product with it, some stocks or whatever they wanted to do. And then they would go, wait a second, shrinker. They took 20% of my money. They only cut me a check back for whatever, 88,000 instead of the 110,000. And he would say, I don't know, that's strained. That is weird. Keep my two, he's got the money. He's making up documents. He's so even if you figure it out eventually. And typically what he would do also is he would convince them not to pull the money out initially. He'd say, look, it's a bad quarter. Let's wait till next quarter. So now it's been a year in change. So a year and so a quarter, so three months later, he might get you to go again. Hey, look, it's going to change. It's going to go up. We need to stick with this. So now it's been 18 months. Then he pulls it out. They hit you with the surrender fee. Now all the documents you saw you signed were 18 months ago. And when you say, hey, man, they hit me with 20%. He says, well, yeah, I told you about the syringer fee. Or he says, that's crazy. Yeah, I can't believe they did that. I'm going to take care of this. And he, he writes them and says, look, I'm talking to them. I have a meeting not next week, but the week after I'm going to get to the bottom of this. He spins them and spins them and spins them and spins them. Right. It's a drag. It's a lot. Months go by. You know, maybe he wears them down. Maybe they get frustrated. They go away. But he's got all the documents where they signed saying they understood there was a syringer fee. And I remember convincing him what I was going to say, no, did he like just hide that and all the paperwork? Well, he never saw it or wasn't even in there at the beginning. Oh, yeah. It's in there. It was in there. These documents that came from the, from the insurance company. And what happened? It was like the Apple terms of service when you sign when you you scroll through all that shit and just hit accept. Right. Nobody reads it up. No, but he's reading it. Right. And I remember, I explained to him, you know, he was saying, I was saying, did you just disclose the syringer fee? I don't understand why. And he'd say, you know, well, I mean, you know, Matt, those, those documents are, and I remember thinking he's about the lie to me. I want to catch him before he lies to me. And so I, I remember saying, listen, man, I mean, I get it. I get what I get it because I own a mortgage company. I mean, how many people have disclosed to us? But you know, me times I would put the documents down and I would just run through the disclosures and I say, you know, this is for the insurance and such and such. This is stating this, this is stating that this is stating that prepayment penalty, this is stating the prepayment penalty is only 1% of the, you know, of the of your payment, this is stating this, this is stating that you're going to carry. And so I said, I just go, I says, what did you do? I said, because I would do that. Guys would just sign and sign and say, I flip it over and I'd say sign here. I have got my hand over the document now. You can't read this. I'm going, you know, I'm saying, I've got my hand. I was going sign here, sign here, sign here, check my watch. So you sign real quick because I just told you what it is. Right. Even if you said, look, do you want to sit here for 45 minutes or read these? There we go. Right. No, I'll just sign. Right. Exactly. So he would disclose and he wouldn't disclose the syringer fee, but they would sign. Right. And it's in there. 18 months later, if they really start to bitch a moan and some, some lawyer shows up or somebody says anything, he can always say, you signed it. I did disclose this. I don't ever remember you. Well, I mean, I trust me, I always disclose properly. And you don't remember because it was 18 months ago. Right. You were happy with the 10%, you weren't going to pull out your money. We had a, you had a bad couple of quarters. Now you're trying to pull out. Now suddenly you conveniently don't remember that. I disclosed it. Come on. So what can they do? So he's doing this over and over again. And he's getting people, getting more and more of these guys. And then Delta ends up like closing or something. One of these big companies closes Delta or Eastern, I free which one of the, they close. And so all these pilots get their pensions. And so now he's getting guys that have $900,000. Oh, shit. Because they're cutting them a check. Like, look, we're not running your pension funding anymore. Here's your $200,000 go do something with it. So now he's getting this money and putting it into these, these things. He ends up, and then of course, these people have families. So they're talking about what great investments this guy is running. He ends up selling one guy is 70. There's a guy, a pilot's father who I think is 70 years old. He sells him a 15 year annuity. So that means the first year was like 10% return. Shrinker because it was such a long annuity. Shrinker gets like 18% return. The guy put in a million dollars. That's $180,000. Shrinker. Shrinker is 180. He signs he's happy for about a year. Then it changes. Keep in mind, the guy is 70 for him to get his money back and have earned anything. He's a 15 year annuity. He has to wait 15 years. So he's 85 then. He's 80. He's lucky to make it 85. Probably. Where's the chances? He's 85. He's going to make it. I mean, he had one guy that I think he was like 80. So he would have had to be like 95. I actually have like in the book, I actually go over all of them. I have some of the letters. I you know, I scaled down the letters obviously because you know, they're just outrageous. Some of the letters that he's writing. Some of these people are writing these angry, furious letters back and he's writing back these ridiculous responses. Really? So this is going back and forth, back and forth. Eventually, though, he ends up getting this one group of investors and they're not having it. I'm like, like he can't convince them to just get frustrated and go away. They file with reports with everybody complaints with everybody to work to the point where eventually all of the these different states start investigating shrinker and they start calling him in and having him answer questions and start telling him, you either you surrender your insurance license or we're going to file criminal charges. So this group explain this group again. This was a group of customers. Right. I call them the client group, the client group, right. And it was made up of the, um, how were they all associated with each other? Like why they were all pilots? They were all pilots. So one, it's, it's like one guy's a pilot, his brother's a pilot. One guy is like a Delta or Eastern pilot. He, his brother's a pilot and then he knew other pilots and then he was in charge of investing his parents money. He gives them like a little over, I think it was like 900,000 or slightly over a million. Round a million. Okay. He gives that money to shrinker. I mean, shrinker is just, he's just nonstop. He's just pulling money in. Yeah. So it's, it's, uh, you know, in course, shrinkers, by this point, he's a, he's a, he's a stunt pilot. So he's flying around the country, um, around the world, really, and doing a stunt shows and these special, why is he doing that? You know, they're, they're, it's just like a hobby. Right. These, the, you know, they're, they have poor impulse control. There's a pathological, they have poor impulse control. So, so they, they tend to be thrill-seeking. Okay. And so he's a pilot. Being a pilot's not good enough. Yeah. I gotta be a stunt pilot. Yeah. You know, which like, it's not crazy enough to just be a pilot, which to me is, I wouldn't, I just, it seems like, uh, uh, uh, immense responsibility and things could go wrong. And I just, yeah, I raised myself. Right. That's not good enough. Yeah. I need to do looped to do loops. Yeah. Fuckin' flips and shit. Right. He crashes as plain. You know, I talk about how he crashes as plain. Yeah. He ends up hurting his back. He ends up getting hooked on opiates. Oh, and the stunt shows or something. It's like the Bahamas, right? Right. Right. Right. Right. Landing gear, clip the water. Yeah. And it did like a death roll and he crushes spine. Right. Fuck. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's rough. And then he got addicted to, what was it, uh, Oxy-Coxys. Listen. And the only reason I believe that is because when they caught him, I have a list of everything that was everything that was inventoryed when they caught him and they had a prescription of oxy-coda and extra scripts and other people's names. Yeah. Yeah. So, oh, yeah. Well, like he, he had a script in his brother's name. Okay. So, and he had them in his name. So that followed suit with what he was telling me already. So I felt good about that. You know, there's certain things you, you start going, I don't know. This sounds, this sounds kind of contrived, this little story about how that I was, I was hooked on Oxy. So, you know, I wasn't thinking right. And it's like, it could be an excuse. But then you find evidence and you connect the nuts. I'm going to run with that. Yeah. That's, I feel confident about that. So, but like, I remember this is one of of the things we talk about. All right. Talked about was when he starts getting sued by all these insurance companies. And I'm writing the book in prison and I'm meeting with them and I'm going there. And I'm so, so go, so go back. There's a group of people that are, that are filing complaints against him, right. With the insurance companies. And he's somehow licensed with all these insurance companies around the country around the country. Yeah. Yeah. And they're evoking his license is back to back to back. He's literally getting shut down by every insurance company. Yeah. Okay. I mean, it's, uh, these things. So he's going out of business. Basically, I mean, they jam him not like he's never saw it coming. And he's not in prison at that time. Yeah. Now, because they're, they're, they're trying to wrap it up. So if you're an insurance, you know, investigator or something, you're like, look, I just don't want this guy selling insurance anymore. Right. So just give us your license back. Get out of our state. Don't, don't sell anything else in our state. And he's complying. He's just like, okay, whatever. I just don't want to be involved. I don't want to be charged. He doesn't want to get charged. Right. He's not admitting anything. He's just saying, well, he's like, I wouldn't do this. But I understand what you're saying. I'll just give up the license. I doesn't matter. I never sell anything in the state. He was in a sin. He probably would fight, fight back. Right. Well, what happens is once one of them, one or two of the states do it, they start notifying each other different states. Now they're out talking. Now they're talking. And so it's okay. You lost your license in Texas. Right. And you lost it in Indiana. And here's their, their report. Oh, hell no, you're not selling in, you're not selling in Georgia. You're not selling in Florida. Uh-uh. So they start, they start, he starts getting these letters like within a week or two, just bam, bam. And then the insurance companies he's all signed up with, they start cancelling his abilities. They start sending him letters and you know, you're no longer a licensed agent, don't sell our products, don't advertise our problems, just bam, bam. And within a month, he shut down completely. He packs a shit up and leaves Atlanta because he'd moved to Atlanta. He'll move back to Indiana. So, uh, yeah, he's, he's, and he's done. And he, at this point, he's married with kids, right? Oh, yeah. Mary too. So what about his family? What's, I mean, he's got a wife named Michelle. Uh-huh. Do they know what's going on? Um, what did he hide in it from? What, what I read was that, well, first of all, he's, he's not the kind of person that's going to admit to anything. Right. So he's been lying to them. Yeah. He's never going to bring you into his confidence because he's trying to present a persona that he's. Like everything's all right. I'm a super successful person. Right. I'm super mean. I mean, I'm just amazing. I'm, I'm a pilot. I'm that and keep my remember a much of the pilot. He's telling people, I used to work for NASA. Well, he really was a stop pilot though. At least that's good enough, isn't it? Right. Right. So I'm a stunt pilot. Nope. Yeah. He also has to say he worked for NASA. Keep him on. I've got guys coming up to me. I remember that. I think I put it in the synopsis where I was, guys started realizing I'm writing shrink or story. Some of the guys that you're in locked up with locked up with. Right. Now keep my two. I was, at the time, while this is happening, I'm, I'm actually eating lunch with a couple of con men. Two other guys that are locked up for being con men. And so we're talking and he's they're all saying how's the story going. I'm like, you know, he's lying about this. He's lying. They're like, look, you gotta do this. You gotta, so we're like, they're helping you. They're helping me figure out how to manipulate him into telling me what happened. And they're like, well, you know, it's, you know, why don't you just confront him? And I'm like, I can't. Here's what NASA. Here's what he's doing. If I do that, he, he gets angry. He leaves. He, I explain about the pathological liar about his defense mechanism about, you know, so, so they're helping me kind of coax the truth out of him. But eventually, I'm also eating with guys that work out with him, that hang out with him. Remember, eight lunch one time of this guy, the guy called him a cocaine cowboy. His name is a Mike Hudson. And so Mike goes, oh, so you're writing, he's like 60 something years old, he mass big guy. He goes, he goes, so you're right. Shrinker story. Huh? And I went, yeah, yeah, I am. And he goes, man, he said, he said, well, so what's that like I said, well, you know, jump to the plane, dill that and he goes, I'm not telling him he's a pathological liar. I'm just like, you know, yeah, well, you know, I'm just just just a big case. And he goes, yeah, he's a, he's a shit, he didn't have to get a stand alone is worth writing about. You're like, what the fuck? What? What did he do in Afghanistan? We flew a 10 warthogs. I forget the exactly what he told me. Yeah. I have it written down because I took notes because I mean, like, immediately went back and wrote down, you know, I've all these, I have all the notes. So I've like, I really like, go back to my, the unit like right now. Yeah. Yeah. So he was like, he flew 120 sorties. He took out 40 armored car personnel and, and a Russian T 80 tanks, you know, single handedly. And I'm going, when did you do this? When he was in the air force or the army or whatever in the military. And I look at almost like, I mean, I just started laughing. I actually think I, I think I blew like Coke out of my nose. I mean, it's like, I was like, I go, are you serious? And he goes, yeah, you didn't tell me that. I said, I mean, Mike, I said he was, he was never in the military. He's well, what do you mean? Well, why would he say that? I said, it's a pathological liar, bro. He lies about everything. And he's like, what? So we start talking. He's like, that piece of shit. And he goes, what about NASA? Did he work for NASA? I think about NASA? It worked for NASA. And he wasn't the only person I've had like, I've had, I had like five or six guys tell me, you know, hey, man, you got to put that shit in about NASA. What? You know, so that was one of his favorite ones. That was, yeah, that's kind of, he builds a, a fantasy life. Yeah, right. That he can continue to go back to. And I even asked him at one point, I said, listen, I said, these things that you're telling people, you know, like I had quote, so he, he knew that you knew that he did not work for NASA and all this stuff, right? He knew, like, right, you would him had come clean on that. Yeah, he wouldn't tell me that. Right. He would tell me that, well, yeah, I said that, but I said it be only because only to pilots or I only said it to this person or I only said it because this person did this, and I wanted them to think that, you know, we were in it together or whatever to a press at the same point you couldn't actually confront him by like, why are you telling everybody this? Because then he would like throw a bit of defense mechanisms and right, he would. So I would a little bit, you know, I don't understand. And he kind of explained it, trying to explain it away. And I remember when I asked him about Michelle, his wife, and I said, Marcus, clearly, she knows that these things are happening. Did she, did you ever, she ever confront you or say anything? And he said, he has only once that I can recall. He said, we only had one civil conversation about he said, we were getting to arguments and she'd scream at me and yell at me and it was always her fault. Not the fact that you're alive piece of garbage. So he says, one time they had had dinner, and he had talked about, he'd bullshitted about flying jets or f-15s or something to some of of their friends. And then on the way home, Michelle said to him, why do you do that? Why do you tell those stories? She was like, basically, she's like, why do you lie? You do it all the time. And he was like, I mean, shocked that she was shocked. But she even said she called him out. Right. Because he said she never, it just, it wasn't that kind of relationship. She was an unspoken thing. Well, she was in an enabler. You know, she's enabling him to behave this way. She's enjoying the lifestyle and everything that comes with it. Right. So why would she put an exposing? She's got nice vehicle. She's trading in her car every year. She's getting brand new cars. My husband's a stunt pilot. He's a pilot. We've got a one or two million dollar aircraft. We can go anywhere anytime. We live in a 10,000 square foot house worth two or three million dollars. I mean, she's, she's doing well. Yeah. And do I, does, and shrinker's a good looking guy. So the fact that he's also a liar, he looks good in the family photo. Right. And she's more concerned about the kids. Yeah. Her job, according to a transcript, I read of her, was she's like, I don't deal with the business. I deal with the family. And my job is raising my three children. I don't focus on what he's doing over here. He told me at one point, she actually said to him, you know, why are you doing this? And he says, you know, this is, are you going back to the car right now? Yeah. They're riding on the way home in her dinner. Yeah. From dinner. And she says, or he says, um, he goes, I didn't know what to say. He said, I basically just told her, well, what does it matter? Whatever I'm doing, we're, we're doing well. It's working. Whatever I'm doing is working. So don't worry about it. And she goes, yeah, but those aren't clients. You're not lying to clients. These are my friends. Right. To get anything out of it. Right. We're just at dinner and you're just fucking lying and keep in mind her friend like it's sport. Right. He just couldn't help but exaggerate and fool these people into believing that he's a, you know, a fighter pilot. Yeah. So he said it just didn't go anywhere. And he was like, you know, I didn't know what to, you know, I didn't know how to answer. I didn't know what to say. And he said, but that's pretty much the only time she ever, we ever really had a civil conversation. Everything else was screaming matches. He said, so he said, you don't really get anywhere that way. And of course, he always takes off for screens or all of those. And she basically just enables him anyway. She just puts up with it. Yeah. So yeah. So when, when all that everything went wrong because of the client group and they start hammering away at him and they've shut him down and all these different states. And he's now he's really in trouble. And keep in mind, we're in the middle of financial crisis at this point. He, uh, he's being sued by all these companies. So now these companies are coming out saying the insurance company insurance companies are now saying we want our 1.5 million dollars that we paid you back. We want our 2.3 million dollars that we paid you back. We want, so you that those numbers alone, we want half a million dollars back. Those numbers alone let you know how lucrative this was. I mean, he's got $10 million worth of just lawsuits coming at left and right. And I remember when I went to him and I said to him, Marcus will tell me about the, uh, the lawsuits. You, you remember reading this. Oh yeah. So I remember where exactly where I was. I even put, I think I even put that. At least I know in the book I put exactly where it was. I was, and we were actually in front of vocational tech, or, or VOTAC, which is a building in the prison. And we were there in front of the building. I remember coming up to him and saying, when you got to talk about these lawsuits, yeah, not what lawsuits. I know, right. I already know this is coming because he's, the stories he's telling me is all about kind of more about Michelle. And so I know we're leading up to where Michelle stole all the money, not him. Right. So he's admitting some stuff, but he's really trying to paint hers bad as he can. Well, I go up to him with a pile of paper like this. I mean, literally it was bigger than this. So I go up to him and I say, listen, Marcus, man, we gotta talk about the, the lawsuits because, and he is what lawsuits and I go, the lawsuits that you were being sued. Why would you say that? And what, what, Marcus, I, I read in the newspaper that they lied. That's not true. So you've never been sued. No, of course not. Has heritage wealth management ever been sued? Any of the heritage companies been sued? No, any of the companies you've been, you've owned. No, of course not. Have you ever been sued on me half of the company? No, Matt, I would think I would know if I'd been sued. And he does this whole thing. And I go, okay. I go, here's, here's AG life insurance company out of Texas. They sued you for $1.5 million. He's what, he's what, where did you get this? And I go, what do I, I got, I ordered the Freedom of Information Act. They sent it to me. And he goes, I don't, I never, and I go, do you remember this? Because I said, you signed for it. And he's like, I, um, um, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, I was sued here. I was sued here. Yes, I do right. Now I remember. Yes, I was sued this one time. So you've never been sued any other times. And I'm, no, this is it. So there's no other lawsuits I'm going to come up with. Yeah. No, of course not. Okay. Mutual life insurance company sued you for $2.3 million. Well, he's now, I never should have been sued here. I shouldn't have been sued. He said you were sued at all. Right. Five minutes ago. He said you were never sued. He was never sued. And he goes, I said, now you're telling me there's no more lawsuits. I mean, he's okay, Matt. I now I understand why you're confused because it's my fault. He and now he has understand. He is now I understand why you're confused. He's a, you're confused because you're lying to me. No, no, he said, Matt, what happened? He said, what's going on is, is that heritage wealth management, they were sued. I said, no, they were sued. You were sued on behalf of the company and you were sued as a private person. You were it's across the board. They're suing you. You're done every way, every which way. Yeah. And he's, he's like, and he literally went. And I said, Marcus, I mean, I start pull out different lawsuits. This one and this one and this one and he goes, Matt, I, because I, Matt, I don't understand what this is coming from. I mean, I owned a large wealth management company. Of course, we were sued. We were sued all the time. It would be strange if we weren't sued. And I mean, it was just like fucking bizarre. Right. Wow. Who in every time I've talked to the guys were like, what did you confront him right there and say, you know, you, you just said, it doesn't work. Right. He's just going to shut down. He shuts down. He gets angry. He screams. He holler. So instead, you just skate over that. Just let's just go off. You just let him know that you know. Right. So you say, okay, okay. Well, that makes sense. You were sued all the time. That makes sense. So what happened in this lawsuit is this the one where you, the guy, a race, Mr. Reese, you got the annuity and I we start talking. Yeah, that's, uh, so we start talking about that. Now he's done. I painted him into a corner now. He just just tells me what happened. You could see it in his face. Bro, when I would show up for these meetings towards the end when he, everything was unwrapling. Yeah. I just beaten the hell out of it. He, he was just, he'd look up and be like, you could see when I would pull out some paperwork and I go, okay. Um, so listen, I got this something in the mail here from the Texas Department of Insurance. And you could see him go, fuck. Oh my God. Please tell me miserable for him. Please tell me he didn't get the, yeah, yeah, yeah. I don't want him to stop working with me either. Right. So, you know, I would give him a little here, a little there and coax him a little bit and then eventually and I'd convince him that what he, that we were kindred spirits, right? Like you don't have to lie to me. Right. Do I do these other suckers? Right. Tell him about the stuff that you did. I mean, you feel like you guys have it. Right. I would tell him, I did this one time. I did it. I would make up shit. I did this one to oh my God, those fucking one idiot. And he would get excited listening to me and he has to one up. Right. Right. He can't say we're both pilots. He's got to say I work for NASA. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm saying, yeah, this and one time I did this with this client and this with this client and, and he would go, he'd be like, oh, that's nothing. One time I had a client sign this and he had no idea. One time he says, hey, I had clients sometimes they never signed anything. And I just took the money out of their, their account and I'd be like, oh, okay, go. So that's what happened with the, you know, with the Johnson's, right? And he'd go, well, and he's realized fuck. Yeah, he fucked himself. Right. And so because I got this document right here and he'd be like, oh, God, I'd pull it out and he'd go. Yeah, see what. Yeah. And he'd tell me what happened. So, you know, it was just, it was just straight and sanity. Wow. It was just, the guy's just nuts. Wow. So eventually he gets shut down completely and he shifts to, I just want to tell this, this, the one story about where he shifts it to a Ponzi scheme. The whole economy's collapsed. Nobody that money's just not existed. Nobody's lending anybody anything. What years this? 2008, I would say late 2008 early, I think it was 2000, 2008. Yeah, 2008 when everything was just shut off. Right. So because he jumps out of the plane in like 2009, beginning in 2000. So everything just shut off. 2008. He shifts because he can't do the annuity scam anymore. It's what's called the churning scam. Yeah. And the churns company shut them down. Right. So what he's doing now is he switches to running a, oh, gosh, it's a, it's a 4X scam. So he runs basically it's a Ponzi scam. And the 4X X he uses 4X to say he's trading currencies. So I'm going to trade currencies. I'm trading the euro against the dollar because the euro was actually going up at that point. So he, he starts going to different investors and saying, look, I've got this currency, you know, fun that I'm, you know, we're, we're, I'm betting, you know, betting on the, against the dollar or betting against the euro or betting for the year, whatever, however, they, they do it. And people are giving a money 50,000 here, 100,000 here, 20,000 here. He's not investing it. Yeah. He's just paying his bills. Right. You know, the Lexus, the Lexus payments do my 10,000 dollar a month house payments do my, I mean, he's just paying his bills. What's so funny is I have the document that comes in where they would show where the government's like, look, $60,000 check. 15,000 went here, 5,000 went here, 4,000 went here, 10,000 went here. And they literally he deposited on a Monday and by Friday, the whole thing is draining. Gone. Yeah. You're paying his personal bills. So you can't even say, well, I did trade some of the money or I meant there's no fund. There's no fund. You're just stealing. Yeah. So. And he's lying to everybody to get a mistake. But I remember this, this is the one story. And I'm, I can't remember the name of the woman that at some time, some points keep buying, he's got, he has control over your money. So at some point, sometimes he would need money. He would just take the money. He just write himself a check out of your account for 10 grand. And maybe a month later he put it back when some more money came in. So this one woman checks her account one day and realizes that like 10 grand's missing. And so she calls him up and says, Mark, is I just checked our, our fidelity account and $10,000 is gone. And he says, it is. He is, you know what? Oh, yeah, yeah, he said, I invested that in the currency in the, the, the, our Euro fund. It's a currency fund, you know, it's a four X fund. I'm trading. And she, and she said, he said, oh, your husband, whatever to the name is Mark. Oh, yeah, I talked to Mark, Mark, okay, it, she's always never said anything to me. Give mine what he just said. Mark said it was okay. He knows she's going to call Mark. Right, obviously she's going to say, she's going to say something. So she, he is, oh, yeah, yeah, Mark, Mark authorized it. She goes, oh, okay, I'm so sorry. She hangs up the phone. call mark right obviously she's gonna say so yeah so he she is a mark mark author authorize that she says oh camp so sorry yeah she hangs up the phone he sits back and waits because you know she's calling back right she calls back and she says i just talked to mark and he said he did not absolutely tell you that you could do that he goes what hold on a second let me put your hold on let me let me talk to my secretary but her own hold kicks back waits wonders where they're gonna send them to prison you know we'll Michelle bring the kids to see me and you know that kind of stuff waits a little bit gets back on the phone and says listen I just talked to my secretary I had given her a list of investors that I wanted her to contact to get authority to put money into the euro fund she checked off the different names that she called the left messages for I thought that meant that those people had okay the investment so that was my mistake and I apologize and he said I'm so sorry I'm gonna go ahead and I will put the money back in the account you know by tomorrow you'll have the money or whatever he said plus your returns he was which is eighteen hundred dollars and she goes eighteen hundred dollars he is yeah he's well I mean it's been in there for a month almost a month she's you made eighteen hundred dollars with ten thousand in less than a month he's yeah well you know it's the euro's going up you you watch the news yeah and she goes well Mark if it's making that much money leave it and leave it and he's like are you sure and she's like yeah absolutely yeah fine so he gets to keep the money he says she showed up like two or three weeks later and gave him a check for like twenty grand or thirty grand put it in there additional oh by the way put this in the euro fund yeah why me oh my god I remember he that's the one where he told me I don't know if I have in the synopsis uh the one you're on the website but I have it in the book where he said he goes I remember at the time he goes I didn't even need the money he just but I took it anyway he said because you know I mean he said I mean you're gonna turn that in check yeah he said you know I didn't you know I didn't need it at the time but you know at that point he said it was you know it was for the point he was on a slippery slope and he knew it wasn't gonna end well so he was just he's he's um and what happens right about this time is uh burning uh burning made off hits yeah and I remember he said phones just start ringing people are like where am I where's my money where the investments where this or we want proof of this I want proof of this I mean so he's in a bad spot right and at this point he's also sleeping with this girl named Michelle oh wait what was her name Kelly Kelly Baker he's sleeping with this girl named Kelly Baker so he's got he's has an affair with this poor chick that works at the airport I mean she's this guy's six-foot tall good looking having plane went to NASA he's that new sir just NASA this guy's amazing he was in the air force when he was 12 or whatever he's fucking told her um you know he looks like he's filthy rich she he's buying her presents I'm she didn't have a prayer so he sweeps her off at her feet and she knows he's married she's seen his kids you know but he puts her into her own apartment he buys her a new car his wife finds out about it she's she flips out uh what else happens but that's when when he's telling me about her that's when um when he we're talking about her in the in prison and one day he comes up to me and and he doesn't realize that one of the things that the literary agent had sent in was a picture of Kelly Baker so I have a picture of Kelly Baker this is the girl he's having an affair with girl he's having an affair with and we talk about her yeah you know talk we talk about her trying to think about have the picture I know I have the picture oh nice said it this is Kelly Baker who's right so she's she's cute she's a good looking girl right yeah definitely right yeah so keep my name prison you're not allowed to have like dirty pictures and you have no access to the internet you don't have anything like that well what these guys do is they get they'll get pictures like our semi nude pictures like some girl in a thong right looking back at you you can see the side of her breast can't no nipple but you can see you know it's like this is close to being naked yeah she's naked you just can't certain things and so they'll order like 10 of them and they'll have them sent in and they'll let them in because at the mail room the women in the mail room would be like ah yeah you can't see a nipple yeah okay he can you can have these and they'll give them and then the guys will sell them yeah well one of the guys that sells them was a guy named Mark Boynken so he would get in I mean he's getting in 50 or 100 pictures every single week and he's selling them for books of stamps or three dollars or three or four dollars because there's no currency so you pay like four bucks for a picture yeah well keep mine that pictures there's like he got like 20 or 30 of them in whatever he got in five ten twenty I don't know but I know that like my silly had one yeah and the guy across for us has one yeah so I've been staring at this one picture of this girl with brown hair who's next to a pedestal sink looking back at you in a thong it's a semi professional photo I mean it's candid semi but it's it's over the top amazing looking this chick you can tell there's lighting and shit oh yeah right right but it looks like it's like some guy caught his girlfriend from behind but you can tell she's too perfect everything's too perfect so I still am watching this seeing this photo for a month or so at least and so somebody sell yeah yeah yeah there's multiples right there's multiple copies multiple copies yeah so one day shrinker shows up and we've been talking about Kelly one day I show up for one of our interviews and I said and he walks up and he goes Matt Matt he goes you're not gonna believe this he was Kelly found out that I'm getting out of prison soon I went really and he goes yeah he goes she mailed me a letter he goes and look she sent me this photo and he shows me the photo of the girl and you instantly know and I get the photo and I'm like wow you are delusional you know and I just go oh wow that's amazing and he takes it and he goes does does like this to me right he has smell he goes that's Paloma Picasso whatever the person with a perfume yeah you mind there's no cologne or pull on on the commissary so you what guys will do is they'll go through books and you get the samples and guys will rub so he must a rub Paloma Picasso on the picture and then waves it to me he goes he is that's her scent that's Paloma Picasso that's I bought her that he is I took this photo so now he goes we were in Florida at some hotel and I took this photo and I was like wow and he goes he is can can you believe they let this through the mailroom I went no no I can't believe it or you don't call him out on it no I mean what's he got I need we need to finish this all right right now another right time for that right and you know it was so over that it's like and he wouldn't have mattered he would have spun it yeah he would have been like are you saying that she's a she's she mailed me someone else's picture no or she would have said she's a professional or that she's she's got these on the internet or she's selling these photos that I took you know he was so crazy yeah and it's like what are you going to say when someone's so willing to be blatant about the lie there's nothing I can say so I just went okay okay we're so pathetic yeah so I'm like okay so let's go ahead and talk and we we keep going but so at this point he the whole scheme's falling apart yeah when Bernie made off happens everybody's calling and wanting money they want their money out yeah because they're you know they haven't gotten any statements or the statements they got don't look right you know now they're everybody's weird everyone's here people start pull money out you didn't have the money money is gone so one of the one of the guys comes up to him one of his uh brokers comes up to him and says hey look I got somebody who wants some money out of this this some they said they've got like whatever 20 grand in the Euro fund do we have a Euro fund and he goes and shrinkers fucked up on pills and he's drunk and he goes the money's gone there like okay well where is it he's like it's gone he's like well understand he says it's gone there's no fund it's just gone I spent it and the guy's like oh wow and he realizes of course he already has to know he's a liar you can't spend much time with the guy without knowing so he goes and he calls the Indiana uh securities and exchange commission calls them tells him what happened tells him what's going on what he thinks is going on within days they raid the office he knows there's a raid he finds out there's a raid he and Kelly have actually flown down to Florida and they're in Florida and Michelle knows that he's got this girlfriend she's already she's already they've had these fights and she kicked them out of the house he's living with Kelly so he uh he's down in Florida the raid happens he flies back after the raid and he knows they're gonna die me soon yeah they just raided the office they just took all our computers it's it's I'm done mm-hmm with the same time his uh stepfathered eyes goes the funeral and at the funeral he sees Michelle's there they're together and he tells he says he says now she's doesn't say this but his version is that they were at the grave site and he tells her look I'm gonna I'm gonna fake my own death and I'm gonna jump out of the plane and I'm gonna fake my dad and you're gonna get the insurance money which by the way the idea that he could get an eleven million dollar policy you know people don't realize about insurance is like if you if if Danny said hey look I want to get a million dollar life insurance policy on me okay you have to qualify for that yeah you don't just go in and buy by the policy and say hey how much is it okay it's a hundred and fifty dollars a month it okay cool sign me up no no it has to go through underwriting you have to justify it to the underwriter they have to go to understand this guy this guy works at tire kingdom right right here where that not giving him a million dollar life insurance even if you can pay for it it doesn't there's no justification for the million dollar policy and it it's it's it's weird so they don't do it there's a risk factor there there's some actuary that's calculated who deserves it who doesn't the guy tire kingdom doesn't get a million dollar policy he's making twenty five thousand a year yeah you have to be some somebody who's making a couple like a hundred fifty thousand a year so he says eleven million dollars you're a stunt pilot yeah you're hooked on axes you're not passing any of these texts yeah you know when I got an insurance policy which is only like a hundred thousand two hundred thousand dollars one of the things they asked was like have you ever skydied have you ever this have you ever in all these questions like if you said yes I skydied they were going to be like yeah yeah well you're done see you later right yeah do you race cars you know you oh yeah I race cars on the weekend yeah okay well we're not giving you a fucking miles right right you know maybe not for we did not give you one but not for that amount right guys a fucking stop pile he's getting eleven million dollar policy come on please yeah yeah so but he says he says that's what happened so and and he said it before he said it on multi multiple sources where this is what happened so I wrote down this is what happened I even though I said tell the reader I don't believe it is there any way to prove that he got that policy no and I asked them over and over again to let's write a letter let's find out at the but the policy I like to verify the policy he says that there's plenty of articles about the policy yeah I don't doubt that you've been lying about the policy right no shit but that's not enough so I have to I explained in the thing that we have this discussion about the policy and then I personally don't believe it but it is what he said so he tells her that and she believes him that's what he says okay and so you know so he then goes and he says he gets like 50 pounds of of precious metals like gold silver that sort of thing that he still has now here's the thing you're broke you're going under but you've got 50 pounds of gold that's worth like a million dollars or half a million dollars or whatever it was worth at that time so he goes and gets this money he then drives all the way to like Alabama drops off a motorcycle and comes back within like 24 hours like he drives all the way there all night drops it rents a storage unit drops off the bike comes all the way back takes the plane and flies like he's going to visit his father his real father not the stepfather his real father he's flies of plane and as he's flying the plane he calls in the distress signal and he says you know my windshield has imploded the plane is going down he's flying south from where from Indiana from Indiana okay he's flying towards the Gulf Mexico minutes knowing it's cold yeah oh he says he's hitting turbulence there's no turbulence I mean he's like I'm hitting turbulence on this I'm because I've read the reports and you know the guys are like it was a clear night and it was cold there's no turbulence you know turbulence is you know where to like hot pockets and stuff that's different different turbulence comes from I think mainly from the heat from the ground right comes up especially during the day when you're flying over the ground it's really hot out the heat shoots up yeah so there's it's a difference in the air pressure or thickness or some I don't know but the point is they were saying there's no turbulence right he's saying he's hitting turbulence and that windshield implodes and those windshields don't implode so windshield implodes but you know they use you got a pilot in danger yeah and so he sets the autopilot got his parachute on goes he opens up the door and because it's a pressurized plane it blasts them out of the door before that did you say he'd shoot up a handful of axes oh yeah yeah yeah yeah he says he of course he also he says he's drank a bunch of his been drinking beer he takes a bunch of axes he crushes them up and swallows the axes and he opens the door and it blows open and it shoots out of the plane and as he's blown out of the plane he hits the door and it catches something one of the core it catches something on the plane and it yanks them around and he slams into the side of the plane so now he's being dragged by the plane the plane's going up and down because of the air because of the drag it's trying to regain altitude and so it's it's going up and down and the wind is banging him against the side of the side of the so he's caught his his strap is caught on the on the door or something right and it's smashing him against the side of the plane right and so his parachute opens but the it's so the wind the velocity so you know it's so fast or whatever the pressure their movements it immediately shreds it bam so it's not like it does it and stops the plane or or or yanks him it just immediately shreds so now you've got nothing but shreds you got nothing but these they called risers or something but the the strings are just so he's thinking you know he's freezing yeah and so he's like it whatever it is 18,000 20,000 feet the plane's going up and down up and down and it's banging him against the the side of the airplane yeah a few so watch right oh so it's banging him against the side and eventually the strap pops and he falls with he's keep mine he's got fit he says he's got 50 pounds of gold strapped to his ankle so the the golds dragging him down the risers are above him he's plummeting towards earth the plane disappears I mean it's over oh by the way and this is true too air force or the the uh who was it the um whatever the the tower whoever it is the air air traffic air traffic control or people they scramble two f-15s or f-16 they take off they take off yeah they because it was after 9-11 so they they come out of Florida I think or is it Texas I think it's Texas I think it was Texas yeah so they come out and they go after the plane they're talking about shooting down the plane yeah plus they have to signal all the uh commercial airlines about this right oh they had the reroute uh lots of traffic everything everything and well and at the point in your story where you're saying that he he gets sucked out of the plane um and starts getting banned against the side of the airplane um did he mention that the oxies were like kicking in at that point so he was like it wasn't bad oh yeah that's like it yeah it wasn't bad he's like he's like plunging and he said and he's like you know that this is how I'm gonna die yeah and I realized this wasn't a part of my plan he was you know but on the upside the the oxies were kicking in so it wasn't that bad so what was it was a silver lining yeah was the with the motorcycle what was it was that it's a getaway car is he got a landing strap with the bike keep in mind he was flying along the same path so he knew I got a jump at this point and get closer to that bike right that way I went here he says Kelly was waiting for him yeah she was gonna drive him I've never seen anything by his word that Kelly was what was in on the plan right but he said she was there in her little vehicle whatever okay so he's plummeting through the air right towards the earth with with fifty pounds of golds job to his ankle yes then what he shoots through the tree line so so there's the trees yeah he says he's coming down at a slight angle not sure how that's possible on a cold a non windy cold night he's coming down an angle so he comes down and he shoots through the tree line when he shoots through the tree line the risers get caught in the trees so they don't stop him but they they yank up on him and they slow him down when they yank up on him the straps from the parachute yank up into him and they one of the straps severs his testicle fuck that's what he says so he says right so he hits the water and he passes out he says that there's some kind of a device in the vest that blows up okay and keeps his head above water and he says that he was anchored to the ground by the by the gold so he says when he wakes up he he's freezing it's freezing cold he's freezing barely feel as fingers or anything but he he manages to get his knife out and he cuts away the gold and the parachute and he gets to he ends up getting to the shore starts a fire and everything doesn't even realize he's so fucked up on axes doesn't even realize that his nuts ripped off been ripped off he ends up making it to a kangaroo gas station yeah and he goes into the he goes into the the into the bathroom and looks in the mirror and realize he tells me he goes oh he said my face had scratches all over it keep in mind that I get I've got a mug shot of him that was taken three days later you know scratches not a scratch no scratches I just did scratches would there's no I mean it just scratches everywhere I'm blood everywhere and he says when he goes to take off his his taken off his stuff and he said there was a pain in between his legs said he's pulls his pants down a check he said and that's when he realizes that his nuts missing fuck just gone off his awareness the axes were in all the eight days two he's wishing he had one fucking more in his pocket yeah but that's when that's when in the story so I remember at that point I had written that up and I was in the middle of writing the whole thing and the next day I end up with the con man with a at lunch at lunch with the sky um they called him his name is Andrew Levinson and I'm sitting there with Andrew and the other guy and he goes he goes okay they're like wait a second he lost a nut I'm like that's what he says and they're like bro so okay look they said so you're they go what happened in the nut yeah I'm like what I don't know they're like did the fish you know like I don't think that it's even true what the fish didn't eat it I don't know what happened I don't even think this is true right and they're like and and and they're like how how elaborate is this lie and I go it's pretty elaborate he told me he has to take like uh um he has to take testosterone injections he's got low low teeth yeah you know I said he's I mean he's it's pretty I said yeah he's went into a whole thing on it and the one guy goes when you know you want to be so you want to write true crime when you're when you get out of prison right I'm like yeah and he goes you you want to be like a like a reporter yeah yeah he is what I mean you're gonna have to take him into the bathroom and tell him to go in the bathroom and prove it pulls not out let's say they go like tell him to spread it out like a bat wing yeah see if this thing where does this little fella is it there if it's missing I'm not going there right do I'm not so uh but yeah he uh the guy's just insane so he keep listen by this point oh so the airplane by the way like you got the f-15 circling the airplane because they they they they can't they can't go slow enough they have to go too really fast yeah so they're circling the plane like this they're going by and slowing down and going by and they can see there's nobody in the plane yeah this is where this is before it's crashed before it's crashed they can see the doors unlocked so it's headed out over the Gulf well then it loses altitude it runs out of gas to because of the drag it doesn't go up make it over the Gulf 50 miles or 100 miles like he had calculated it loses it's burned off all of this fuel early it loses altitude crashes into a like a swampy area the wings get ripped off the tail gets ripped off this thing is shredded I mean it's nothing but a haul and when the police get there they track it down the one thing that is not destroyed is the window that he had said the windshield that he had said had imploded right which is the reason for the whole crash in the first place parachutes missing they find a campground uh they find like a guide to KOA campgrounds which is where he ultimately ends up going and they find him there yeah I mean he's just he's just a trail of evidence wow just pure stupidity yeah and he's not stupid he's just got some issues yeah so that's putting it lately yeah he's thinking it's going to go out hit the hit the water and sink sink and then when it hits the water the windshield will get blown out yeah so yeah it doesn't happen they realize right away there's something's not right so there's searching for them they start looking for them it hits CNN it hits every every place he ends up picks up his motorcycle he says kelly's there he tells kelly to kick rocks like you know like what what happens is he says at kelly when he gets in the in her truck and she's ready to take off he says she goes where's the gold and he goes I had to cut it loose and she's like whoa so you don't have the million dollars in gold or 1.5 million or whatever it's worth you don't have it and he's like no I was drowning me I had to cut it loose and she's like so ironic yeah he's like she I mean she's like yeah I'm done weren't you're we're good I gotta go let me so later nerd yeah see yeah he's like I mean if you want to go do you think you do you want to go do you when she's like yeah yeah I'm going and she takes off I've never seen anything to corroborate that that she was ever involved in anyway but so anyway he gets on his motorcycle he takes off he goes to the campgrounds and tried to tell me was trying to drive to the to the accident site to turn himself in or tell me but he's so cold he had to turn he to go and he went ahead and he had his camp again so he had to go ahead and just pulled into this campground and so he stays there and the next day overnight he realizes he's the next morning he sees the stuff on the on the media they're covering it and then he's they're looking for him they found the plane when you know he knows he's straight he knows he's fucked yeah it's over I'm done so he starts thinking I remember told me this and everything I had read about narcissists pathological liars the whole thing thing is that they don't kill themselves you see I mean they're there you go and let them kill right right he's not good he's just not going to be able to to to do that yeah he tells me I remember he tells me that's when I started I was in the tent and I started thinking about suicide and I went you were thinking about committing suicide and he goes no no no not committing suicide sort of thinking about suicide and thinking that attempting right if I if people thought I had tried to commit suicide they would have sympathy for me and I might get a lighter prison sentence or maybe be able to go to like some kind of a hospital or something right so he's now trying to fake a suicide in place of the accident yes yeah so that yeah to make it look like it was a failed suicide right like like he yeah he did jump out yeah because he knows that's over I can't another thing I can do about that but I can make it seem like it was you know I was having a mental breakdown or something I'm trying to commit suicide so he actually does cut himself and I've seen like I've read the reports and stuff in the newspaper about how he tried to kill himself now I don't know much about scar tissue I can tell you right now I've had worse paper cut scars yeah I mean I've got scars like on my fingers like you know where I can see where they actually stitched it up this guy has a barely visible scar he told me he cut his he told me he cut it so deep like it cut the tendons and it's just complete bullshit I mean you cut it there was blood I start pictures of the tent where he's like covered in blood yeah but he's covered himself in blood right now he's cut himself it's he's cut himself good okay it's a decent cut and he does believe but it's not cutting into the tendon yeah not kill yourself yeah it's not like there's no coming back I'm gonna be dead in the hour yeah not not what happened it just bled a lot yeah and so he smears blood all over the place first he first thing he does is he sends a letter to a guy he knows who's a reporter that he knows constantly checks his email and he's assuming that this guy will immediately notify the authorities which he does and that they'll track him back to the campground and show up so he's got this whole thing puttin in motion I'm gonna cut my wrist they'll show up here with an hour or two it'll look like I was trying to commit suicide they'll save me and I'll have at least be able to say that I was having a mental breakdown of some type so he cuts himself smears blood all over the place waits for the police they don't he told me this whole thing about helicopter coming down and this whole thing nothing that never happened like he told me this whole thing about how the cyber they had like the cyber police tracked him back with a whole Hollywood bullshit yeah the cyber police you know pinged uh you started pinging satellites to track down the that's not what happened and first of all they couldn't track it down anyway right like they did try and figure out where the email had been sent from and all they got was the kOA router but they they used the same routers apparently for all of them so they couldn't figure out which kOA he was at yeah and they're everywhere right right so all we know is it came from a kOA yeah we don't know which one so he in he said no no they knew exactly which one they were headed there that's not what happened what happened was you didn't pay your bill and when the campground owner showed up to say hey are you leaving or you paying your bill shrink or head rub blood all over the front of it all right so they call the cops so they see the blood when the campground owner showed up to say, hey, are you leaving or you paying your bill? Shrinker had rubbed blood all over the front of the right. So they call the cops. So they see the blood. And they're like, Oh, this isn't good. Something's up. They call the cops. And the cops are like, okay, well, what does the guy look like? He was driving a motorcycle. And he's this tall. Don't go near him. We know who it is. The US marshals are looking for him. He's this escape this or he's this pilot guy that jumped out of the plane. They show up. They surround the tent. They go in. They grab him. They drag him out. They handcuff him. And they throw him on a helicopter and they fly him in and shrinkers. Like, and they save my life. And your life wasn't in that much danger. Yeah. And so then of course he says, oh, I was trying to commit suicide. I was trying, but he wasn't trying to commit suicide. That's one of those things that the newspapers, because it's such a dicey thing. Nobody wants to say it was faked or you're trying to fake it. So if you read the newspapers, newspapers all say, he was trying to commit suicide. Yeah. That's not what he told me. He told me it wasn't trying to commit suicide. So he was just trying to make it look like suicide. So he gets grabbed there. Now he's locked up. He ends up pleading guilty and kind of a choice. He gets 20 years in the state of Indiana for security fraud. In Indiana, you get 20 years, but 10 of it suspended. So he's got a 20 year sentence, 10 year suspended. So now he's got 10 year suspended sentence. What does that mean? Suspended means that we're going to give you 20 years, but we're going to suspend 10 of it, provided you complete the 10 years. Okay. And you don't get in trouble. Right. No problems. No problems. Because let's say he commits another crime, well, then they can give him the other 10. But you're in the other 10. Yeah. Right. So be on your best behavior. So they also in Indiana according to shrinker. And I think this is basically true because I saw what the newspaper said, you got like 20 years, 10 years suspended, the whole thing. So I got the 10 years that you only do like 50% of your time for a non-violent crime. And now you're down to five years. Right. Well, if you earn a degree while incarcerated in the state of Indiana, they knock off like two years. So he gets another degree. All he does is he transfers all of his credits to Oakland City College. And he takes some environmental class and he gets a degree in environmental studies. And so he ends up getting another degree and they knock off like another two or three years. So he ends up doing like two years. A couple years. Yeah. There's a couple of years. Then he immediately goes to the feds. Well, in the feds, he got like 50 months, 51 months right around there. You do 85% of your time. So he got there. He does 85% of his time. He got a year halfway house, which is amazing. This guy got a year halfway. I got nine months. But while he's there, that's when he meets me. And it comes to me and says, look, you write my story. You know, I shouldn't be here. It was all my wife. It was all Michelle did it. Michelle's the one that ran the Ponzi scheme. Michelle's the one that took all that money. Michelle's the one that was doing all the books. I didn't know that she wasn't investing that money. He doesn't he didn't mind admitting what he did mind it, but I convinced him to tell me about the churning scheme with the insurance company because he wasn't charged criminally for that. He was charged criminally for the for the Ponzi scheme. So he's trying to blame that on Michelle. And you know, of course, I looked at all the victim statements. All the victims are like, I handed a check to Marcus. I talked to Marcus on the phone. Nobody's saying Michelle. You know, I did that Marcus Marcus. Now, Michelle was at one point. There was an issue because she had taken on a whole bunch of money in cash a few days within a few days. But that was because she was divorcing him. Right. So she knows she's in the process of divorcing him. She's taken a cash out of the bank because she's about to divorce him. He tried to equate that to it was all part of her plan. That's part of a divorce plan. Not her. Not your plan. Not her running a Ponzi scheme. Yeah. So it's just wow. So it's the stories, you know, outrage. And and was so funny. So when I'm done with the story, I bring him the manuscript. So you know, I have this manuscript, right. So I bring him the manuscript. This is after I've written it. The whole time he thinks, how long was this whole process for months? Okay. So because keep in mind too, like most writers will tell you, oh, it takes, so it's probably four or five months. Most writers tell you, it takes about a year to write a book. Well, yeah, but that's because you have a wife and kids and you have right. You're locked up 24. Yeah. Yeah. You're not locked up. That's to do. Right. So if I get this stuff, you know, I'm spending a couple months. I'm working 18 hours a day. Yeah. You know, this is and to me, this is total entertainment. Oh, yeah. Right. So passing the time. Right. And there's nothing else to just. You're immersed in it. Yeah. Right. There's nothing to distract me. There's no internet. Right. There's no, hey, I'm going to go watch my favorite program with 150 other guys trying to watch for TV screen and not all right. I don't want to go in that. Yeah. You know, this. No. No. I'm not playing softball. You know, because these are the things that the guys do. I don't want to learn how to play the guitar. And so I knock it out. I bring it to him. I give it him the book and he reads it. And it's like three days later. He comes to me one day. And I go, hey, Marcus, did you read the book? Yeah. He's like, yeah, I did. I'm going to talk to you later. This was like lunch. And I know he's going to be furious. He's going to be furious. Yeah. And I can see it in his face. He's he's he didn't know what to fucking do. Yeah. So later that night I come to him and I say, hey, you got the, you know, the book. Uh, did you make any notes? Did you, did you try anything down? How do you feel about it? Anything. And he's like, he said, I was a pathological liar. You made me sound like a criminal. You didn't say anything about Michelle. I don't. That I can't let this get out. And I went, Marcus, what are you talking about? I told you, I mean, you told me those stories. You're the one that you told me. That's what you told me. I know, but you were supposed to be writing a story about how Michelle, I was not given Michelle didn't. Michelle didn't steal the money. Michelle wasn't culpable. Michelle wasn't involved in your crime. Even if Michelle knew and she was vicariously culpable in some way, which I don't think so. She may have known, but knowing doesn't constitute being a participant in, in the crime. Right. So, you know, no. And I'm like, so this is what I wrote. I told you you may not be happy, but you know, you market. You said I was a liar. Oh, just delusional. So I say, OK, I'm like, well, man, listen, I mean, if there's any, would you see that he's like, it's all wrong. It's all, it's not true. It's not, it's all wrong. And I go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, bro. If I've made some mistakes as far as the accuracy, like if there are factual. Things that need to be changed by all means, Marcus, please tell me I will change those. Well, man, he just, he's just flipped out. He's just, he's no absolute, you know, I see. So what you do? I mean, I take the books they will then. Oh, well, yeah, bro. I said, I said, don't buy a copy. Yeah, I said, well, you want me to tell you. So I said, well, I mean, he's like, I'm, I'm, I said, well, I mean, look, he said, I'm not going to help you get this polished. I want it. Well, Marcus, I said, I don't really need you to help me get it published. I'll get it published. Right. He goes, he looks at me, he goes, man, you're just some, he was leaving. I'm staying. Yeah. I still had a ton of time left at that point. So he goes, man, you're just some guy in prison. He's nobody's going to publish anything that you write. And he's in, and I go, well, I'll eat published and he goes, when, when you get out in 20 years or whatever, it was like, and he was like, and he just looks at me, scoffs and walks off and I was like, fuck, it's a motherfucker. And he was right. He was right because I did, I did send it out. I did try to get it published. But I was in prison for your some fucking publisher and you get a letter from some prisoner. You don't even open it. Right. So I got out and, and I just, I did, you know what, I'm going to do. First thing I did was I put, I had written a synopsis. So I've got, I got, it's like a 90,000 word, roughly 90,000 word book. It's about 300 pages. So I've got a book that I'd written. So I turned, I condense it and I turned it into a synopsis of, which is about nine or 10,000 words. And I, I placed that, that story on my, on my website. Keep my shrinker had been at has been out for years now five, six years, four years, five, six years, something like that. Yeah, probably like five years. So about four years, whatever. So he's been about about four years, let's say. So I get out and I put it on the website. I got a bunch of stories on the website. Yeah. Well, at some point, recently, it's on the one, it's on the website. And two, I was in the process of publishing his book, putting together his book and I was going to publish his book, right? So I'm in the process of doing that, putting it together. I think, OK, I'll put it up on, you know, on Amazon. And so while I'm in the process, he happens to come across the website. Somebody tells him about the website and that his, his synopsis of his story, he doesn't know that he just, he just finds a synopsis. So he find this is, this is, this is in what this is, what this one, this is October 20th of this. Of this year, this is a few weeks ago, a couple weeks ago. So a couple weeks ago, first thing he does when he sees the, when he sees it is, he goes to inside true crime, which is, you know, my website. And he goes inside true crime and he writes a letter to them. He doesn't realize that I, I'm inside that's you. That's my, what's going straight to you. Right. You know, really, he writes a dear inside true crime. My name is Marcus shrinker and I was just notified you published a story authored by Matt Cox. I was approached by Matt Cox at Coleman prison and declined speaking with him about my story. The story you have published is complete fictional, completely fictional and totally made up. Also, you have used copyrighted photos in the, in the publication that do not fall under fair use. I own the rights to the cover photo and it was only licensed to one entity. I would expect you will do the right thing by removing the article. Thank you. Marcus shrinker. So he sends that to inside true crime. All right. Now that was just specifically about the cover of the, we're not. It's about everything. We'll cover in the story saying that the story's fake. But the only really claim he has is a copyright claim because it doesn't matter. You wrote the story. Well, he's also saying that I made up the story. It's all complete fiction. Okay. That's what he's saying. So he didn't realize it went to me. But even if it was fiction, you still keep a fictional story on your website. There's nothing wrong with that, right? No, but I'm saying it's true. Right. I mean, I have all the evidence. Okay. You know, so he then I sent him an, you know, I sent him an email back saying, uh, nice, Marcus, nice try. But I have all the, all the true links printouts because the printouts when you print documents in prison, they have your name and your regular number on them. I have those with his information on. Okay. So I have all the true links printouts wherein you chronicle numerous stories to me. Also, I have all of the original documents you provided me. I also have handwritten notes from you, which you provided me in addition to the above. All of the photographs contained on the website are in the public domain. The law states that any and all websites are allowed to use photographs from other websites to populate additional websites. You know, I'm not using those photographs to sell anything. Not monetizing. I'm monetizing in a way. So I put, uh, I'd love to see the licensing agreement for the photos of you and Michelle. That's the cover one of you and Michelle. However, I doubt you possess it. Nice try, Marcus. However, you and I both know you participated in the writing of the story with that said, what's up, bro? Uh, I have been in contact with multiple people doing documentaries. Um, during documentaries as well as several magazines and podcasters. I've told all of them I doubt you would be willing to speak with them on camera. However, if you'd like, I'd certainly like to arrange it. Uh, I'd love to hear your thoughts on the above subjects. You know, please feel free to contact me. I give my, my page. Wow. Right. So I send that back. So he sends me this back. Well, how long did he take him to reply? Oh, like a day. And that's that. I'd love to see his face. I mean, I, that he didn't. Matter of fact, he sends it back on October 20th. So like that morning, that morning, he sends me the one I respond. Same day. He's this is going big, big, big. So he sends this one back. It's pretty long, but I won't read the whole, uh, it's a, uh, Mr. Cox, your story is salacious, untrue and harassing. It is junk. I'm glad that he was very professional about it. Um, it is gross, absurd and insulting. Or in insults, good people that have, uh, served an honest life of public service. I don't know what the fuck that is. Okay. Um, you were obviously a very sick man and quite dangerous. Oh, you did. Okay. Um, stating that my parents abused me, um, publicly is an insult to them. And certainly malicious in every way. You are also casting the blame of my crimes on other people. Did I ever do that? Did I ever say that his crimes were never, never one number. No, never. Um, on other people, you have basically created a fictional story and clearly the deojit department of justice, uh, has not been properly supervising you. We will be in contact. We, I don't know who we is because it was from his lawyer, if he and his lawyer, his lawyer would have written, right? He was in the right. His legal team. Right. We will be in contact with the department of justice tomorrow. And of course your probation officer. I'm also going to print the story out and send it to your judge and let him or her know, um, uh, what you are doing with your life. Those pictures are licensed to ABC, not you of which is a crime. Give me a fucking break. Okay. Uh, on top of the other things you are doing, uh, we will be sending the, a DMC violation, blah, blah, blah. You just, yeah. DMC a violation notice to your provider. Um, I just cannot understand how you, uh, how your probation department is allowing you to do this kind of malicious work, stealing pictures and harassing people. If you have been stealing from the federal department or federal, uh, bureau of prisons, then that needs to be reported as well. I have never spoken, I haven't, this and this is good. I have never spoken to you about my life. Given you notes provided notes and, uh, when you asked me to do a story, I declined. I told you very clearly I was not interested in your, uh, your route of life. Okay. This is not an honorable life, Mr. Cox, blah, blah, blah, blah. Uh, then he says something down here about victimizing, I'm victimizing, retired school teachers. Because, okay. Because he, what he's saying is, uh, that his mother and his, his real mother and his real father are both stool teachers. Okay. He's saying I'm victimizing it. One, his real father, I'd never even talk about in the, in the book I talked about it, but I only say good things. Right. He told me his stepfather was abusive. He told me his mother was a drunk. So he goes on on, uh, finally, do not contact me further, blah, blah, whatever. Yeah. So the, so the next, so like a couple days later, October 23rd, I'm thinking no big deal. Fuck him. He's not going to do anything. He can't do anything. I've done, I've done everything right. I have documents. I know. Right. I'm good. I'm good. I get an email from my probation officer, which already, I feel doesn't like me. So I mean, not that you're supposed to be warm and fuzzy with your probation officer, you know, but, you know, it would be nice. So of course it was. Yeah. That's what you hoped for. Right. You hope for. Yeah. But apparently I'm difficult. So the last time I was on federal probation, I stole 11.5 million dollars. Right. So they're not feeling it. She's made it aware. That's not going to happen. Yeah. She's, she's let me know very clearly that ain't happening again. Right. None of her life. Yeah. Not on her watch. So. Okay. She's supposed to be good morning. Be prepared to have a conversation between 1pm and 2pm today, regarding a complaint I received from someone you spent time in prison with. This is your current probation officer. My current is my probation officer. Right. Like last week. Yeah. This was October 23rd. This was a two weeks ago. Less than two weeks ago. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. About two weeks ago. Yeah. So yeah, because it was a Wednesday. Yeah. So then she put, or then I put, it needs to be closer to one, because I have a conference called with my lawyer and opposing counsel. This is for the, the word, August lawsuit. So I explained to her, look, it's got to be closer to what I have to a clock. Right. What? So she put actually report to my office tomorrow morning at 10 at 10 a.m. Wow. She's all flexing on you. Yeah. You ain't going to tell her what time comes in. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. It's just like, look, you're, you're forgetting who you're going to be. Oh, you're going to be a cross. Yeah. You're not in busy. You're coming here. So that I put no problem. I'll see you at 10 tomorrow. Cause you know, I'm terrified over. Yeah. So, uh, so the next day I go in and I see her and I go to her and I see as I walk in after they're after having to go through the, uh, metal detector and all this other. Yeah. So I go in there and I say, hey, what's up? And I walk in and she goes, have a seat and she sits down and she goes, um, so I received a complaint. I said, right. I said, she just, she says, you know what this is about. I said, yes, from Marcus Shrinker. And I pull out the, I said, she's, how do you know that? And I said, oh, he sent this to my website. And I said, uh, you know, I have a website and she says, yeah, I know. I've been to the website. And I said, oh, okay. So did you read the story? She says, I read the story. She said, and several people in this office have read the story. Very serious. And I'm thinking, so what part of this is violation of your probation? I don't understand. Well, because what I gathered, she wouldn't show me what the complaint was. Even though I feel I have a right to know one of the freedom of information act, I would have to file the freedom of information act. And I'm not positive that that I could still get it because some departments are exempt. And she may, she could easily not, she could easily say it's still under review. Whatever. They didn't have to get good. Right. But based on what she said to me, she said, have you ever been up to, she's, do you know where Marcus Shrinker lives? And I went, no. I said, but I think he lives in pace, pace, Florida, just by the panhandle. And she goes, how do you know that? Why do you say that? And I went, well, because I said, the email that he sent me has the name of the company he, I think he works for. And it's like a landscaping type company, like probably has something to do with the environmental studies that he got. Yeah. Right. Something like that. And I said, so it said it, and I looked that up on the internet and it's up there near pace. I said, and I have analytics on my website. So I know that after I received this, I checked the website and there was, there somebody from pace, Florida has been on the website. Yeah. And I said, so that's shrinker. Right. And she, I goes, that's how I know she was, but have you ever driven up there? And I went, also his father lives in the general area too. Remember he was flying, oh, sorry. He was flying from Indiana to Florida, which is, that's why he had to go through Alabama. He was going to see his father, which lived in that area. So I said, so I, I assume that's where he lives. And she goes, but you don't know his address. I said, no, she said, she ever driven up there to see him. I said, no, she has, have you ever driven up there and seen his parents? So that made me think, okay, that's weird. Why would you think? So I think in the complaint, he must have said that you were harassing him. I was harassing him. Right. Because he says harassing him. So I think he was trying probably to her. He probably said, like, I've been harassing them. I've driven up there and harassed him. So I went, no, that's not true. And she goes, okay, she goes, well, you've been pretty good about notifying me when you leave the jurisdiction. You've gotten permission. I go, yeah, I said, I'm not going to do that. That's one of those things is stupid. You just tell them, you just tell them, that'll let you go. It's reasonable. You can't say, hey, I need to go up to, I need to fly out to Texas, because I'm bringing in some, you know, bringing in 15 keys of cocaine. You can tell that. But if it's a reasonable, you know, you're going to a friend, no, let you go. They're going to let you go. So I go, okay. And she goes, yeah, okay. She said, well, what is, well, you know, she goes, what's all this? I go, okay. I said, well, so I pull out the thing. I said, you read the letters right and I show her the letters and we read them. And she goes, okay. Okay. I said, you see where it says he never, she is, did he participate the story? And I went, yeah, he did. And I said, so I said, let me, let me explain this to you. And I show her this. I said, this is a letter. This is something I printed out on core links. And I show her, see how my name, my reg numbers here in my name. She has write. I said, anything you print out in the bureau prisons. This is what it looks like. It has all your information up to it. It has all this where it's from, what it is that it, everything. And so this is something I print out. And I show her, look, every page has it, every, so page. She goes, okay. She goes, yeah, I see that. I see. I understand that. I said, okay, cool. So I show her. I said, so first of all, remember how he specifically said we didn't work together. And she just write. I said, these are all the notes that I took while I was. And I show that. I said, which I said, let's face it. I said, you see all these notes, right? She was right. I said, I couldn't have come up with this with this by last night. Right. And she is okay. I agree. And you see how old it is. She is right. Okay. I said, he says he never worked with me. She's right. Right. Right. Right. I said, okay. Right here. This is a print out from him with his name and information on it. I said, right here it says, Matt, here is draft 1.3 of the outline. Um, uh, I'd be curious to get your thoughts on this. I said, and then he goes on to tell me a whole story that he typed up, gave me me. And she was, and she looked, you should say, her face was like, let me see that. She's like, huh. And she goes, okay. So this is, I said, no, no, no, no. Right here, chapter 1.1 draft two. Uh, I was, I said, here, see all the hand, all the notes that he made? She goes, yeah, okay. I said, this one, Matt, I can't believe I'm writing this. While at Purdue, I fell in love with a cheerleader named Terry. I said, he tells me all about the name. And he, he typed this up. He typed it up, printed it out and gave it to me. And that says his name on it that he printed it. Of course got right. See name, reg, everything. Marcus shrinker. Yeah. And what's great is that he, it's not like he, like he, he addressed it to me. Holy shit. Right. Right. He puts your name in it. So he knows it's really funny. Because when I got them and I was like, well, I'm going to show her this. When I remember I pulled it out and I looked at, I was like, Oh, my God, he addressed it to me. And it says I can't believe I'm telling you this. Wow. Same one. Another one. Matt is beautiful. Matt, here is the write up from the old mill experience. Remember how he hides, oh, you didn't read the book. He hides under the table. His, his mother's drinking and she's screaming. And she's there. And remember how he says that I'm saying that I'm smearing his mother's image and everything. He's used claims and so on. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All that. Okay. I had learned by that time that they both, and they, because he also talks about his, his stepfather being, right. By that time, by the time they got to their third drink, the monster in them came out. Then he put my mother head between one and two or less than a wonderful loving person. The problem is being the alcoholic she was, that was a rare moment when she was that sober person. So it goes on and on talk about how his mother, the school teacher, elementary school teacher, how she was a drunk and she was. So well, so you shared all this to your probation officer. Right. And so what, what did that run? What's look? So I keep, I keep going and going at some point. I mean, I'm like, maybe 30, 40 pages into it. I'm like, this and then remember this story. You read this thing. This story and she's like, Mr. Cox, she's, we're not going through this whole thing. She's like, so she realizes, look. All right. You're right. You know, like she can tell the guys are fucking liar. Right. So she knows. So, so that's the end of that. Yeah. So I say, so she goes, okay. So what's going on today? She sees the fucking line piece of garbage. And so, so she's like, okay. So what's, what's comical to me is the only thing about it was that I thought to myself, the issue I have is that the ABC thing, like is that photo license? At one point, I know it was licensed by the associated press. This was a photograph that had come out from shrinker. Okay. This is a, it was like a glamor shot that had been done by, by Alexis dealer. Okay. Yeah. They wanted to use him as for like an add or something. Like he knows wife and the plane and they have their Lexus and they bought just tons of Lexus's apparently, he thought that was a fucking awesome car. So, so, you know, I knew it had been at one point. It was copy written by the associated press. So there's very possible that it had been licensed that made it possible. I don't think that shrinker owned it. He never owned it was somebody might somebody might. It may have been, it may have been, it may have been licensed to them. So I thought, you know, it's public domain. Is it, isn't it? I could track down and figure it out. But even if I found out that that was true, well, then you know, ABC news is going to be like, okay, yeah, you can use it, but we want you to pay us. Yeah. So on my fuck that, I'm not going to pay you. Yeah. I'm paying anybody for that picture. So I figured, okay, well, you know what I know is public domain mug shots. Yeah. So instead I redesigned the book cover with his face with his mug shot on it. Yeah, which I'm sure he loves even more. So, you know, my whole, my whole thing to shrinker is you could have had the GQ nice, pretty picture on it with the pretty wife and the nice clean plane. Right. Instead, you get this is what you get. This is what you get. That's public record. Wow. I think that's better personally. Oh, listen, I have two more. I have one another one that's kind of like this. And then I have one that where he looks like serial killer, shaved head, he's kind of bloated and that he's terrifying looking. So I've got two other covers that are coming. So these, these, these are the books that will be put out with the different colors. Okay. And where so, uh, how long till these are published and able to be purchased? Well, man, I say it's literally a click now. So by the time you can buy him right now. Well, no, I haven't done it yet because I wanted to do this with you. Right. So I'll, I'll give you the link and you can put the link down and people can buy the book. Okay. The links right below. Do you want to buy this motherfucker and buy it right now? Definitely. And I've got quote, I got quotes from, like I got quotes from Associated Press from, you know, it's, yeah, listen, bro. It's, it's some good shit. Right. Well, it's fucking fascinating. I'll tell you, I mean, it's, he's definitely fascinating. What I love is that he's now currently still doesn't want the story out. Yeah. And is trying to get me thrown back in jail. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then writes these letters that are clearly lies. This is like two weeks ago. You're still lying. Yeah. Right. And still we're just trying to get them on a conference call or something. That'd be great. Yeah. That would be a me. That would be that way. Cause you know, and you, you people hear the whole, you know, you can watch him. Like there's like a date line or 2020 interview with him. Yeah. You know how I kind of mock him a little bit. If you watch that video, you completely see him going, well, now wait a minute, like they, they, they, um, confront him where they're like, okay. So you took the plane out and you, you jumped, you got blown out of the plane and right, right. You were so, so dazed. And he's like, and so you, you're, you're thrown out of the plane. They're like, she's like, right. Right. And you've been flying for several hours, right? Right. Right. Right. She's, and you, you just happened to land right where you had parked a bike, right? Or stored a bike the night before. And he goes, I, you know, I know how it looks. But it really was just random. This is like so. Right. So coincidence. This is a coincidence. Please. I mean, just, it's like, are you serious? Did you really think you were going to pull the wall over these people's eyes? And he's still trying to play it on. Right. Still trying to do it. Still trying to do it. Well, that's amazing. Well, I mean, this is, this is another one. These things were like, man, they're great fucking movie. It would be great. It would be great. Just like war dogs. That would be a phenomenal movie. I got, like I said, when I was, when I was reading the synopsis, the first paragraph, I was picturing the, the, the film. It would be a great, great, great. It's like War Dogs. That would be a phenomenal movie. Like I said, when I was reading the synopsis, the first paragraph, I was picturing the film. I was literally watching a movie. And the whole conflict between he and I, convincing him to tell what really happened. And the parallel story of just the psychology of a pathological liar is just as fascinating as his crime story. Yeah, it's bizarre. And honestly, had I not read all those studies and the books. And I mean, it would, I would have been super frustrated. But I was so, I was so enamored with just him being this. And it's like, you're talking to somebody that you just completely, I'm, I'm, I'm, everything I'm reading is you. Oh my God, you do that. Oh my God. So I completely know what I'm up against. And it was just bizarre to hear him say stuff that I'm like, oh my God, what do you mean you? Oh my God. He did the same things. There was just no benefit to it. It was just, it was amazing. Same thing here. I mean, I clearly, he's got a benefit. He's trying to get me shut down completely. So now the book comes out. And you know, you, it's just gonna get worse. The more you, the more you squeeze, you know, the more slips through your fingers. Right. But yeah, you would be great if you. Oh my God. Call them up. It's that, yeah, we did. So we just read your book and we were going, what book? Yeah. Marcus, if you see this podcast, just leave a comment below and I'm sure it'll get a voted enough. We'll have to communicate and get you on here. Okay. One more thing is I've talked to a reporter for Forbes that I'm supposed to talk to about writing an article about me and shrinker and writing the book about shrinker. So hopefully if that comes out by the time this comes out, you could put that link too. Yeah, yeah, definitely. And I'll definitely mention the podcast to him. Cool. Yeah, that's awesome. Have you pretty cool. Very cool. We'll see what happens. Well, cool. Man, that was super fascinating. Thanks again for coming on and sharing another story. Hopefully we can do it again soon. Yeah. Because I love it. I know everyone else loves it. So hopefully this gets a bunch of life. Yeah, there we go. Stop reading the comments. I got to stop reading the comments. There you go. There's some of them are good. Most of them are good. Yeah. But everyone's father is so calm. Awesome, man. Well, thank you again. Yeah. Appreciate it, man.