You got a ring on your finger Matt first of my senior with a ring on your finger well Congratulations when you get married. Yeah congrats. You're married man. Look at you turned your life around That a little in the February just before to do two days before The two days 13 or 13 of February 13 February day. What's the feeling out in times day? I mean I feel I don't feel this I don't don't feel no different. Yeah, Jess is like, you know, we're buried I'm like, I know what's it like. I mean are you guys just do the kids live with you guys or Jess's daughter lives with us. She does. Yeah, okay. She's being homeschooled. Do you sign a prenup? Why don't I have anything You gotta put us out of anything. You got some potential out there I mean maybe you're really making a life for yourself Matt What's it like to be a guy who's on the run from the FBI for 10 years did 26 years in prison now sets it up good now Look at you. You're on the front. You're on TV. You're the face of life lock. You're the face of home mortgage lock You're on half of that's what's the guys see you on title lock. I watch ESPN religiously You're on ESPN at least almost once a day. I know my mom will you show go Matt Cox is on TV She she you almost convinced her to buy title lock I almost had to talk her out of it and you're on Steve Bannon show. Yeah, I everywhere Matt. Yeah Yeah, Steve Bands probably one of my favorites because he doesn't say anything to me It doesn't even talk to you. I mean he he he does his whole spiel and then he's like and you know he he talks about home title lock and how you know horrible identity theft and aggravate identity or and Title theft and all these he goes on and on and on and then he's like and that's why we have Matt Cox here mr Cock, you know what what what what can they do? What come you know my watchers do to protect themselves when I go well They can buy home title locks to even he's like that's right. Thank God for it And then he goes on and on it's like I barely say anything I might say ten lines and five minutes Pop in and then I I then it's over and that's it. Great. I love it It's so fucking funny that last time you were on here You mentioned that you're like what's this guy's name some guy that had something to do with Trump I'll go on his show when I promote home title lock. I don't remember this guy's name Meanwhile Steve fucking band that Jesus Christ He's about to go to jail. He's got a well Yeah, he lost he's supposed to go to jail. He's fighting it. He's appealing it. He's he's dragon Man, I'm actually think Trump. They said about Trump, too They said he's better go to jail, but look at that. They've said that for I was just thinking about that You know what's so funny? It was like it was for two years It was like nothing about Russia about the Russia gator Russia investigation and then Okay, we don't talk about them then it was you know this and then it was you know documents and then it was and it's like They're they've tried to get him for so long. I mean you shouldn't just quit at some point It's not gonna happen. No, it's not gonna happen and then there's a lot of stuff coming out right now about Jeffrey Epstein There's like five five articles that came out in the last three days about Jeffrey Epstein and all this new these new documents They got released about his schedule that was calendar Meeting with the head of the CIA and all that shit. Yeah, but those were like he they were he was supposed to meet with like that was he was on His schedule and they know he met with him. They literally met many times, but there was also Guess there was Time they were supposed to meet again in the future, but he died Okay, but he had met with him he met with him and he was like the head of the state department or something like that It was before Bill Burns was actually the head of the CIA, okay, but he was yeah When he was when he was with Obama right yes, yes, I think so and then he said and then they said when they asked him about he said oh it was about reintegrating into society or Investing money or something was he had some some benign like out of all the people you were gonna meet with of course Yeah, it was benign of course it was yeah, yeah That's fine. Hey listen, I'm a day. Oh, you know, they talk about these getting a background check I think about it on my day. Oh met with president George W. Bush. That's insane So he and tell people who got out of prison for all of our new listeners who aren't familiar with who you are Give them a brief background on your history. Let's let's sum it up Well, maybe we did a whole podcast on this obviously in the beginning that went completely viral and made you into who you are today and So tell get give us like that the elevator style pitch of your background your left on the wrong with the FBI How long he spent in prison and how you met on the day? I mean that was it just You just did a great job. So okay, so I own a mortgage company right I own a mortgage company and we were doing some you know light fraud changing W-2's pay stubs, you know not You know, I mean I was gonna say nothing all that sophisticated and then eventually I got in trouble for buying properties Well, I would buy a house for 40,000 50,000 renovate the house and then sell it to my wife at the time In her maiden name so that I could get around something called seasoning well I'd done that several times and one of the brokers that worked for me She started her own place and she got in trouble running what's called a straw man scam She wore a wire on me and then I lost my license right so FBI comes in You know, they they they they call me. I lose my license. I can't be a mortgage worker anymore So I start a larger scam so instead of like saying okay, I'm just gonna go get a job You know and just I'll go sell used cars and you know what instead of what I did was I said, you know what I'm gonna do I'm gonna I was on probation. I got three years probation and I started making synthetic identities I started making fake people. I would I eventually I started just by experimenting But eventually I figured out how to go into into the social security administration and get them to issue me social security numbers for Children that don't exist like a 10-month-old kid by giving a fake birth certificate and fake So shot record no shot record and they'd issue me a social security number in any name that I said That was on the birth certificate. So I get these names I would then pull the credit a few times. I give them a couple of secured credit cards I'd make the payments and they didn't at with like after six months. They'd get like a 760 credit score 750 700 credit score something like that and so what I I then turned around I started buying houses in those names recording the value of those houses So I'd buy a house in e-bor City for $50,000 and I record the value of the house at 200 or 250 or 230 or 190 whatever So look I bought so many houses in so many different names the whole area shot up through the roof that way My synthetic identity can buy a house for 50,000 record the sale of that house just by paying the extra docs names on the deed so record the sale of the house at 200,000 and because you got perfect credit and I can provide W2 some pay stubs and proof of his residency residency and and residential his history of payments he could the refinance that house For let's say he could get alone for like 180,000 we bought it for 50 So 180 minus 50 is like 130 less closing costs whatever so let's say 120 so I walk away with 120,000 dollars I make a few payments let the house go into foreclosure and I did that each guy bought five or six houses So each guy borrowed roughly a million dollars and of course I'd also run out the credit his credit cards borrow 50 60,000 and credit cards get a couple Personal loan so he gets another hundred thousand dollars Ends up with like a million million point to whatever make a few payments let them all go Why did that for how long did it do that for did that for about 18 months? I borrowed 11.5 million dollars in the of a bunch of fake guys well eventually another friend of mine gets caught in a bank trying kind of in a similar scam That he was working with me and somebody else and he ends up getting caught and he cooperates They put together a task force. They wash me for three four months Another buddy of mine comes to me and says listen bro He's a sheriff's deputy. He's like I used to date this chick on the tape of PD She's a part of a task force. They're coming to arrest you the FBI's coming to arrest you So I take off on the run I go on the run. I immediately go to Atlanta I ran a house from somebody I Satisfied the loan on the house so it looks like there's no loan on the house. So I'm now living in a house as The owner of the house. I make a fake ID I get a social security number issued in his name. I then Build the credit history and I refinanced that house and I pull out like 400,000 dollars. I might 350 400 400 What else I'm wrapping it up so then I take off from there Secret service is now after me so now the FBI secret services after me. I then turn around and I go to South Carolina And at this point I'm I'm surveying homeless people. I'm getting their information. I'm getting Drivers licenses in their names. I'm getting passports in their names. I end up buying a couple houses in South Carolina I bar $1.3 million Pulling out money out of that. I get about 500,000 out of the bank. I end up getting handcuffed in the bank, you know Question the bank. Oh, yeah, this is the best part. Yeah, this is one of the best words. Yeah, so I'm pulling out cash right the get in 8,000 At a seven or eight different accounts like I get 8,000 5,000 7,000 like every other day I'm pulling out money one day I go into the bank as Gary Sullivan and two deputies walk up like I'm waiting for to get the cash and They call the police and or the sheriff and two deputies come out and they walk up behind me and boom They grab me by the arms yank my arms behind me put handcuffs on me bring me into the the bank manager's office and They start question well, they don't question me. They actually wait until They call it a detective Investigator whatever they're called they call him he shows up, but they keep calling me Gary Sullivan Mr. Sullivan, Mr. Sullivan like hey, Mr. Sullivan, you know, you're being detained. We're waiting for the shit or for a Detective become I thought it was the FBI, but he walks in and I and he says Hey, the head of walk. Oh, yes, there was walk over your bank. They had a walk. Oh, yes, fraud department Said you're running some kind of scam. He says you got three mortgages on the same house and I went Was that illegal in the guy goes he goes yeah, you know, he's I'm not sure and I remember thinking like I'm walking out here and so to wrap it up so that you know To get through this so basically over the next 10 minutes we talk to the head of Walk obvious fraud department and I convinced the investigator That the bank has made a mistake That I couldn't do anything wrong the banks loan officers may have done something wrong And so we go back and forth back and forth and it looks in the guy from what Kovia 100% knows what's going on But he can't seem to convince this guy because I'm running in a interference. Yeah, and finally at one point he says This is really where I think he messed up at one point, you know We're going back and forth back and forth and I'm like, oh no, that's not what happened This is what happened. Oh, I don't know. No, no, no, that's not what why would I do that? And so we're going back and forth and finally he says the guy from walk. Kovia goes listen He needs to be arrested. He's running a scam He's using a fake ID look at his ID his ID starts with zero zero zero South Carolina their ID start with zero zero zero zero I had gone into to South Carolina DMV and gotten a real driver's license in the name of Gary Sullivan's name so the detective says and He says no, no, he said are RID start with zero zero zero And I remember I lean into him and I go I said oh come on bro now I'm not Gary Sullivan. I go what are we doing here and he goes I know Gary. I know And literally got him. I mean like to what I said I was like oh, yeah like this guy now he clearly knows It's a real ID and this guy say it's fake and he knows it's real so I didn't believe anything this guy said like everything All the credibility he'd built up just got thrown out the window. Yeah, and I was like come on. What you know, so he's like, okay, Gary Um, he ends up hanging up on what Kovia says look. I'm gonna have this guy come downtown fill out a police report and And then I'll talk to the district attorney, but I don't even know what to charge him with. Yeah, so you need to fill out you guys need to fill out a police report And you know an official complaint and he said we'll see where what happens from there so I end Leaving and following him back to the police You know, I was gonna do the whole because I didn't do the whole setup of The prostitute thing so like the guy that I had stolen his ID had been arrested multiple times for Male prostitration and Las Vegas so he had run my stuff and he actually thought so everybody there thought years earlier I'd been arrested for Prostitution prostitution in Las Vegas. I hadn't but the good the the almost guy had yeah, so anyway I follow them back to the police station fill out a police report and He releases me like I get my car and I leave I Then go to I then go back to Charlotte North Carolina Pack up my stuff drive to Houston where I was dating this chick. She'd already relocated go there get no an argument with her Empty the truck of all my IDs everything. I have nothing on me except for an ID that I'm sure they're looking for by now And I drive all the way back to Charlotte because I get no an argument with her and I'm just like okay We're done drive back to Charlotte on the way back to Charlotte. I call the secrets I called the FBI agent try and talk about turning myself in but she's lies to me a much times So then I go back to Charlotte. What I go back to Charlotte um, I get my car I go into a Starbucks and I almost get caught in the Starbucks from the US from the US Marshals I Then go to Nashville Tennessee. I borrow 3.5 million dollars and I'm there for about a year and a half so I was on the run for about three years and then I was there and I end up getting caught there because Dateline NBC news was about to come out. I was leaving. I was cashing out a bunch of a bunch of cash out of different Um, different banks. I was pulling money out right because this was before like Bitcoin and all that stuff like you know There was just like the only way to get cash out in 2006 is you go in the banking ask for cash. Mm-hmm. So I was pulling out cash out of multiple accounts and um My we were asking people to cash checks for us the girlfriend I was the girl was dating at the time asked a friend of hers to pull out cash That sparked a conversation. She told her who I was and She called the secret service At the secret service watched my house for a couple days and then then they arrested me like that's the read That's a short version of obviously. I left out of ton of stuff. Yeah, but they end up arresting me I end up getting 26 years in prison. I go to prison. I get my sentence reduced twice. I end up doing 13 years I was in the halfway house four years ago I called Danny to see about starting a true crime podcast because everybody said I should start a podcast because I wrote a bunch of stories when I was locked up true crime stories Danny used that to get me on the show and then never helped me um And so I do this podcast like I just got out of halfway. How they've been out a few months and he says I don't even think you were officially out yet. No, we talked. I was in that But when I got out it was like I was like it was like an octo I got out like July you called me an october you said listen man I remember the day you came in it was a guy and it's so another podcast cancelled Yeah, and I like can you come in today? Yeah, that's what because that's what you said you called me that day You like listen Like you hadn't put anything up. I think in a week or two and you said I'd the guy canceled very rescheduled Yeah, and he didn't come in and he was like he's like Because I had called up multiple times and asked him questions about how does YouTube work? When I walked up there's no YouTube. Yeah, so I'm like has YouTube work? I don't understand How do you make money? Well, what kind of cameras do you need? You know I'm asking these questions and so when Danny called me said listen Somebody canceled. I need you to come in and do a podcast like today. I answered all your questions like Knowing me for two or three months now you said you come in and I need somebody to come I was like Hey, I Con the con man of to the stars Yeah, but I remember I looked at the thing and I don't know what any of these numbers mean But I remember like whatever it was that I saw like it was like a video like I And I don't know how to do it right like I don't know how to do most popular most this So I looked at a few videos and like you know they had like 15,000 20,000 and I remember thinking I Don't think it because I remember thinking Like videos got millions like that's a viral video a couple millions and I was like there's like 15,000 20,000 and I went nobody even watches this guy's show I'll go on his show because I was kind of nervous. Yeah. Yeah, I'll go do it and see what happens Good little starter right I come here. It ends up getting you know fucking one point five million Yeah, and it's blowing up in a month. Yeah, and then and then People start reaching out to me saying Hey, we'd like you to come You know, we're having a lunch or we're having a convention We'd like you to have lunch with a small group of investors just to tell your story Yeah on a little obscure island in the Virgin Islands. No, it's Puerto Rico in Puerto Rico. Yeah little some James and And so I fly and then they pay me like 1800 bucks and I flew me out flew me out flew me out couldn't believe I was like this is insane these guys are gonna pay me to come talk to them and Then life is good right and now and then it becomes Hey, we've got a mortgage convention. Can you come talk to us? You know, and I'm like um Sure how many people will be there like yeah? And then they you know we arrange for whatever it is three thousand four thousand however much to fly out tell my story Over the course of 45 minutes answer some questions for 15 or 20 minutes get on a plane fly back nice so And then that's evolved I've been doing that like I'm trying to do more and more of that so if anybody's out there I speak at mortgage conventions What do you call cyber conventions whatever and how long did it take for? The home title ought to reach out to you and make you like the face of their brand. You know who got home title? It was Was Tyler Really no shit. I didn't like I literally remember I used to get up early on like a Saturday and they were always playing on Saturdays They play the infomercial and I would go watch those commercials And I sit there and watch them and you know they'd have a lawyer they'd have a an FBI agent They'd have it a they'd have some victims They'd and then they'd have some guy in a hoodie that you couldn't see his face and is his voice is muffled And I remember thinking You're showing everybody except for the fraudster and I thought you guys make it seem like you're doing it like Cinematically like I like on purpose but the truth is you guys can't find anybody to talk about this You know like like guys like me don't come out and start talking they come out and try and Re-aclimate themselves or blend back into society and don't talk about it And I remember thinking those guys they need I need to be doing those commercials But I forgot about it so years later my booking agent contacts me and says Tyler Tyler Yeah, yeah, he calls me and says listen Have you ever thought of even under home title lock? I was like yeah, and he goes well Yeah, yeah, yeah, you'd be perfect for this. He's like you'd be perfect for it And he said I said that's what I think and I told me I used to watch the commercials and he goes you mind if I reach out and try and talk to them I was like sure listen an hour later. I get an email from these people saying hey, we'd love to talk to you When can we range a meeting next day? I talked to them on the phone Give me a couple of days. I tell her my story. She looks at the the podcast Danny's podcast which is like at this point. It's you know 1.4 1.5 one points climbing And she says we'd love for you to fly you out to Oklahoma and shoot some commercials And like a week later. No like a month or two later I'm on a plane flying to Oklahoma Then they pay me to do all these spots and Then listen that's not like it. It's just how many years ago was that? It's a three years ago four years ago You know what's funny. That's crazy here's funny people will say People will be like man would Danny pay you for that and I'm like nothing there Ah cheap mother he's been nothing And I'd say no no no man. What do you even do that for are you serious? Yeah, bro? I haven't had a job since Yeah, like I got out people buying paintings from me. They buy books. I got book sales I'm getting asked of flow now. I'm getting flown all over the place. I'm dying right like people are so narrow-minded that they're like yeah, they don't want to like They don't see cash right now. Yeah, they don't see it and I didn't see it But now I really like like I bought you Waffle House the first night I only owned because I complain on the way here because I remember say listen man Listen, I my truck barely meant or my Jeep right that Jeep right not that this one's that much better But at least this one's got I remember that very first podcast went to Waffle House afterwards I love Waffle House. I fucking love Waffle House too. That's one of my hair places. Yeah Now look at you Matt. Yeah, I'm doing good. Now you've been everywhere every big podcast that exists Value you do a value attainment value tayman. I'll eat underbelly. Yeah, he did software. I did I'm glad I just did I just did Larry Lotten Wow who Larry who said I don't I don't interview snitches and sex offenders we just we just had a cop. We just had an hour and a half the interview He's like wow, you know you're Jim what you did. What's his problem with you? Yeah, and rats I what's his problem with him? Yeah, probably he's a stand-up guy and you know He doesn't like him. That's like they're not okay with sociopathy. I Don't even know that means sociopaths sociopath oh, okay What we mean they're not who's they're not okay with like a recognizing that there's own sociopathic values like you are like you You had yourself admitted narcissist so sociopath which is you're okay with Yeah, you're okay with the fact that you ratted people out, but you mean you mean Larry Lotten What's his problem? Maybe his problem. Is that what you're saying? No, I mean like what did he say to you like what was his He didn't that's something I really expected like a confrontation. Mm-hmm. I brought I brought Jess with me, you know Just in case he got I need to ease it down a little bit. No, I thought she could take it um and and Like I'm not gonna do well, but Jess is tough so no bro. You look at you. You're freaking your jag diesel. This is this is this is New shirt. That shirt just came off the racks at Nordstrom that is a brand new teacher He like target um so so anyway we go and we yeah, he I kept waiting for him to I was when we got to that point I thought he was gonna say be like you what and he was like yeah, I understand you know They already see these people already snitched on you. You're in a bad spot I was like that wasn't what I expected from him at all And he said I have kind of changed my I've softened it softened as I've gotten older kind of changed my Here a lot of stories. What what is have you ever heard of the prisoner's dilemma? Yes, yes, that's a fame that he won the Nobel pie. Where's that Nash? Can you find out who who came up with that the prisoner's dilemma? It's fascinating I just heard it like articulated beautifully in a book. I was just reading and they they they They compare it to Mutually assured destruction with nuclear bombs. Yeah, it's a Nash What's who his last name is Nash the guy beautiful mind oh Really a beautiful mind the guy who that was based on his last name is Nash What is the math? Oh? You did Michael study with his grad students. Why that's cool? That's cool? Anyways, so Can you explain what that is like what the idea is it's basically like you have two people who who Collaborated in a crime right you separate them right and you talk to one of them And you say look if you don't give me this stuff if you you have two options you can A you can give me this information and Reduce get yourself off Basically save yourself right and you're gonna have to give up this guy right or This guy's gonna do the same thing to you like you present them both of the same thing Mm-hmm and each one thinks that fuck fuck fuck fuck what if I don't give him up He's probably gonna give me up right and they're both thinking the same thing right But I think the third I think you see it on it a little bit The prisoners lemma is a game analyzing in game theory It is a thought experiment the challenge is to completely rational agents to a dilemma They can cooperate members of a of a lower lower. Okay. There you go. Two two okay Here's the members of a crime criminal. Yeah, you go ahead and read it in hell no I two members of a criminal gang a and b are arrested and imprisoned each prisoner is in solitary confinement with no Music communication with their partner the principal chart the principal charge would lead to a sentence of ten years in prison However, the police do not have evidence for the conviction Their plan is to sentence both to two years in prison on a lesser charge But offer each prisoner a Faustian bargain if one of them confesses to the crime of the principal charge betraying the other They will be pardoned and free to leave While the other must serve the entirety of the sentence instead of just go down instead of just two years for the lesser charge This leads to a possible of four different outcomes number one if a and b both remain silent they will each serve the lesser charge of two years in prison be If a betrays b b where if a betrays b but b remains silent A will be set free and b will serve ten years Option number three if a remain silent but b betrays a Will serve ten years, but b will be set free Option number four if a and b both betray each other they share the sentence and share five years each Yeah, that was that's very very interesting so most prisoners What do they choose out of these four options Matt like like 1995 percent they probably both to save each other right now they Well the problem is that the scenario doesn't necessarily really work in the real world because if I snitch on you Who do you snitch on they're like we already got you? They don't even they don't need you to they're not giving you both five years Yeah, they just need one person this right now you're doing ten. Yeah, I'll walk away you do ten Yeah, I put money on your books. So it's just the first one that snitches Right, but in this scenario where there's how to be like this It's usually the usual there's always 99% of the time somebody snitches. Mm-hmm. It's it's like It's probably 1995% here's the problem is that the statistics say that's like It's like 87 88% but the problem with that is that doesn't mean that they didn't they didn't co-op the other guys did that only 88% Cooperated it means that 88% Got the cooperation So you and I both might have cooperated Right, but I get the cooperation and they say yeah, you did tell on them But that was three days later and you're the king team late It's too late this guy is gonna give you up and you're the bigger fish So you don't get any cooperation. You're doing ten years. He's going free And by the way almost nobody goes free like you're probably still doing to still do it to right Which is better than it's better than five and then yeah, right and you were you were even beyond any of these options because you Were aggressively going out and seeking opportunities to wrap people out in prisons people that you had no involvement with nice Wow, and I wow is that's actually not true by the way. That's not what happened. Oh really yeah It was it I was just writing stories like this guy at one point. I'm walking around the compound with him and He says he asked if you could he could trust you. Yeah, I at least you were honest keep in mind I just I had just gotten back from getting seven years off my sentence for cooperation Yeah, and then I come back a month or so later I'm walking around the compound with this guy who's also cooperating against some his co-defendants and he keeps saying He ran a Ponzi scheme his name was Ron Wilson and he kept saying Yeah, they're never gonna give me any cooperation. I'm like yeah these guys are gonna arrest these guys They're gonna indict them. They're gonna plead guilty. You're gonna be fine. They're gonna reduce your sentence Now you don't understand like what are you talking about and he goes? They think I hid Ponzi scheme money and I'm like well They'd have to find the Ponzi scheme money and you didn't there's a did you and he's like now I go well right so you didn't hide it They'd have to find it prove that you were lying in order to not give you something and he said Now now they're gonna fuck me out of the cooperation. I was like Okay, well that's not possible and if it is then we'll hire we'll get this there was a guy Frank on the day Oh Frank will Sorry, Frank will Frank will get you yeah, Frank will reduce will get them forced the government to reduce your sentence so that goes on and then let's say like let's say two weeks later Comes up again and then a month later It comes up again. I go you know you keep saying this Like they would have to find the money comes up again and then a month later it comes up again. I go, you know, you keep saying this Like they would have to find the money and I said there's no money So it that's not gonna happen and you sat there and we were walking and he goes Can I trust you? And I went probably not and he goes I Did hide some money I gave you know my my my wife I gave her it was like 150,000 He's like but the problem is she found out since then she found out he was having an affair and She we're getting a divorce. She hates my guts My fear is she's gonna turn the money in just so I don't get any time off my sentence and He said and my brothers got like 30 grand. I was like, okay, I just don't even like 200 that I like that's less than 200,000 and I Didn't like he won it fell in my lap and I didn't do anything right away That's what always could listen. I also bad about that. I was filled like you're an idiot You should have immediately gone to the phones But I didn't because I thought you're not running to the phone right after that Right like like in the middle he just says it and I go what and then I just start writing doing like the windmill All with you break me me at the phone But but what happened was I remember thinking The government didn't want to reduce my sentence the first time when they promised to So like they're not like first all they're not gonna they're not gonna do anything for this This is a couple hundred thousand dollars Mm-hmm. And that's if they go there and these people admit it and I doubt they will so I was like Well, listen, they're not gonna say anything Don't worry about it and so we have the conversation nobody like a month later My lawyer was supposed to send me my transcripts from when I'd been recentants. She never did so I call her Hey, what's up? I said you never sent the transcripts is I go man. I'm so sorry. I'll do it and whatever Okay, fine. You got lost in the shuffle. Yeah, right. So we're talk so I say okay, okay That's cool. Please, you know, please don't forget. She's no no. I will I'm gonna send them. I'm gonna go on right now Okay, and then we're talking and she goes and she says so what's what's going on And I go what do you mean? Just what's happening in there anything happening and I thought like this is this chicken this woman never wanted to talk to me Yeah, which was representing me. She didn't want to talk to me She damn sure doesn't now she hurt her job done. Yeah, and she goes yeah, anything happening and I went no no like And I went well, you know something weird happened the other day. Listen to this and she was what's the guy's name? I told her what happened. She's what's his name? I go Ron Wilson. She looks him up Ron Wilson. She says oh wow This is a big deal. There's a lot of articles. Well, this is a bad guy Mm-hmm. We got like nine huts. She's he's got nine under victims Like he stole from churches and stuff and she's going on and on like I don't know I've never ordered anything on the guy and she's like oh wow. She's like yeah, yeah She goes let me make a haul a couple calls and I was like okay, like she never really wanted to have his chat Did you up? Yeah, and I was like, okay, I hang up the phone. I don't even think about it again a week later a Correctional officer comes up from you go say Cox and I go yeah, what's up? He goes next move. You got to go to SIS Now SIS is internal security right like they're the special investigative services and they investigate like the other cops they investigate They do like investigations against like people bringing in drugs whatever and I was like Okay, or if you're cooperating like against other inmates will cooperate against each other or whatever the case Maybe you know cell phones like hey that guy's got a cell phone. They sit on you whatever and I was like Okay, so I go to SIS and everybody knows that's the best Yeah, you know now, but here's the thing. I was writing people's stories So SIS called me a venture every once in a while It may be every month or so they go Cox go to SIS. I'd be like, okay So I go to SIS I'd wagga. What's up and they go hold on. Cox lit We got a freedom of information act you ordered on this guy and they'd be like here this guy John Bozy act like what's going on? You're not allowed to have his stuff I'm like no no I'm allowed to have that's and then I'd explain I'm writing a story on that guy You got to give me that that I need that I need that They give well, what's the story because I'd had some guys in Rolling Stone magazine and you know I've been in some magazines they knew I was writing stories They knew I had a book deal so they're like what's the story? And I tell them the story and they go okay here you can have it so I go there thinking they just caught something in the mail Open the door they go sit you're standing that room like okay. I walk in I walk in the room There's a fat CEO there and you go sit out. I'm like, okay Diales of this is how they talk to you sit out. All right. They dial the phone Yeah, I got him right here. All right. Hold on here talk to this guy. I'm like, okay Like he didn't tell me shit. Yeah, yeah What the fuck hell going on guy goes this is agent, you know Whatever I remember his last name is Griff. This is Tom. I think it's Tom. Graphe is this is Tom Griffin with the secret service I understand that you know where Ron Wilson hid some Ponzi ski money. I'm like whoa Oh shit. I said whoa. Well, I need something in writing. I need Yeah, yeah, I'll get you something right. Well, what do you have? I said no, no, no, no Yeah, because it's all possible multiple times and I was like no, no, I need something in writing I need and I saw I Explain it to him. I need something in writing from the US attorney and And I said listen it's not millions because well how much is that it goes not millions? He is a half a million I go it's not millions, okay? It's a few hundred thousand dollars But I do know where that where it is and the people will Wilson seems to think that they're gonna give it up if you've been asked for it and he goes okay I'll get you I'll get something so we end up emailing each other he gets me something from the US Attorney's office Saying that they will reduce my sentence if there are arrests or if there's an indictment arrests Or a significant amount of money is recovered. You know who that's pretty all that's pretty subjective. Whatever that's supposed to be right So I explained this is what he told me they turn around they request interviews from both of those people from the the wife Go at that point there to their getting I don't know if they were divorced yet, but they were getting divorced and His brother his wife comes in and Turns over Remember he said 150,000 in cash she comes in and turns over three hundred and fifty thousand dollars The brother comes in the next day and walks in and turns in 150 so it's half a million dollars and some of it's like silver You know ingots and you know because he was a silver it was a precious metals dealer So she's got fucking gold coin. She's got so it's mostly cash But there's also probably a hundred thousand between the two of them and gold and silver and whatever just a half a million dollars and Listen like a couple weeks later Wilson comes to me and he goes They indicted me. I'm like no They indicted you. He's like yeah, that's crazy. Whatever what my wife they called my wife and my brother Oh, how do they know? I don't know that's crazy and he's like yeah, I've been indicted in her I'm like, okay And so they put him on a bus bring him back to South Carolina. He pleads guilty Because he's done and he gets six months added onto his sentence his it x-wife gets like six months probation and The brother gets like six months probation and like I think the wife got a hundred community Service hours like neither one of them became felons. It was other sentence was under a year So you're in the federal system if it's over a year you're a felon. It's under you know so both their sentences were under they're both In they it was for obstruction of justice. They were charged with obstruction of justice So as Wilson Wilson got six months. He already had 19 and a half years now. He's got 20 Turn around go to the US attorney. Hey said you reduced my sentence If there was a substantial amount of money recovered arrest or Indictments there was all of those and they said yeah, it's not really enough of our first They said they said we don't really we don't know what do you talk? What are you talking about? We don't know what Cox is talking about So I had a file emotion with the court. Well Frank Amadeos filed a motion with the court 2255 they said we don't even know what he's talking about your honor We sent him a copy of the letter the judge says I want to be wearing an evidentiary hearing or something like that And you know you guys are gonna we don't have to figure this out and so they Immediately come back and they say look will reduce your sentence. We'll give you I forget what is one level off We argue we end up with three levels off which was five more years Six months later. I get five years knocked off my sentence And he gets six months added he got six months added but then COVID happened and he got released He's home now. Oh really he's been home since Kobe. He's been home for a couple years. Where's he live? South Carolina He'd be a great guess we got yeah, listen. Let me let me get a little bit. Yeah, it didn't he didn't like a Some happen somebody said he liked thanked you or something later on. Wait. This is what's so funny So I've heard two things That that story's true, but then I'll tell you something another one too, which is the opposite so what happened is Probably Whatever five four or five months after he was sentenced I'm standing there waiting for count right. I'm standing at myself Okay, and you know that the You've seen prison shows right like you know, they're just let's just door after door You know well, you don't have doors. This was at a low. So there's just it's just an open Ob kind of an obey, but they have you have like you're like at a cubicle, but it's concrete block So you're standing there waiting for the cop to walk by and count and just standing there and this new guy had just gotten there Black guy he's still wearing his he's still wearing his uh The bus close they ship you in Any stand in there and I'm standing there and he looks up and he goes hey I just not a lot of white guys in prison. So if you ask like hey, you know, we're dang, you know, you know You know where dang it's like there's a good chance to white guys like yeah, there's like four dang white dangs. Yeah So he was hey, and I go yeah, what's up and he goes he was a you know a guy named Cox and I went Yeah What do you need? And he was I got a message from from uh Ron Wilson and I looked at him and I went And I'm thinking this is gonna be a problem. Yeah This is where the movie goes bad. Yeah, this is where I get stabbed. I'm already looking at his hands I'm like okay, and I went yeah I said I'm Matt Cox. He's get the fuck out of his. I don't man Matt Cox. I said what's up and he goes Not serious. I pull out my ID and he goes holy shit. She's kind of laughs He's okay. He said um Yeah, I got a message from him and I said what's that we're still waiting for the count for the cop like he's count The other unit. He'll be here in five minutes or two minutes who knows and he goes he said he um and he looks around right Because he realizes what we're talking about. It's pretty dicey. Mm-hmm. He kind of looks around and he goes He want he said I was locked up in South Carolina with him I don't want okay. He said he want he goes he wanted He's told me he goes because he knew I was coming to Coleman to the low and he said to look you up He told me to tell you that Um, he understands what you did He's not angry. He hopes you get as much time off as you can now by this point I'd already got my time off and he goes hopes you get as much time off as you can and he wanted to let you know He's at peace. He's found Jesus and I went now he was a religious kind of kind of a religious guy anyway and I went Okay, I said all right and he goes yeah And I said is this gonna be an issue like Am I gonna hear that you're telling everybody this and he goes no, he said let me put it this way He said bro. He said I'm gonna he said he said something like I he was I just got you know Six years or something He said but I fit he was but I plan on being out of here in a few months Like that and I said ah He goes that's between you and me. I said absolutely He said but I Wilson told me about you and the whole thing he's like I got you I understand it. All right I got I was gone two months later. Yeah, too much later And I would see him like I'm we walked by each other he'd look up. He goes what's up? What's up one day? Boom he's on the town gone so You know how we how we got out No, he had snitched on a bunch of people he'd already testified at several trials He was just waiting for those people to get sentenced and then they're really out So what's funny is so that's what I had always heard that Wilson didn't have an issue that right you're all like Then what happened was I'd say Oh Remember right then I did an interview with a guy that I was locked up with this guy named Chris Mararo He's like a sovereign citizen and we're doing an interview Was maybe was before the interview and Chris had been moved to I don't know if it was but no it was yeah, zoom. Yeah, zoo or but no, I forget But he had been moved and he was locked up with Wilson I said hey, I said you walked up with Wilson and he goes yeah, yeah He's yeah, he told me he told me about you about what happened I said you know it is what it is that I'm laughing about he said or he hates you and I go really I said I told him what had happened And he said he goes well, I mean, maybe that's true He said but when I mentioned you I said hey, you know, what's up? I said um I asked him if he was still in communication with you and he goes and and he said what did he say um That piece of shit motherfucker or something like that like like he really he was oh really just Jobe, you know that he snitched me out and I'm which always kills me He was in the middle of snitching out two guys on his case like you were in the middle of snitching So you snitching but didn't you snitch fuck you? Yeah, you just had a bad day right? So that's what Chris told me. Oh, yeah, he hates your guts like So I was like okay well that's completely at odds with what the black guy told me Um We need to get to the bottom. What do you how do you talk to people who are like extremely uncomfortable with you Admitting to be a snitch like that guy that one guy you did a podcast with like when they get really upset about you being a snitch and Who's your sweet? Wait? What's this? Big hurt big hurt big hurt. Yeah, like what is your how do you how do you rationalize it to them? Um I mean I rationalize it because they here here's the problem with those guys Those guys always turn around and say that Well, uh the code of the street like and that's where it just right then it's like stop it Like they're trying to say hey, there's a moral code among Inment or among prisoners or criminals that say you don't cooperate against other criminals But the truth is if you're a criminal you don't really have a moral code If you're a moral person or a code of ethics like You would be working two jobs to pay your bills and not robbing banks So for you to sit here and say hey, I'm a moral person. I'm a code Yeah, but there's a difference between like fucking over a friend or a fellow human being versus Just not obeying the laws that are put into place by our country or our government But who am I who am I fucking over another criminal? You think he wouldn't fucking you know, he's a criminal Defined by the government. He's still another he's a civil and other human being he's a friend Yeah, there's a difference between like selling drugs and like destroying your friend's life Well, wait a minute my friends committing fraud or my friend is cusselling drugs with me I'm not randomly saying hey, I'm gonna go pick somebody and say this guy who works at Walmart as a cashier Has never done anything wrong. I'm gonna say he sells drugs with me Like I'm not gonna do that But if you and I run into a run into a bank together and we run out and I get caught and you take off And I'm looking at 15 years and you're not answering my fucking calls anymore. You're fucking done You're done I'm in the bottom bunk bud. Yeah. I mean you know what if we're both caught. We're both in prison I'm wearing the prisoners dilemma and we're both separated and you'd better hope they talked to you before they Mean I don't know what to say, you know, I know that I mean the appropriate thing to say is you know I would never here's a you remember the guy. Oh That's right. Um, okay. I interviewed a guy the other day That gave up like $11 million in gold to the government to try to get out of prison and they reduce the sentence They got them out now when we were talking During the interview he said, you know, they caught me and they got me in the room They wanted me to snitch, but I was like I'd rather die I'd rather die than snitch And I was like right right he's like, you know You know I'm saying I said now I don't I said bro I said I I'd fucking don't let anybody you made a mistake there and he kind of I stopped and he went um Well, so so I and he didn't obviously doesn't realize my stance on it Yeah, so he just kept going and said, you know, they asked for this much money back He gave him that they wouldn't like game like whatever he gave my three or four million in gold They said now you got more because somebody else was cooperating And they said now you got more and so he takes them he finally he said after a month or so I finally went fuck man I know I can't do this So he said I went and I gave him the rest of the money I said, okay And he said, you know and so then like a couple days later. They let me out they they gave me a they gave him a a minor sentence And he ended up getting out of prison. I'm forget exactly what he ended up getting but it was instead of the 15 or 20 years He got next to nothing and he got out so The point is that So that's what he was saying right like yeah, you know this and that I would never I would never and then when it was all over And the cameras were off I looked at my said, you know you fucked up by gunna all that money back and not just cooperating as all those fucking people Same people that are cooperating as you I said and he goes And and you know I said I mean I hear what you say you'd rather die you guys he said well That's how I felt then he said but after going to prison and after what happened with all those people and realizing that everybody was cooperating against me He's an even after I got sentenced people would get arrested that I didn't tell on and they would cooperate against me They try and get me fucked up on something else He said um, I just he said at that point. I realized like Yeah, he said I really fucked up He said and I said, you know what I said I'll bet you all those people you didn't cooperate against how but you none of them contacted you None of them came to visit you none of them put money on your books. They don't answer my calls I said right so for a bunch of scumbag pieces shits that wouldn't even talk to you anymore They expected you to take the whole rap and they run off And um left here. It's not like you guys are putting money on my books. You're helping my mom You're going by to see how my ex-wife is you're going by to help you know with Mike with the kid No, you're saying you got caught go fuck yourself. See you the fuck you and then then then if it's Every so they're saying it's every man for himself. You're right. It is But watch this Next thing you know you start cooperating. They all get knocked off you get a bunch of time off your sentence Still got a few million and gold. Yeah, exactly like that guy could have cooperated and kept the money And that's what he says about I wish I would you know he said I wish I'd cooperated and kept the money But he didn't know that at the time. He was still believing that whole bullshit code and listen All of these guys that I talked to say the same thing and there are guys I know That I'll interview and they all say yeah, you know, they gave me 10 years and I'm just like You've been 10 years like the man you've been arrested four times you've been in prison four times You've been like the mandatory minimum is 20 On that many kilos of meth. How'd you get 20? You know you got 10 but I don't say anything because I know what they want to do It's the same thing big hurt does he doesn't question some guy says he robbed 10 banks and he got five years stop it bro Stop it. You put people hard hostage. You did home invasion. You got five years here And then they yeah my fucking could have finished they snitched on me. They did okay Typically what happens is when it's all over. I realize like I'm not gonna out you you don't want to fucking say that's fine But when it's all over I say bro come on man you got fucking and they usually go Well, you know, I like I'm gonna tell you But you don't want anybody to know okay understand and then they say Yeah, here's what happened Listen half the fucking stories that I've written either they admit to it and the ones that won't admit it I know the truth like I got all your paperwork in yeah, you're walking around saying you're a solid guy and it's like But you had a 20 year mandatory minimum you got 10 years What's I read your sentencing training? What's that? What's up with the 5k one? They're like hey hey hey hey hey hey hey Where'd you get that yeah don't say 5k one? That's a sentence reduction like don't say 5k one I'm I'm walking around the compound telling everybody their snitches, you know, and then I'm a stand-up guy like it's like You're not even man enough to just fucking To even admit to it. So one you cooperated now. You won't even say it. Yeah. Now you're telling everybody else. Oh you that doodle there Yeah, I think he fucking snitched you snitched shut up like just be quiet. That's what that guy John a light said when he was in here And hey, he was in some sort of Rico case right and he said that there was like an endless laundry list of mob guys that snitched on him To get out. Yeah, which fucked him. Well listen the and they were they were all guys that were like high-level Mafia dudes of course and those are the guys that are most outspoken about like snitching. Yeah snitches get snitches or yeah But they get fucking buried in the desert. You know, and this is the other thing about that is like If you're a high right like these are guys that it could be dangerous to tell on each other like these these are white color guys They're not hurting anybody They're not gonna like once you word in my word about the banker The banker he's gonna come and do a hit on me because he got five years or he got six extra months He's a fucking banker. He fills out paper. He's harmless. It'd be different if these were murderers or gangsters or you know monsters That are shoot well then you could be like yeah, they might hurt my family. That's another thing like that always kills me too Like well, I don't want to say anything they might kill might they might kill my family like Like these are the people you're protecting people that you're worried they might kill your family. These are good guys These are scumbags. I cut anybody's fucking throat to get out of here Flip that I love Do me a favor Look at me and then look directly at that camera and say I'd cut anybody's throat to get out of prison. I'd cut anybody's throat to get out of prison That's a good one. That's fucking great. There's a What your tick tox got I noticed them several of my clips have millions. Oh, yeah I just we just posted one a couple days ago that has like I just looked I just noticed today It has five million views not a tick tock. It's a YouTube short Like you two five or a million views in like a week. Yeah That's How many subscribers do you have now? I don't know. I feel like almost there's like six hundred and something six hundred and change on the main channel And then it's like three hundred thousand I have three hundred on the clip channel. That's insane. I have I've 77,000 subscribers Not that I'm complaining, but it's not six hundred thousand like that's insane And yeah, I think people that clip my stuff and put them up and they got like three million hits five million seven million four million is like What is going on you're doing more views on their clips than you are? I got guys entire channels I mean you know four or five six thousand you know they just started a channel ran a couple of interviewed me ran a couple of clips That's not how that all that all that all helps though, but it all helps you it doesn't I mean maybe not Directly, but it definitely not right now. I don't know if you've picked this up But I'm not really a big fan help and other people. It's like benefits me You know, I don't know anybody out there helping me going out there. Let me do this to help me actually That's not true. There's this guy this Canadian guy that started my my tick tock account got taken down And he started a tick-dock count for me five months ago maybe and it's got it's got It's got over a hundred thousand follow 100,000 followers in like five months. Yeah, but then he got busy and can't do it anymore So I had to get somebody else and he did that for free Just cut him up and said look man. He said can I start doing? I'd like to do this for you. I'm like Why I can't pay you and he was like no, no, I just want to do it I just think I can I think I can run up your numbers. That's great. Yeah. Yes You got people that like you got people that follow you their hardcore fans They believe in what you're doing and they connect with you because you're a great storyteller They believe in what you're doing. What am I doing? You're telling stories you're talking to people interview people So you're getting worried doing you guys that send me things and your inspirational What are you talking about? I've never said anything inspirational in my life like I'm not making an attempt to be inspirational title lock I Don't know your inspirational because of your incredible physique mat cocks I want to know the secret behind what is your what is your workout routine? What are you eating? I'm a Bible the basics test debaw Just goes on dude is fucking insane stuff. Let's say so what do you want? What kind of what's your protocol right now? What are you waking up a five a.m. Every day and hitting the iron or what no wake up it? I wake up about three three this morning. I woke up like three thirty. You're like jocko You're like the jocko of true crime, so I wake up and I write for you know, I write for a couple hours two three hours and then Then jest gets up from three to six Yeah, well usually probably from let's say three to five because around five jest comes down the stairs and makes coffee And she'll make me a cup of coffee and then she'll sit there and we'll talk for a little bit a little on and off She plays on Facebook and we kind of talk and then she goes up and she gets her daughter up and then by six Yeah by six o'clock We um we walk out the door and we go to the gym. What are you right about when you wake up? I mean, I'm still like did she start writing or do you like pick things? No? No, I'm I'm working on like I'm working on three different stories right now so One of them is consolidating that one story and One of and I don't always do that like I I sometimes I'll write like somebody will pay me to do like a press release And I'll write a press release or they'll ask me to write a story like a ghost write a story You know, so I'll go try to story for somebody And then they pay me and then so it's not always you know, it's not or sometimes I'll wake up like it's I'd say three days out of the week Maybe four days out of the week. I'm not probably four days out of the week I'm writing so it made me the other two or three days Mike I might come downstairs and and Do something regarding painting or fill out bills or answer emails or sometimes I'll just grab my phone and start answering comments like a But I'll answer like 40 comments 50 comments and you know and then But usually because here's the thing I'm I'm working with my buddy Pete Right in prison. Right and he does research and they send it to me and then I pull it off the email put it into A word document and then I consolidate it because he'll send me He'll send me like a thousand words that really honestly I need like 150 200. What is your research? He's researching that that listen that same story. I started The same time the pandemic and then we just kind of stopped working on it and then we start working on it. It was the Chinese It's the Chinese story about that that where these the what do you call it the the Chinese triad and in California they started hitting this is back in the night early 90s. They started robbing Computer chip manufacturing plants in the United States throughout the United States like they did by probably maybe 20 25 to 30 different warehouses Sorry manufacturing plants. They go in they zip tie 15 employees at two o'clock in the morning They load up 10,000 Intel processing chips into a couple of vans and then they drive off and then they go sell them for You know, maybe it's 10 million dollars where the chips. They sell them for like six million dollars The Chinese would ship them back to China put them into Computers and then ship them back to the United States like the whole Chinese start up of building their whole tech industry was built on stealing computer chips in the United States and shipping them back to China to then ship them back to sell them to When was this back in the it was late 80s early 90s? Wow, listen it was so bad that that bill Clinton Ended up making a presidential what do they call it? Not a presidential order? What do they call it? You know, they do it? Can you pull up something on this press the way he signed that? Yeah, you know, they they signed into law Because if it's national security, then they can just sign it's a presidential I want to say decree of them saying it wrong Anyway, he signs it where he says listen It was so bad he says from now on all computer chip manufacturers have to have armed guards Because they were getting robbed left and right and so then they then these guys turn around They start hitting the trucks so now they wait from the load up the trucks and then they just hit the trucks over And anyway, it's it's a super cool story. The name of the guy was John Long But it mean I whether there's something on it specifically or not John Long who is John Long? John Long is the guy that was arranging all of these really this guy's got two life sentences What plus probably 150 years he's in a pen you'd never get now I talked to him on the phone a couple of these really this guy's got two life sentences. What's plus probably 150 years. He's in a pen. He'd never get now. I talked to him on the phone a couple of times. Hard. According to the American, I mean, they were making millions of millions of millions of people. We're talking, we're talking about like a 25 year old kid, 25, six, 26 year old, and he's getting directly paid by China. Well, I mean, like he's going to pay through intermediaries. Like it's not like ZG ping was cutting him a check or, you know, walking over here. But yeah, So I wonder if you put computer chip with Chinese computer chip, high school, when are no, that's 2016 John, John, John, John, John, long computer chip, heist. Well, listen, they got, it was multiple different times that they got arrested. So like they didn't all get arrested at the same time. What is the title? Robbers, a silicone valley striking high tech companies every 10 days or so, making off with computer chips and other components worth more than their weight gold with workers terrorized and losses and millions. The FBI and the San Jose police began an undercover operation 18 months ago, but a day in the wake of the biggest crackdown on thieves of computer components in the country. Dozens of suspected high tech, Bergen's were under arrest caught in a sweeping raid that involved more than 500 police and federal federal officers on Wednesday. Whoa, the operation led to more than 120 arrests, mainly in Silicon Valley about 45 of them on Wednesday. And the arrest over recent months, the authorities said today. Damn. But do we still make computer chips in the US? We don't make them, right? They make them all in Taiwan now. Yeah. But those are just, no, those are the semi conductors. Those are not the same thing, right? Well, well, I mean, the United States makes, I'm sure they make some of them, but something like 80% of all computer chips are made in in Taiwan. And there are chips made in China, but they're low level chips. Like they might be chips that you put in a refrigerator or right? Right. Right. Right. These are not super sophisticated. What are the ones that are made in Taiwan? Why? What's the like stuff that goes in your, those goes in your car? They go into computers, like your cell your cell phones, like, you know, and they'll ship them over to like China. And the Chinese are, you know, they'll put them into the, like they're like their workers. They're not super sophisticated. That's the problem with where they keep saying like if they invade Taiwan, they're not going to bomb the crap out of Taiwan because they want to invade it because they obviously want right there. They want the, at least they want the factories and everything put in place. The problem is even if they get over there, they can't, if they kill too many people, they can't necessarily run the factories. So I don't think they want to know what the bomb the factories either. Right. They showed some sort of animation of like all these bases in China, basically like sending missiles over the over the fucking water and like hitting Taiwan, like some sort of threat simulation that they like post. Right. But that's the problem is like, so you've got to, if you bomb the hell out of them, then you've taken over the island, but I mean, you've just first of all fucked up. Well, it's all fucked up. And then then they've already seen what they did in, in Ukraine, right? Like like Russia invaded Ukraine and Putin kind of thought, man, they're going to, one, they're going to invite us in. That wasn't true. Um, and two, they're, the, the Europeans and Americans, they won't do anything. They'll bitch in moan. They might put a couple sanctions, but they're not going to really do anything. And that's not what happened at all. So now China is watching that in China was, was thinking to themselves, if that goes well, we'll invade Taiwan, because we'll get the same treatment. But now they are like, okay, if we can't be in Taiwan and these guys put an embargo on us and kind of quarantine us, like in six months, we're starving to death. They can't feed themselves. Right. So that's a problem. That's what that guy's a on says, right? Peter Zane or whatever his name is. We're talking about. Yeah. Yeah. Listen to him. He's, he's smart. Dude. Yeah. And yeah, he also talks about the, the gap in, um, in, um, their workforce. There's a huge because of the one China policy. What's that? I'm, I'm sorry, one China policy. The one child per family policy. So there's like for like 30 years or so 30 to, yeah, I think it's 30 to 40 years. Now it's about, so I think it's almost 40 years. So like 35 years, let's say China, basically, they were concerned that they were growing too fast. And they were afraid that like the new generation was going to like, eat them out of existence. Like we're not able to feed ourselves. And we've got everybody's having kids and stuff. So they said you can, every family can have one child. Yeah. So two things happened. One, the bulk of the people that did have children ended up having boys. They're dropping. They're giving away girls. They're, you could, you could listen in the 80s and 90s. Um, in 2000, you could, if you wanted to adopt a, a girl, a Chinese, a Chinese girl, they were, you could get one because they were giving them up left and right. Or they were aborting them. Or they were, um, like abandoning them. So what happens is the bulk of children are male in China, right? So it's like a huge, like it's like two or two men for every one woman or three men for every one woman. So that's a problem. And the second problem is that in order to pay for the retirees, you have to be able to replenish your workforce. Well, they have a huge gap in their workforce. So you don't have enough people to fill the jobs and you don't have enough. So that means that the economy is going to decline. And then those people that are paying in, there's not enough money being generated to pay for the retirement of the older generation. So there's like this huge gap. So now if you and I, if I'm married, I have to take care of my parents, your parents and probably some other parents like how do you, how do you, how do you do this? It's a lot to come up with. And these jobs aren't being filled because there's not enough people to fill the jobs. So the economy is going to shrink like a peer, a Zohan or whatever the zane zane. Yeah. He's saying like, listen, 10 years from now, they're going to be devastated. They're, they're already seeing the effects. 10 years, they'll be devastated. 30 years from now, that whole country's fucking collapsing. And they all know that it's the same, the same things happening in Russia. You know, the United States, we have a slight dip, but not a huge one. Keep in mind too, like in World War two and stuff like we didn't lose as many people as everybody else did. And we came in arc, we came back. Our economy boomed. Other economies didn't boom for decades. It took to recover. So if you're broke, you don't have kids. You know, we came back and there was baby boomers, like people started getting jobs, the economy boomed, they're having kids around the world. That didn't happen. So there's this massive, and here's a problem is that as that, as that workforce isn't there, if you said, okay, well, here's what we're going to do. We're starting promoting like in Japan, they promote you to have children. That's great. But those kids will be ready to work in 25 years or 20 years. What do you do? We need them now. Yeah. You know, so it only going to get worse is the thing too, like the media, all of sudden, like, turn this whole, they turn the whole narrative, like China, China, China, everything's got, everyone's going to be worried about China. There's this spy balloon, this China spy balloon. So they're trying to like the media narrative, everyone left and right. Like they, they both united against China. Everyone's united against China right now. Did you see that video on TikTok where they have like 40 or 50 newscasters? All the same. The same. Oh my God. It was like, it was literally like they must have emailed all of them at the same time and all of them. They literally, they're, they don't even rewrite it. They're reading it for beta. What the guy is telling them to say. It was so air. It's like, oh, no, you're not, you're not basically just an arm of the federal government. Right. Michael, I'm going to text this to you. But yeah, anyway, so we're like, we're like united against China right now. So like the US, the both the left and right are both like in line with going after China or like trying to paint China as the bad guy. Yeah. And that's some people speculate. That's because they know that we're going to have to get involved in Taiwan. Yeah, definitely. I mean, you don't want China taking over Taiwan. Like China is, they're very outspoken about basically. They're just, they want to be the world power. Like the United States is right now. Yeah. They want to be, they want to replace the United States. They want to replace the dollar. They want to replace the United States as being the, but here's the thing. Everyone paint, like everyone paints all these scary narratives. Like, like they have all these, they're way more technologically advanced than us. They can control our power grids. They can control all this stuff. But they're not, they're not doing anything. I think because I think we are leaps and bounds ahead of China when it comes to any of the stuff, we're leaps and bounds ahead of anybody else in the world. We spent literally a trillion dollars just south of a trillion dollars last year on the military and down to a complex. Like that's, that's the next nine countries in line. That's more than all of them combined. Right. It's insane. Yeah. And if you look at some of like the fucking blue sky research from these scientists are doing in like these companies like DARPA and like these, the stuff that they're fucking researching and like look at those drones that are off the fucking coast, bro, like that. There's, there's gotta be, there's no, I can't fathom that the people that are like in the, the people who are running like the military industrial complex and the people that are in these organizations like these private military contractors, they're not worried about China. Like the stuff that they're doing and, and, and testing and researching is gotta be the more than two decades ahead of China. Right. But, but I mean, you know, so to sit there and say, Oh, well, what do you, you know, we, we do our own independent investigations. We, we, we look into things. We don't get our marching orders from the federal government. Are you serious? Like that was like the US government sent out a massive email and then like the Twitter files where they're like, Oh, yeah, listen, we need this post taken down. We need this taken down. We need this done. We need to suppress this. We need to. And then they lied like the whole time they were saying, this is what you're doing. And they're like, no, we're not. No, we're not. Then Elon Musk takes over and says, yeah, yeah, you are. And then they're like, oh, well, we're not going to talk about that anymore. Right. It's like, you know, hey, we're going to raid Trump's office and we're going to get him and we're going to throw him in jail because he's holding these, these papers, these secret papers and then you find out that Biden's got a bunch of them and then they say, okay, well, let's drop that. It's also, it's also doing it's also so weird that like it and just like the government aligns, they're all aligned left and right. When it comes to war, they're lockstep. They're, they're in full agreement on war. Like let's spend all this money on war. Let's, let's do it. We're going to fucking go invade Ukraine and then we're going to go fight Russia. And then we're going to go help Taiwan. Right. And oh, if you don't support Taiwan, who are you? You're racist. You're sexist. You're a homophobe. Well, okay. So one, there's a whole slew of Republicans that don't want to give Ukraine any money. They're like, we don't need to be involved in it. There are huge, huge slew of Republicans. But here's the problem. Um, I mean, I don't, I don't know their name, but I've seen the, I've seen tapes where they're like, we're given so much money to them and it's ridiculous. And we could, we have people homeless people here and it's mostly Republicans. But here's the problem. I think feel like there, and it looks like I'm, I'm extremely conservative. But it's to me, it's like stop it, bro. You guys know damn well. You can't let Putin just start invading countries. And I think they're only doing that because, because Biden's behind it, like if Trump was in, in the office, you guys would be behind him. You know what I'm saying? There's some people. Yeah. They just want to get votes, right. And I'll bet you the moment if Trump got back in office, I'll bet all of you guys would step in line saying, yeah, well, let's send them tanks. Let's say what you were saying. You know, and then of course the, the Democrats that are now saying, let's send them this, let's send them that would be like, no, we need to back off. You know, some of them are so stupid. Well, the, also the US isn't helping negotiate a peace deal between them. They're, they're actually like not like actively not trying to negotiate a peace deal because they want to spend more money. And then, and then when eventually when the contracts to rebuild Ukraine come in, that's going to, those are going to be US contracts. Right. Well, they can't rebuild. Imagine a guy that goes shaded a peace deal between the Ukraine and Russia, but that would be terrible for us. First of all, Putin isn't going to pull back. And they're saying we're not going to accept anything unless you pull back. Like you guys have to pull all your troops back. We get our entire country back and we can negotiate a peace. And so they're, they're at odds. They're neither one of them want to budge. Um, but the problem is once again, that you've got a problem because Ukraine has so many fewer people, even though Ukraine is killing like it's for every, every one Ukrainian that dies like three, it's like three Russians die. And you think, man, they're kicking ass that they are kicking ass. But if you've got, if you have, let's say, you know, two million troops and Russia has, well, let's say, let's say you have 200,000 troops and Russia has three million troops. Like yeah, you're kicking ass. You guys are taking out a lot of their guys. Yeah. But it's only number. It's only 600, you're only going to be able to take out 600,000 before you're gone. And they still have for a 1.4 million. And Putin doesn't care about throwing wave after wave of these guys. Cause he can't lose because if he loses, like you don't, in Russia, you don't typically retire to your dacha in the mountains and, and, and do well. Like the new guy comes in and says, the coffers are empty. They've been robbing the country for the last 20 years. Go arrest this guy. And so now he ends up in prison or he ends up dead. Like he knows, like he's only got one choice. I've got to stay in the power as long as possible. That's a, that's a scary situation. Yeah. He's probably the richest man in the world. I mean, you know, they probably very close to it. Yeah. Cause they always, cause those guys don't, they don't really tell their wealth. So, and he's been robbing, you know, robbing the coffers for 20 years, 30. Is it 30 years? You have to get stuff with it. Has he even a power for 30 years? 20 20. I think he's been like 20, 25 years, 25 years, 25 years. Yeah. At least like, yeah. I think it's 20 or 20 or 25 years. Right. It was early, early 90s. Yeah. Well, the, the wall came down in 90, I think, or 89 or 90. Yeah. It was 89 and then in 90 and then 91 all the company countries, basically, the broke apart. Here's the thing about that area. The control of different parts of that area of the world have always been in interchanging like throughout our history, right? And just because Russia, they only really wanted like their dumb boss reason region. They didn't really, I don't think they wanted all of you. Well, what they want. I think they want, he wants all of those Eastern, um, Soviet, the former Soviet block countries. I think he wants them off. But the reason he wants them black or wants them back. This is what kills me is everybody says, well, he wants them as a buffer zone because there's so much flat land between like Moscow and, and, um, an Eastern Europe that you can basically just drive straight to, you know, like the, you can just drive straight there. Like there's no defense. There's no mountain regions or anything. But my problem with that is that is that like, so I need, I want to invade your country. So it's a buffer zone between us. And like that's ridiculous. You don't get, that's just what you're doing. You're going to invade my country because I'm a buffer zone. Like that, that's your argument. Well, NATO's too close to us. Yes, but NATO is not invading. Well, we feel threatened. Well, I'm sorry about that, but maybe you feel threatened because you're invading other countries. It doesn't make sense. And, you know, the, all these countries are ridiculous. The same thing with the O.C. Xi Jinping, like he sees things around it. We literally have them just complete surrounded with, you know, we have launch pads and everything in one of those countries. I agree. But do you see the United States invading Russia? Yeah. Why, I'm saying if, if he just are they creating a reason right now to invade Russia? The Russians invaded another country. Like if they invaded that country, if they took Ukraine, they took Ukraine. Do you think that? And it took Ukraine Russia? If Russia took Ukraine, do you think that in, do you think he would stop there? Or do you think in two years he, he'd take something else? He would probably take something else. I think he just, he just keep going because that's what bullies do. Like, you know, and Russians really only respect strength. Like, I mean, that's, that's just the bottom line. They only, same thing with the Chinese. They only respect strength. And they think Americans, you know, I just, they, I just don't think they have any respect for Americans. They just think they were weak. They don't think we think we have the stomach for war. That's what the Japanese did. We don't, right. Well, that's well, sometimes like look at the Japanese, the Japanese in World War two thought, look, here's the problem. They were arguing over oil, well, you know, gas and oil. So they were arguing over oil with the United States. And the United States have embargoed them. Japanese came and they were arguing. And they realized they weren't getting anywhere because they had invaded China. So they thought, here's what we're going to do. We're going to, if we can take out the Pacific fleet from the United States, we, so we're going to go into Hawaii. We're going to Pearl Harbor, take out their entire fleet. If we can, they're going to have such a disastrous, um, a disastrous, a defeat in Pearl Harbor, they'll negotiate. That's not what happened at all. No, that opposite. Right. That's like Osama bin Laden saying, thinking if I can crash the towers, then the United States will pull back. They'll get, they'll say, hey, we don't have the stomach for this and pull back, but that's not what happens. Like the United States get they, we get nuts and then we overreact. Like now we're invading two or three countries. Everybody. Yeah. So I think that's, don't you think it's crazy though that like the politicians and the government will spend trillions of dollars to, like to protect the freedom of other countries, but we can't pay elementary school teachers more than $20,000 a year. You've got, you've got veterans that are sleeping on the streets. Yeah. You know, like it's, it's, you know, you're not funding the VA. You don't get to vote on what the tax dollars are spent on. Like we don't get to vote. Like you're going to take, okay, every single American, you're going to pay a thousand dollars to fund this war. We don't get to choose any of that. Right. They fucking do it. Yeah. I mean, you know, I think, you know, the problem is I think that if you were, if with the American public had had the ability to help dictate what money was spent on, one, it'd be spent probably a lot better. But two, we probably wouldn't have half the stuff we have because like what? Well, I think like like our infrastructure, um, like infrastructure. Yeah. Like roads like like there's ton, you know, roads, there's our roads and airports or dog shit compared to other countries. I even Trump said that. I understand that. Well, so did Obama. Obama was like, this is like it's, it's bad. What I'm saying is, is that you have to say, okay, there are certain projects that you have to be funded, right? Like we're going to spend whatever, you know, half a billion dollars to look into building this sub and they look into it and they do all this research. And they build it and it doesn't work out and they cancel the policy. Like they cancel the project and the subs cut up and sold for scrap. And people would be going nuts. But the truth is those are building blocks, like dumping a bunch of money into NASA, like spending all this money in NASA. Why? So that we can go to the moon, which didn't do really any good. Other than to say, hey, look, we're better than the Soviets at this. Um, so people would say, you guys spent like, you know, three trillion dollars of the course of five years. Like that's insane. That was back on the seven. It's like that's insane. But I kind of feel like those are important programs because, you know, we got a bunch of stuff out of it. It helped in that advance a lot. You help advance plastics, rubbers. Um, it helped advance, um, you know, um, what is it? We got, um, obstacles. We got suffer cameras for, um, what do you call it? Uh, um, contact lenses. You got a computer chip. Like it, it forced them to come up with all of these inventions that they never would have done. You know, did we lose a bunch of money? Yeah, but the government really shouldn't be in the business of making money. Sometimes they have to spend money on stupid shit. Unfortunately. And I think that the public wouldn't understand that. You know, that's my, you know, my takeout. I mean, keep in mind too, the public's knew how much money we were spent on the military. They'd be like, no, this is ridiculous. Let's just, let's just, we'll just hunker down. But what happens when they start invading? Then it's like, where's our military? Well, you didn't want to spend any money on the military. Remember you guys wanted free health care. Well, we wanted to buy these new jets. We're spending a trillion. We're spending a trillion dollars a year on the military. Yeah, so let's just take a billion and spend it on something in the country. Like, let us get a little bit. Well, I'm not asking for a lot. Hey, listen, you I'm dying for free health care. Like I hear you. I hear you. But, you know, I also like the idea that I'm not really concerned about, you know, the, um, the Chinese invading, you know, I'm not concerned. What do you think about if China and Russia are teaming up right now? What do you think they are teaming up? Because it's working for China's benefit to, thereby cheap, cheap fuel. And I also don't really think that China is planning on invading, um, Taiwan anytime soon. Like, like, they don't have like to get across that straight, right? That the waterway between the two boost of Montei said he thinks that they're going to be made before the new presidential election. No, like they don't. I don't, I can't, I can't believe that. First of all, that you need special to guys. That guy's a geo-plained. I know, I hear you. I hear you. I mean, I know that's just stupid to go up against boost of Montei. I don't even know. But I'm saying that I was, I've been watching a bunch of videos. And so that makes me an expert. Um, like he probably can call a general something. They'd be like, yeah, it's not happening. Um, no, he's X C I A. Right. And I know I'm the one that told you you've got to interview this guy. Who is he? I don't know. Two weeks later, bro. Did you call him? What, who is this again? Mac. What is he? What? I don't know. I'm really bugged me to call boost of Montei for like six months before I called him now. Look at that guy. Then he calls him boost of Montei blows up. He won't return a fucking text from me. Wait till you say, you said you come on my program. It's like it's he's working on something big right now. He's about to be worldwide and saying, no, yeah, he's stepping on the backs of little people climbing the ladder. I get it. Oh, that how dare you probably won't talk to you. He's not probably going to talk to you in six months. It'd be like Danny Jones. God, that sounds familiar. But I think look, I think to move that many groups. So petty. I was going to say like, you know, like you need specialty crafts to move that many people to get them on the beaches of Taiwan. Like they don't have they have those. They don't. They don't have any new people. Have you seen their new ships? They don't have enough listed as of two weeks ago. I watched a couple of videos where they were like this, they don't have them. They can build them fairly quickly, but they just don't have enough to move that many people. And they're going to lose a ton of people going across that straight. They're going to it would be a bloodbath. And here's the thing. Here's what I heard too. And I heard this from who would have Russia helps them. Russia can't drive to Kiev. They can't drive there. Like they ran out of they ran out of fuel. They they they they they they're logistically there. They're not capable of even draw making a drive 150 miles outside their border. They're damn sure not going to go all the way to China and be able to help. And what are they going to help them with? They don't have landing crafts. They got bombs. I mean, they got some bombs. Do they still have to get these farm bombs left? They got planes. They got some planes. Like look, like we have, let's say, whatever, let's say, 550 or however many, you know, F 22 Raptors, right? And we have like F 35s. And and so we've got whatever, let's say roughly 5 or 600 of them. Like they have like their their their version of that. I forget the name of it. It's really cool looking. They've got like 80 or 100. Like that's it. That's the remember they keep they kept saying, why aren't they using these and Ukraine? Their fear is they're going to get them shot down. That there's just not as effective as everybody says. Like nothing about the Russians worked out. All of these things that the United States and everybody was saying how amazing the Russians were and how advanced their military was. Like look what happened. They got more nukes. Thank God they use the fucking nukia. That's if they even take off. Like who knows? Oh, come on. I'm I'm serious. Their trucks are breaking down. Their tires. They don't rotate their tires on their trucks. Half the fucking tires were falling off. They couldn't even drive their trucks. Like this they're not taking care of anything. They're right now they're doing it. You really think that their nukes probably don't work. You have a chance. I think they're there. Of course there's 30, 40 years old. 50 years old. This is 30, 40, 50 year old technologies. Been sitting at silo. Do you think they're keeping? Do you think they haven't been doing tests though? That's what I'm saying because they don't even take their trucks and rotate the tires. Like you're giving money to generals that are underpaid, that are using it to spin it on other things. Putin thinks, oh, we've all of our guys have night goggles and and body arm. Or like, it's not. I understand. No, no, they have to. We gave them money for that. Yeah. They bought some of them. Some of the special troops might have them. You know, but the bulk of these guys are using like walkie talkies from like radio shack. I mean, it's, it's, you know, you've seen that like why they should have crushed you crane. They should have crushed them. They didn't. What happened? Your forces 10 times as big that the country borders your country. You should have driven straight into the Capitol and crushed them. And you didn't like that's not, that's not a solid ally. Like that's not. How do they, you know, and as far as missiles like China doesn't need Russian missiles China has a whole div, they have a whole sector of their army just dedicated to missiles like we have like the the army navy Air Force Marines. They've got another one, which is just a missile division. Interesting. It's huge. I mean, it's, and that's like because they're going to, well, probably bomb the shit out of Taiwan. If they can't take it really, I mean, they, obviously they can bomb just the beaches and strategically. But I don't know. I just don't see them. I don't see them invading because I just think that will, they will be a huge embargo on everything Chinese and the Chinese will be. Yeah, they're massively starving. Death in six months to a year. There, you know, the US is already doing these, they're doing these war game simulations, right? Where like all the people in the military and like government, they like play this game where they all play characters in this like fictional war scenario between Taiwan and China, we're China is debating Taiwan. And they like, they're basically like creating this science fiction scenario. And like, what do we do? Like you people play China, you people play Taiwan and we're going to play the US. Okay. Do what you do to invade. Like, and we're going to try to see if we can figure out the right move and see what happens. And they're like doing these crazy simulations and almost, and that was, there was a, a think tank in Washington, D.C. and this was like three months ago. They did all the, a bunch of simulations and they said like, Taiwan, if Taiwan can survive for three days on their own, which is long enough for us to move like battleships and get there to help them if we come to their aid, then they can prop, live like an 80% chance that they can stay off an invasion. But that's if the United States helps, the United States doesn't help. Then then ultimately they fall with anything. They said three months. I think they said they, they can't last more than was it 60 or 90 days without the United States help. And with the United States help, there was like an 80% chance, I forget what the chance was, but they had to be able to hold their own for like three days because for us to, you know, you got to load up the ships, you got to get there. Yeah. Have you ever seen the, there's a graphic where it shows all the military bases, the US owns around the world. Oh, they're everywhere. And you compare it to China, even with the fucking, what's their, um, uh, what's their thing? And they have the road, what's it called? Uh, the belt road. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The China's Belt and Road Initiative where they have like all these airports and, and, uh, factories and all this thing, all these things all around the world. But if you look up the US's base, it's like 10 times that everywhere. It's insane. Yeah. But I mean, that's also part of that, you know, trillion dollars that we're spending to maintain all this money and pay all that. And the other thing I feel now, the other thing is you have to think like how far does that trillion dollars go compared to the CCP spending? Like they're not paying, they're not paying 10 dollars for a light bulb. And they're paying a few cents for a light bulb. Like, you know, our money doesn't go as far as theirs. So they are spending a lot of money. They do have a ton of troops, a ton of people. Mm. Yeah. I just saw something recently where our, the US Army is having trouble recruiting people. Yeah. Well, they were like, they made it a video. I saw this video on YouTube. I forget who posted it. But it was, uh, I think it was actually on Fox News posted on YouTube, where they, the US Army posted a video of like a, a trans, like a guy dressed like a woman, like. It was, I think it was actually on Fox News posted on YouTube where they, the US Army posted a video of like a trans, like a guy dressed like a woman, like doing some sort of song and dance, like for the US Army trying to recruit people, like young people to join like trans people to join the army. So sad bro. I was like, but those aren't the people you want to recruit to the US Army. That should have like Matt Cox, like shooting up some tests at the gym. Yeah, I could some steal those. That's kind of... You say that's like the Bud Light campaign. Let's alienate, let's alienate everybody that drinks our beer. Right. That's what we think is, you know, like... And then her explanation, the head of marketing, you know. You know, it's been a bratty kind of a... You know, kind of a... Or not sorority, a frat boy in mature humor, like these are the people that buy your beer. Like, what are you doing? Did you see that video of her? No. Oh my God. She, their head of marketing was a female and she... That's all picture of her. Came up in the same video. Yeah, she came up with the campaign and then she was explaining, she was doubling down on it when it started going bad, saying, you know, well, we needed to be more inclusive. The brand is in decline. We needed to be more inclusive. Well, there's inclusive and then there's alienating. And what you did was you included less than 1% of society and you excluded 100% of the people that currently buy your beer. Right, right, right. Like, and you insult them. And then you go on and insult them. They're like fraternity boys in mature, you know, bratty. It's like, are you doing? That's your customer. Yeah, that's your customer. Like, don't insult your customer. I'm not a... I'm not a marketing genius, but I'm pretty sure. That you don't miss a bad move. That are buying your brand. I understand you want more. I get it. I love what Corill said about it. You remember what he said in that comment? He's like, beer fucking sucks. It's like drinking bread. Like, you know, they're selling it like Costco now for like a case of beer for like a dollar 25 or a dollar or like it's insane. I hate beer. They're desperately trying to get rid of that beer now. Like it's pile got a Costco. Like there's like empty like like two other beers are empty. Like Corill is in all these other ones. Like the shelves are empty with that. And there's all the but light brands are still there. I also heard Costco's got their own brand of golf balls now. Multiple people told me this. Yeah. And they're selling for like super cheap. They've been doing it. Have they? So they ripped off the Pro V1X and they had to change their golf ball because it was basically the same exact one. Really? The title is... So Tyler is like a quarter of the price. Lexi's brother Tyler was... I had to change it. And that he was like trying to get up there. He wanted everybody. Lexi to go up there and get them. And she went up there to get some balls and I'm like shit for that cheap. And like hell yeah. I get me like three boxes of them. Yeah. And they were sold out. The guy at Costco's like yeah they come in and they're off the shelf. Same day. Yeah. That's Kirkland's. And apparently Costco's trying to come up with like a bunch of golf shit. They're going to start making clubs and shit. They sell clubs already. Oh really? Costco brand? No. I forget what brand they sell. I want to get a Costco set of clubs. Or maybe it's not Costco. Maybe it's maybe it's Sam's. I think it's Costco. Anybody they do. Yeah. Beer. Oh yeah. Beer. Yeah. This is a dollar. You said how much it was like a dollar $75 or $25. Like it was super. I just remember thinking. I just remember thinking. My god. Like in the guy was like they're practically giving it away. Because they had just they was just stacked up. Like isn't it so weird that we're the only aren't we the only country that like has all this infighting about like people trying to be different genders or like trying to tran like because even like because when you even talk to people in Europe, like people in France or Germany or like some of these like left leaning sort of like semi-socialist countries. Right. They're not super conservative, right? They're kind of they're kind of liberal and they're a lot of young people. They just look at it and they laugh. They're like it's so weird what's going on in the US. Well, when you hear people's perspectives who aren't in the US, especially, it's like they're like it's it's not going on in any other countries. I mean, definitely not places like Russia, obviously because they're like their war torn country that's been you know through crazy. But they have they have real things that were exactly it's like it's so it's funny how if there if there was a war right now, like a major war, like a serious war, not like we're sending off our current existing troops to go fight some war that doesn't really affect the United States, the continental United States actually haven't been like if suddenly yeah, exactly like all that shit would be out the window. All of it. My fear is that the that the youth, these are the people that would have to help fight that war. My God. Could you imagine if if if 19, 20, 22 year old kids had to help fight a war right now, the kids that are being raised like they're it's real. Isn't it? Like the drivers licenses. Isn't it the same thing is what happens to late stage empires like like what happened in Rome like a lapse they got a start wait exactly like shit starts happening like they start looking for more things to to battle against or they start looking when there's no real external threats. They start like eating themselves from the inside and looking for more problems. I mean, I I that's kind of what I feel like like you don't have real problems in your life. So you're manufacturing these issues that I have to call you he she or I have to or you know that you you have want me to acknowledge that you're you know, whatever binary or whatever the hell that is and you know, it's like like these are what you're arguing over like I think and it's like it ties into media and politic and people they love it. People love it. What's people like AOC they just fucking amplify just so they can get more people to follow them and vote for them and like whatever happened to her. She's still out there chirping the Republicans. She's off all her committees. Is she if they did you went nuts when they start pulling her? She was just a bunch of committees. She was just talking about some guy that happened in some guy in New York. I guess got killed. There was like a there was like some homeless guy on a train in New York and he was like threatening a bunch of people and then some like marine. And I guess put him in a choke hold and killed him by accident. And and I guess he didn't get charged with murder. He was it was a homicide, but I guess like there was other people trying to restrain this guy who was going crazy. The guy put him in a choke hold and the guy suffocated died. And so there's people hiding there's people in the streets protesting about this like saying that that guy that marine should have gotten put in prison for murder and AOC is like out there tweeting like oh this guy's a fucking murderer. Of course. Of course. And there anything about the transgender that ended up going in and killing them with those kids. You know a month ago. Oh yeah. You don't hear anything about that. Yeah that was everywhere when it happened. Was it for like what we forgot about it. All right. Yeah. Yeah. Like if that it that it just been a regular white kid. If we'd be hearing about it right now. You'd still be hearing it but you couldn't hear anything else about it. Bro that was a terrifying video. Did you watch the video of that? Like the cops video footage from this. Oh yeah. Going in. Walking through the classrooms like these little baby chairs like these little kids sit on and they're like running through like clearing it and oh my god just the mental mental cases that are out there. When do we become a type two or a type one where type zero right now? Where do we become a type one civilization? I don't know what that means. Yeah. What is that type one civilization? You just stopped interviewing all these smart people. I can't come. I haven't interviewed these smart people. One civilization is when we become a global species or we start thinking of ourselves as earthlings not just Americans, Russians, Chinese and we stop becoming these territorial apes bombing each other and trying to invade and take more territory. I think we got to get to another planet, create a colony on another planet. Maybe that would help. Yeah. That would probably help. Yeah. Because it would still be who would still be us though. It would still be. But then it's a whole planet of us. Yeah. But then you're saying you've got to. So what are you saying? like like progress, like we progress. You're saying this earth. Be a type boy. Yeah. When we do that, I think you become type one because the only way. I don't know if you said that. One world government. A type one s. Yes, you would. The type one civilization is able to access all the energy available on its planet and store it for consumption. A type two civilization can directly consume the energy of a star like the sun. Finally a type pre civilization is able to capture all the energy emitted by the guys. Well, we don't worry about that yet. That's way deeper than I do. Yeah. You're still like I mean, we ain't even talking about people. No. So a type one, right. But type one is like we're already sort of on our way to type one, right? Like we have the like we're progressing. We're becoming more global in a sense like we have the internet, right? We're all connected to the worldwide web. So that's like not all of us. It's a slow step. Some countries aren't. Some countries aren't. That phrase to energy specifically though. Yeah. They were talking about like so yeah, like a day sources. A stone fear putting in. So when you start becoming like type two civilization, then you can like travel throughout the universe. Like right. Obviously, I mean, you get off the planet and you can move intercellently like between stars like between our between what we went to. I'm a fraudster. Between. Yeah, right. Haven't you had some scientists like is this a question? I'm not. I'm really honestly not even really versed enough to talk about half the stuff we've already talked about. You can't take anything instead so far for truth. What do you think exactly like I'm not that's why I'm interested because you have an outside perspective. I'm wondering like like I've been thinking about it like the type zero. What right now we're type zero, we're fucking monkeys with with bombs. That's basically all we are just trying to make money. Like everything everyone who has gets any sort of power or money all they do is just try to get more and they try to take it from other people. It's the basics of what you did right. You fucking found a way to exploit a system and you fucking kept gaming it and gaming it and gaming it and tell you eventually got caught and couldn't do it anymore. And that's like what we're doing. We're not looking out for our own species. We're not trying to to better ourselves as a speed on is. Do you I mean yeah, he's kind of put a ton of things like to him. He's like, he's dumping a ton of money into a venture that honestly is he ever really going to get that money back to go to Mars for what reason. To build a colony why because I think we should be in the money or he's getting it from the goal of the money. He's getting paid by the government to do all this stuff right. Yeah. Well some of it some of it is not he's using his own money. He's getting a lot of it. He is using his own money. It's money too because not for not for not for space X though. He's got a lot of people like did you want a documentary about him on Netflix? Yeah. He has a lot of he's getting recouped for a lot of money right. Yeah. For you know doing things like you know bringing up satellites and things like that. But if he's making back all of his money and who knows if he would or not. Look at what's his name Bezos. Like Bezos is not in getting any of the contracts. Right. Elon loses loses loses but he keeps dumping money into it. Because of course he's one of the richest man in the world. So he can like to me it's like if I had that kind of money where I'm not going to run out of it. I would probably do something absolutely ridiculous like that. Like like I'm not going to run out of money. Well I pretty much got everything. I mean Elon's got so much money that he doesn't even care anymore. Like he's sleeping on people's couches and sleeping in like nothing that is. Yeah exactly like hey let's drop one of these little these little rooms that I'm building here. These little cubicle things and drop it. And what are those things that you know what I'm talking about? They bring them in on a. Yeah. What do they call? They're calling any houses. Tiny houses. Yeah they're kind of like tiny they are tiny houses. Yeah. So he's like he's got one of those so he can sleep there like he doesn't really you know look at the houses and then sleep in the prefabricated homes. Right. Like he. You see them like he's just he's a mess. They're built in factories and there's dropped there. And then you've got then you've got Jeff Bezos who has got like five yacht. Got in around to ice. How about him getting all buff getting him. He's all a jack and now he runs on test. He's running around with like 21 year olds on his yacht. I'll zip it up. You know what's so funny. It's so funny his transition from fucking nerd to like billionaire playboy. Did you ever see the interviews when he first started? Oh yeah. Hold on geek bro. Yeah. Same with Elon till you see like his early. Yeah. Yeah. And now he's got a full fucking head of hair. Hey, I heard you just did a deal with some Turkish hair loss company. No, I didn't do it. You need to hook me up bro. My corners are getting like that they got they have them and they have a clinic in Mexico. So you don't even have to go to Turkey. Oh really? Yeah. But I have really good. It's not FDA regulated so it's probably good. It's just surgery. It's the same surgery they do here. Oh, is it the same shit? Yeah. Oh, the wife. You threw it in Mexico. Is it cheaper? Super cheap? Like the guy. Why would he go to Mexico for everything? Why would he come here and compete with American doctors to do the same thing? He can go to Mexico. I want the guy who did your hair. I want that guy just to fill in the corners like maybe a quarter inch. I don't know that guy. I want one more surgery. Really? Oh, we had a talk and everything but the problem is in the end. I'm going to start a go fund me in the end. I'm going to have to come up with you know, you got to come up with a few grand. I have to explain to my my probation officer that I'm going to get a hair. You know, hair grafts. He's going to be like, it couldn't you maybe throw that towards your restitution? How can we scam your insurance company to paying for your hair? I mean, health insurance companies are the biggest fucking scam artists in the world. We got to be able to get them back somehow. I don't have health insurance. Oh, you don't? No. That's sad. I know. What if something happened? Yeah. I got health insurance. I got health insurance. You can't get your piece you back together like, Jesus. Like a car. They rebuilt you like and every time I hear about all this stuff. It's like the scarecrow. You look fine though. You walk fall. Like I wouldn't think you were like, you know, and all the accidents and you're back and like, oh my God, he's fucked up. You should start the surgery made it better. But you seem fine. You don't, did we are like sit weird or or or hunter? I got a weird walk. Do you? Yeah. My back is like my back is fucked. Oh, you seem fine. But my equilibrium is like fucked up. Did we talk about last time you were here to be talking about your heart rate? Yeah, I think we did. What's wrong with your equilibrium? It's all fucked up since I'm accident and shit. Really? I get like a re ever get that ringing sound in your ears. Oh yeah. If I drink like three cups of coffee. I get it a lot. I have it all the time. Yeah, I get it probably at least one today. Really? Well, I just goes it goes like full fucking. You know what it's tuned out? Like that loud? Yeah. Oh shit. Where it goes totally deaf. I have like mild 10 nights. Like for like 10 seconds. Like fades in and fades out. I got my blood work done. You might have it. You might be getting directed energy. You might be like targeted by the CIA might be like bro. I had a guy who here said it's aliens talking to me. Oh, God. Listen, I got my blood work done the other day. Oh, yeah. What's your test levels? They were everything was like they give you a range like between, you know, your whatever is between should be between 200 and 250, right? Whatever. Whatever. Whatever. Whatever. I'm saying in general just this should be between 1200 and you know 1500 and mine would be like 1312. You know, this should be between 300 and 375 and mines like you know, 300 and you know, 40. You're right. It's very almost always right in the middle and then you got to test the host room. And it was the range is it's 200 to like 650 or something. 250 to 1100. Okay. I'm on like 1560. Nice. And I was like, you're pinned. Wow. And you know, I called Ryan route and he's like, that's fine. He's like, yeah, that's good. He's like, that's good. It's good. You feel good, right? I feel great. Yeah. That's good. Rock car, baby. How's your libino? Yeah, it's, yeah. I'm hungry all the time. What's your dose? What's your dose? I don't even know because Jess gives it to me. You don't know how many milligrams you're taking? No. How often you take it? How often you shoot twice, twice a week, twice a week. But listen, I'm, I'm strong. God, I want to get back on it so bad. Like I'm like, like I can do, I can do like 30 dips. I do like four or five sets of 30 dips. I do pull ups. I four or five sets of 30. I've never been able to do pull ups. Like I knew pull ups behind my head. I can do like this. Yeah. Easy. Easy. I don't mean like one. I mean, we're talking about, look at him. How many clubs can you do Shane? My shoulder would pop out, bro. One pull up kid. One pull up. Pull up. And shoulder out. Fuck dude. I told you. I could do other shit. I just can't do shoulder shit. Oh, listen, I didn't never do. Like I never been able to do like a, you know, pull up like. Why am I so, I need shoulder surgery bad. He means he has to do themselves. I gotta go to Mexico. He needs the stammies. I need stand up. You know, that sounds illegal. No, no, no. States. It might not be federally right off FDA approved. It might not be FDA. I feel like there's a legal place. Rogan gets them all the time. So it's got to be all right. Yeah, but he went, I think he went to Columbia. No, they go over there. They're in. They're met a union. No, the guy in his podcast said they go right over the border in California right down there. Oh, Tijuana. Tijuana. Yeah, there's one Tijuana. They're right to Tijuana. They fucking put you up into five star hotel. Geez, yup. They got saunas. They got hyperbaric oxygen chambers. They got a spa there. The largest drive right back over the border. Oh, yeah, it's full treatments. Like eight grand for the week. They give you multiple sessions. Like you go in there on Monday. Go start a go for me for that. You already got the go fund me. Just ask asked the boss man. Yeah, they funded it. Mm hmm. It's to be like I want to do anything. Are you just on the test or what else? No, I also take a an estrogen blocker. Oh, you take that. Only because like so you did your blood work and your estrogen was too high. No, no, it's just that because when I started taking the test like my one on my all your garno. Yeah, my what well and you know, keep my two like they're gone like the glands are gone. You got them removed. Yeah, I had two surgeries. One they cut them in half. It started growing back when. Oh, this is when I was younger. 20, 20, 20, oh, yeah, because you said you were taking that shit when you were young. Right. So then they removed them. So then they just removed them, but still something must still be in there because I started getting this a little bit of a pain in my in one of my breasts right like right. I hate to say breasts because it's not my mask. But but it's just started kind of hurting a little bit. Right. Like I was like, that fucking hurts. So I talked to Ryan and we ended up getting he said, look, just take like this as you need it. Like take it like half a tablet. Every time I took half a tablet, boom, it's gone. Mm. And other than that, I feel great other than the fact that I'm hungry all the time. But you look phenomenal. I you don't look fat. I you look. The only reason I feel fat in here, like a fucking bulldog. Like a little bulldog dude. You know, the only reason I feel fat because I weigh like 180 pounds. And I'm like, this is you weigh 180. Yeah. You're the way the same. Yeah, I weigh like a way a little over 180. Like I was typically like I want to be like 170. I feel like I need to lose like 10 pounds. How long should I wait till I go back to I go on the time? I don't know why you got off it. Like what was the reason I was ever, you never does anything more in like fucking one week. I did it for a month. And I felt just like the best way I can describe it is I felt overstimulated all the time. Well, then hello, where does I did? I did. I did. I started, I dosed down and then I started doing it. Water down. I started doing the injections every other day. Just like I split it into three. Right. So I did it three times a week. And I still felt like I felt a little bit less overstimulated. But then look, so I did my blood work pre doing the test offs round. Were you working out? Yeah, I was always working out. Okay. So I did my blood work pre test offs round. And my test level was like 730. Right. So I got in the middle of the month when I was doing the test offs round. I did my blood work again. And it was like 640. Why did I be? I stopped, right? I stopped the end of November. Makes sense. I know. I stopped the end of November. I did the test. And then I got on my blood work done again end of January. I'm back up to 750. How did you never go? Can I ever get out the same place? Everybody goes, bro. How did you go into that lady with those fake machines? No. What's her name? Literally the blood work I got. I got the fidget type in a month. I got literally the most comprehensive blood panel that you money can buy. They were, the lady had the needle in my arm and she, you know, they fill up those vials. She had like a fucking grocery bag full of those. They were falling on the ground everywhere. I'm like helping her pick them up. She had like 30 of them. It was insane. And they did like they tested everything, like literally everything you could possibly have. And I don't know. For some reason it was lower. I wish I had money to burn. I'm like, what's the cheapest one I need to test offs round. Can I just hit the no. Sorry. It's a whole panel. Well, that's all I need them. Like, listen, I might have like, there's different esters. Like there's sipping in a, in anthee. There's like three different esters you can take. One that lat, the sipping eight last longest. The, that's what I'm taking. An antate has a shorter half life. So I don't know. I don't know. I want to try it again, but I want to figure out. I'm like at 750 right now. So I don't want to like, there's really no need. I mean, that's where you're basically supposed to be. Yeah. All right. Like that, the when I was like, probably where I am normally, I'm in this, is off the charts and what's happened. But when I first did it like the first line, the first injection I did, feel bad for her, the first injection I did, I was like, not already. She's like, what? Oh, she's like, I'm not already. I'm 100 down. Like, you know, she's like, hey, hey, hey, fucking horned up bulldogs. Walking around with one of those five gallon paint sticks, you know, bows. Stop it. Sit. And that's humping legs in the kitchen. That's hilarious. But yeah, I know. That's why I got off. But I want to try it again. I'm like, I really want to try it again. So I think I'm going to do it again. You know what's funny? I wonder what would happen to Bozak, because you know, he's super hyper sensitive to any type of, any type of drug. Like, you look, I am too. I am too. You look at him. You think he's taking, he would, he takes drugs like he done, listen, he done drink, he doesn't take drugs, he can't drink coffee. He can't take aspirin. Like, hey, two fucking 25, 250 milligram gummies, the first time he came in here. Listen, no, we need to different now. It's different. He's big on me. He does a lot of it. There's no problem with weed, but he has a major problem with any kind of medication, like anything. I'm like that too. So yeah, he couldn't, he couldn't take anything. It's called a hyper responder. It's horrible. Like it's horrible. Because you can't take anything for anything. Like if it's good if you're addicted to pills, because then you save money. Yeah, I guess so. But if you need medication, it's not good. There's nothing. He said, if you're addicted to pills, it's good because you know, you save money because you can't take them. It's like, it doesn't, I don't know where that came from. But I mean, what if you need medication? You can't take it. Yeah, you just take a smaller dose. You just break the thing in the corner. He does. He takes like, he'll take little, like he'll take, he'll have like a pull his back or something. And he's like, he takes ibuprofen and he gets all like, feels sick and he really. Yeah. It's like, it's ibuprofen. He's like, I brought, I'm like, how much did you take? He's like, I broke a pill and a half. He's like, what do you mean? Right. Like, I barely took any of them. Like, well, that's not even going to do anything. I got a little pam, pop in a thousand ibuprofen. I'd be proof of the thousand. A thousand milligram. Wait till you my age. I wake up, that's just part of my routine. I woke up to take fucking three of three, two hundred milligrams. This guy got COVID. He's fucking chewing up, Viking in, bro. That'll help, right? You worked. Huge enough. Two days later, I was straight. That's the secret route. Fucking, I've remacked in bro. It's the Viking in that. My grandma came over, brought over 800 milligram ibuprofen. So, Viking in. Fucking so. So, I'm so. COVID. Some cough syrup. I'm laying on the couch. She brings over a ziploc bag of pills. It's a cough syrup. Your shame. Take this. I was straight two days later, slept it off, sweated out. I echo bit again. I've had it twice. Well, I was excited three times. Damn. I got it when I went to, I went to pod fest. We both got it. Just and I both got it. Really? Pod fest geeks got me all shaking hands and, you know, I'll cope it. Yeah. Mmm. No. Don't tell you what happened. I gave a speech. They gave about my speech. No, listen. So I gave it, I had to give a talk. Basically, it was, it was something like 60,000 subscribers like in two years or something. I forget what the name of the speech was like. How do you like whatever? You know, like and I basically got up and just said, look, you know, you have to. I just gave like five tips, right. Here's what happened. So there's a room. And I remember thinking like these guys are going on this app and they're trying to get people to go to their, their little show, right? I never did that. I go to the show. I go to the thing pod fest. It's okay. It was five days. It honestly could have been two. So you say everything the first day and then maybe you want to loop around again, but after that. So then they have these rooms that are broke up is very professional. Like it's a super cool kind of thing for two days. So then they have breakout rooms where you go and you talk to them. because they have big ones. There's 500 people. There's sometimes a small one. There's 150 people. So I'm thinking nobody's going to be it. My thing, I never tried to promote it. I never tried to do anything. I just told the guy that runs the place. Chris, I told him, I'll do it. He said, okay. So I go to do it. Ernesto Chris, Chris, Chris, Chris, Maasto, whatever his name is. Yeah, Chris K. So I go and I'm also a panel. So I go and I get there and I'm like, like this place, like it's packed. The room is packed. And somebody goes and they do a talk. And that's great. They do their talk. More people are kind of coming in. The place is packed. This guy does a talk and he sits down. No big deal. And then this other chick gets up and she does a talk. And listen, like halfway through the talk, I remember looking over at Jess, like this is the worst chick to follow up. This chick's been doing this for five years. She's polished. I mean, I was like, wow. And Jess was like, yes, she's good. She's good. And it was like, for the support. Right. It was just like, wow. So then she's done. As soon as she's done, I'm thinking, okay, great. So now I get up to do mine. And she, it has, I'm getting up to do mine. And she says, okay, she's got the mic. She kind of stops and she says, listen, if anybody else wants to talk about this or needs some help or needs this or new to this, blah, blah, blah, blah, she said, I'll be out in the hallway. Come on out in the hallway. Half more than that. 90% of the room gets up and walks in the hallway. There's like six guys left. And then you went to your chair. And then I went and did my thing. So obviously I was fine because of only a few people. But I sat there. I thought, wow, like that, like I would never do that to somebody. Yeah, that's kind of a problem. It was real. Like I wanted to go to her and say, the fuck did you just do? Yeah. Did you see what just happened? Like, did you see what you like, would you want that done to you? Yeah. That was fucked up. It was such, you know, if it was anybody but me, like if I was in the crowd, like I probably would have been like, I would have laughed like, oh my God, that was horrible. But I was like, I was like, wow, I'm not nervous now because we're just nobody here. So she should have thanked her. Yeah. There was maybe whatever. Let's say 15 or 20 people. So I did my little speech, whatever it was fine. But yeah, I got sick. Like the next day when I got home, I was all by the time we got home that night, I was feeling achy. The next day, super achy. So it was just, we both super sick that night. And I was supposed to go to Ian Bick, fly up to be interviewed by Ian Bick, do you who he is? I think so. I think you sent me something about him. Yeah, I was supposed to go up there and I had to cancel the last minute. And I still haven't really been able to go up there since then. And so now when people say, hey, you should be on Matt Cox's podcast to Ian Bick, he says, fuck that guy, he canceled on me. Really? I really says fuck that. No, I don't see that. And they'll say fuck that guy. He's like, no, he kind of almost does. He's basically like, he says like, screw that man. The hell with that guy, he canceled on me. I had COVID, like I had COVID. I even texted him and get his flight reimbursed. No, he said he just walked. I had COVID, like I had COVID. I even texted him and get his flight reimbursed. No, he said he just lost it. And I told him, I said, look, I'll pay for my own flight and fly up, I get it. And he came back and I told him, I said, hey, quit telling people that I canceled on you. I had COVID, he's like, yeah, I get it. But you said you'd be up here within a month. And it's been like two months. And I haven't heard from you said. Okay, granted, that's my fault. But come on, bro, like I'm going to get up there. Give me a minute. First of all, you invited me to fly up to your show. You know how many needle you got to bring with me on the plane? You invited me to fly up to your podcast. And you have like three thousand, at that time, if they get like 5,000 subscribers. I think he's got like 30 or so. He'll probably get 100,000 before I'm at 100,000. Like he's, he's, he's boomin' people like him. Bro, when is Tucker gonna start a podcast on YouTube? I don't think he can. He was, he was immediately. Bill for the internet, bro. Have you watched his full send podcast? No. Oh my God, this is so fucking hilarious, dude. He is so funny when he's able to speak freely. And he's not just like reading off a teleprompter. I saw a video on why he was fishing in Central Park. Central Tucker was? Yeah. And New York? Yeah. Really. Yeah, so guy comes up and like he's like turns around. The guy's like, oh, you're Tucker Carlson. Well, you're supposed to be fishing. Yeah, you can fish. And he like totally cool. The guy starts talking to the guy's like, no, don't you need a license? He's like, no, people don't know that. But you don't need a license. He goes, is it good fishing? He said, not really. And he was like, he's a big hunter and fisher. And he likes to hunt and fish a lot. But he likes to hunt. He's like a big bird hunting guy. Is he? Yeah. And my God, he's already got 62,000 subscribers. What was that? What are you mentioning? How much do you bend? No, I'm we use, you don't do Ben. No, yeah, but it's not a machine. Oh, you fucking push. I don't actually use the bar. How much do you in the machine? It's like 250 to six. It's almost the whole rack. And I'm not doing, by the way, I'm not like barely going down. Like I'm going deep all the way down. All the way. Oh, yeah. And I'll do all that. But yeah. So I started like 225. I'll do like 225. Then it goes like 245. Then it goes like 255. And then it does goes like whatever 15 or 25. One where you sit on, the one where you're sitting up and you go like that is like the one talking about. I do a slight incline. incline. Yeah. So it's not quite. So I'm not length as last. Yeah, I like doing the incline too. So that way you don't build like the bitch tits down there. You build up the top. No. I mean, I do that. I do flies on a machine. You keep on working with working out with Jess. And then we just pretty jacks. She is. We do dips. She's strong. It's fuck all. She looks like it. And the worst thing is like I'm on my upper batter strength. At least double everything she does. And yet when we wrestle, I can't pin her. Where we are. I can't. I don't know. I just don't even fuck with her anymore. It's gotten to the point where it's so embarrassing. I mean, it's embarrassing. It's like literally like I'm like, I don't understand. Like I'm like, I'm sitting there going, I don't understand. Like I'm benching double what you're benching more than double. And I can't get you off of me and you. Yeah. It's ridiculous. Yeah. She's got my wife. My wife's a good friend. She got retarched ring. She does. She does. I'm glad you whispered that. Hopefully the algorithm didn't hear it. I'm sorry. I hate to say that. I mean, I know. I know what it is what it is. Like and I went to a school with kids with special needs. Like I know it's a serious, it's real. It's real. We had a guy named Rodney who had Down syndrome. Strongest fuck. Yeah. That's Rodney. I don't know. He was scary though. He would chase you around. Like John. Yeah. Yeah. That is crazy how they are strong. Yeah. They are really fucking strong. For no reason. Yeah. It's ridiculous. And Jess is like that. Is she strong? Is it hard? You okay? I don't know. I've drank two cups of coffee. This is literally probably my fifth house. This is your first time in here since we got the new AC. I'm actually kind of cold. You know what's going on here? Yeah. You don't get a lot of talk. I'm doing a lot of talk. We don't have that fan going anymore. Right. And it's I think it's a lot cooler now. This looks like a draft right here. You like that? Yeah. That was the last time I saw it. Getting ready to get a new studio. We're here or in someplace else. Not in this building, but somewhere around here. And then we get one in a really big shot. Yeah. Yeah. We're in a big warehouse. Really? Vaynercy factory. Vaynercy factory bud on Indian Rocks Beach. Seriously? Like, you know why? Why? Yeah. It bothers me until you see it. And I like that jealousy feeling. How would you be jealous? Because I feel like I'm above that, but I'm not. Because I'm running my whole thing out of my living room. I'm running this whole. Listen, people show up. You know, it's fine. People show up and they're like this. They're like, hey, what's up? They look around like so does Lex Friedman. He doesn't his fucking kitchen. I know, I know. But you know who I had on the other day, Brett Johnson. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I had him on here a while ago. Yeah. This is the second time I've had him on. Oh, really? He's great. Yeah, he is good. We were both on the Secret Service's most wanted less. Yeah. We both go back and forth, back and forth. Oh, I bet that's fascinating here you guys are. It's good. Hey, what's up with Rucini? You told a story about him when he's getting out of prison. Didn't you ask me that the other day? Yeah, but we didn't. We're on air now. Oh, so he, so I mean, literally he should be in a halfway house right now. The problem is the halfway houses are packed. And so he's they've, there's just nowhere for him to go. Like he should be home. He should be in a halfway house or on an ankle monitor right now. Like he's literally telling his case manager like, have me go. I'll immediately go on a, you know, I'll immediately go home. Like my home's already been approved. Like I in, he probably will not be in a halfway house for six months. And even then he may only get a month or two. Yeah. No, basically he'd be out of prison. Where's he going to move? Where's he going to be? Um, the halfway house like his mom is somewhere up. I want to say in the panhandle area, but they tried to get him in halfway house. Everywhere like like O'Calla or Lando Tampa. They're just all full. Like everything's place in Florida is full. It's attacked with people that did our das and the devil. Yeah. Well, in the halfway house is too. That's so wild. No, but great guy. I can't wait to listen. Listen, Ruth, you remember the other day when you, not the other day, it was probably a year or so ago. You had a guy sit down and start and was talking about the cartel. Usually in that Pete can tell you the origin of every single cartel, how they've turned into the different factions, why they became different, became different factions, the murders and double crosses. He can tell you it's insane how much he knows. He could sit here for six hours straight and tell you just about everything. How does he know about it? He just, you know, he's got one. Watch tacos. He's probably got 180 IQ and really. Oh, it's insane. Listen, when I was doing his story, this was the kind of stuff he would do. It's funny too, because as much as I despised ever, he was super, he was much like this. Only Pete's likable. And Pete would go, you know, I would say, okay, well, when did this happen? And he'd go, oh, God, let me think. That was, he'd say, okay, so it would have been, that was Tuesday the 12th. And it go, what? Yeah, June, it was a Tuesday. It was on the 12th of June, you know, 1992. Why did he rain, man? Like how do you know that? He'd go, well, because I remember so and so his birthday was on this, this date. And I remember we went to, we went to this concert. And it was two days after that concert and like he literally has this whole, and he could do it all the time with everything. And if you went back and double checked, damn, if he wasn't right, it was, it's bizarre. And he'll give me my two. He's, he's from Brazil, right? So he's, he speaks Spanish, he speaks Portuguese. So he'll, you know, listen, I can't say Spanish words, like he's for Portuguese and he or French or anything in these pronunciations is perfect. He just, you know, he's one of those people that I talk to that I feel like, you know, you feel like you're drooling when you're talking to him. You're like, God, like this is ridiculous. And I feel like he's patiently talking to me like, right. He's like, he's like, he's just putting up with me. Yes. He just has like an incredible sense of fucking time where he can put timestamps on anything that happened on different things. But things, it's not just that. Like he, he, like he'll talk to you about quantum physics and he'll remember names. I can't remember names for anything. He'll remember the names, the pronunciations when the book came out. This book, I remember he was, it was like 1100 pages and this and this and this and this and there's a chapter. Chapter 13 was about and you're like, are you insane? I hear you tell you, listen, I'm going to get him first. I'm going to, I'm going to, I'm going to completely just just spin like two weeks with them and get as much information out of him as possible. And then you can have him on here. He'll tell you, I want him on here with you. I mean, that's fine, but he'll tell you about his case. It'll take eight hours. He knows every single date he has every single document. It's insane. It's insane. It's insane. He also is extremely wordy. Like he has no, he's not. He reads what one book a day in prison. How many books is he? I don't, I don't know. I'm it, it'll all lot. And I mean, not normal books. These are like typically if I get a book, I can give it to four other inmates. He gets a book and you might as well just throw it away. Nobody else is reading that shit. Like Pete, it's a, it's a, it's a book on mathematics. I know there's a whole chapter on the, on the comma. What? Like what are you, what? Yeah, there's a whole, is, it's, it's just, it's not. So it's, it's, it's he autistic. He is mildly his, I always say he's got a touch of asper syndrome. And you don't notice, like you notice it when you first meet him. But then as you get to know him, you don't really notice it. But when somebody else comes over, you start to notice it again. Like with me, he talks to me. He looks me in the eye. He has we have conversations were open. He's very comfortable with me. But somebody else comes over and he immediately, hey, how you know? And takes like four steps back. And you're like, well, what's going on? Like, like you don't notice it because we, we hang out all the time. And then somebody else would come in and he'd do it. And I'd be like, Oh, why is he in prison again? Short version. Short version is the, the charges basically, um, conspiracy to murder to federal informants in his two FBI federal informants that were both murdered. Then supposedly he ordered the murders, he ordered their murders and the disposal of their bodies. And he'll, he'll tell you, look, yeah, I didn't order the murders, but I did dispose of the bodies. Do you know, you know, I just tell him just through the bodies in the dumpster. Exactly. That's exactly what it was. One of the bodies they found in the dumpster, the other one they didn't. And he's like, you know, what I was going to do, I came home, they guys did. He can't just leave at the body. We were, it was a mess lab. I can't call the police. The story was fucking crazy. Yeah. It's not. What's the name that you wrote? Did you write a story about that? Yeah. You told the story. Uh, devil exposed devil exposed. That's actually a rope. I wrote, so I have an abridged version. And then I have a full book. The full book is basically it's like a true crime book. The abridged version is really more about the crux of the case, how they built the case against them. And there's actually both really good. The problem, like I said, that he has no concept of brevity at all. He, he'll, it'll take him two minutes to explain something that really would have taken about 20 seconds to explain. He just, he's very wordy. He's very detail oriented. He thinks everything is important in the story. He can't cut to the chase. Mm hmm. So, but he's his research is fucking amazing. The problem is you have to read 2000 words to end up saying, OK, there's 2000 words. I'm going to use 200 of them. And he's, are you serious? What about this? What about that? It's irrelevant to the story. Pee. Sorry. I, I, you know, he's all, it's all upset. And then I'll, I'll tell him I'll send you mail and I'll say, I'll be like, bro, thank you so much. This was great. It was really informative. I chopped it down to two paragraphs. And, and I'll say you really need to work on not sending so much information. You know, damn well, I don't need to know every single thing about that person to introduce them in when they're only going to be in one scene. And what exactly is he helping you with in prison? The book, the book, it's called, we call it the company. It's about the, um, the chip heists, all those chip heists, he's doing the research and listen from inside prison. So during pandemic, they shut down the archives because these are all like they're all archive, right? Like there's tons of articles, but you can't get them on the internet. They were back in the late, late 80s and 90s. So, and then all even a lot of the court documents are on the archives. They're not on updated on the system. Like right now, something 10 years ago, you can go pull everything on my case on PASER, but this is back in the 80s and 90s. These are, this is on microfish. Yeah. So he, um, we, we couldn't get into archives. So Pete happened to be talking to his cousin, who knew a girl that was actually dating a federal judge. So he got to her, got to the federal judge, explain that he was doing research on this case. And the archives was closed, but he really needed it. They federal judge calls down the people from the archives and ask them to go and pull the file and boom, we get a fucking chunk of everything. Well, I end up having to pay for. I think I paid like whatever it was, $600 or something. The research to get the research. So now he's got all the stuff. And he's researched everything. Red, all the trial transcripts, red, everything went through and highlighted it. He ordered, um, tons of newspaper articles on archives. I end up having to join some archive system to pull articles and send those to him. And then he just, he's a machine. He reads it and comes up with the information that you need. But it's a super interesting story. Do you pay him? No. Wow. I've offered to put money on his books. Do this in that big, keep in mind. And he's out of my, it's, it's Pete in his mom. That's really, and in some cousins, that's really all there is left. Pete that died when he was in prison. You know, and honestly, you know, how long has he been in? Oh, Jesus. Almost over 25 years. How old is he now? He's exactly my age. Wow. We're both 53. I think our birthdays are, I think he's his birthday is a few days before mine, maybe a week. Wow. I want to say maybe he's June 5th or so. I don't know. I could look it up. That's crazy, man. Well, Matt Cox has been enlightening. How long, how long has this been? Two and a half hours. Oh, look it is. Four, three, five, three, two and a half hours. Yeah. Wow. Thanks again. Well, listen, I, uh, tell it. Thank you for watching the video. And if you liked the video, do me a favor and hit the subscribe button. Hit the bell so you get notified of videos just like this. Leave us a comment. The comment section will respond as quickly and promptly as possible. Try and respond to most of those videos or most of the comments. Uh, if you want to get in touch with us, go into the description box. Danny's email will be there. My email will be there and also will leave the link to my channel, which is amazing. Although it is a grind and it's not blowing up quite like concrete. Um, but it's, it's, it's all true crime, uh, stories. And it's a lot of fun and super interesting. So I appreciate you guys watching. share the video and hit the, uh, hit the, hit the like button. Subscribe. See ya. See ya. See you.