Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. I'm up, sir. Very good to see you. Good to see you. I really enjoyed our conversation last night. We all went out to dinner and how put off blew my mind. As you know, I've known him for a long time. Yeah, what did you meet him? What year? I knew him at SRI. Actually, I was at Stanford Research Institute before him. I, in one of the very early internet research teams, when there was no internet, was called the ARPANET. It was the network of the advanced research project agency. And it was all a computer experiment. And so on I turned into, we had engine number three on the internet at SRI in California. And so it was about to happen. By the time I joined them, they were 30 machines already. And it was exciting. And then Dr. Putoff and Russell Tark came in with a proposal to SRI to do a pan of psychology research at SRI, which had never been done. And it was funny because I was already there in a team. What year was this? What year? Oh, God. Seventy four. Wow. Seventy four. So the arts and the arts and the arts and the arts and the four. And it was funny because I was in my office and a vice president of SRI came in close to the door and said, Jack, you know, you've published some things controversial and your name on UFOs. And you haven't lost your scientific reputation, which is why you're here working for us at SRI on the ARPANET. You know, there's a proposal from Dr. Putoff and Dr. Tark to do a pan of psychology research here. And we've never done that. And I said, well, you know, it's a very valid, I think it's a very valid area of research. We should, you know, where in the kind of institution that should do that. He said, well, let me draw something on your whiteboard and you drew a scale, or a horizontal scale. And on one side, there was a little square. He said, this is the most we can expect in terms of funding for research in parapsycology. You know, it's maybe at most a million a year. Okay. And here is what I managed, you know, in this division, drew a huge cube, you know, it's said $150 million. But we jeopardize the research we do for Xerox and IBM and AT&T and Bank of American and so on, just to do some research on, you know, psychic things. And I said, well, you know, the reason we get all this money from DOD and Bank of American and so on is that we do the research that they can't do themselves. We do, we do the, you know, we go out and we take risk. And I think we should take the same risk with, with how to put off and the Russell Tark because this could be very big. You know, there is a lot of literature on this already. And we can bring the science into it. And they can bring the science into it. He said, well, there is a meeting of the board of directors of the SRI, you know, in two days. And most of them are against it. What do I tell them? And I said, well, I can, you know, I can write up the reasons why in science you have to take chances and this is science. I mean, this isn't just engineering. He said, well, give me a memo by tomorrow at 12. So I went home and I wrote a two page memo which was confidential. I don't think anybody has seen it for the board explaining why there was scientific evidence, you know, enough of it so that good research could be done. And I, you know, obviously that may have helped in getting the approval for them to come in. And then after the first year, you know, they were there because, you know, the, the many kept coming and the results can, you know, good scientific results can, came out of it. So when you say parasite ecology, specifically, what were you attempting to study? So most of parasite ecology, as when they made decades has been studied by psychologists, you know, people who have experiences and they relate their experiences and they have strange dreams, they have all that. And then that has been structured by, you know, people doing experiments. For example, you know, trying to move objects with your mind, trying to, of course, send messages psychically to other people and all guessing what's written in a closed envelope and so on that kind of thing. And but again, those were done by good experimentalists, but it was where is the physics of it. I mean, you know, because in physics, you know, those things aren't supposed to happen without an understanding of a sense that perhaps we're not quite aware of. That's right. And that, you know, our physics has been dealing with objects and with atoms and all that, but it's clear in modern physics that there are other things and that the theories we have about the different fields in the universe are in conflict with each other in all relativity and quantum mechanics are in conflict. I was reading something that was kind of just a glance that it quickly and I was running out the door, but I was going to ask Jamie to pull it up. They there's new research that shows that human beings have the ability to detect the magnetic field, the same way that birds do when they fly south and other animals they believe do when they navigate terrain. They think that human beings have this ability that perhaps it's something that we have ignored so long. It's atrophied or it's not something that we use. That's a question for, you know, a biologist or specialist of the brain, although it may not be in the brain itself, it may be diffused in the organism. So I'm not really qualified, you know, well, I was going to ask Jamie to pull up the article, but the point being that there perhaps are senses that we're either not aware of humans like other animals may sense our smackdown to feel. Yeah, this is a, this from Wow goes 20,000. Yes. Okay. This is not the same article, but it's probably a rehab. It says it, there's another similar one here from like a month ago that's the same title. Yes. That's what I saw. This episode is brought to you by Intuit TurboTax. We're all just trying to level up, right? I'm always trying to push myself, whether it's training, learning something new or just trying to be a better human, you put in work physically, mentally and over time you evolve. It's 2025. Doing your taxes has evolved to just like we put in the work to level up turbo tax has put in the work to make taxes effortless because now taxes is getting matched up with a turbo tax live expert who has the latest tech with that. They can cross check millions of data points to make sure that your return is 100% accurate. That means you get the best possible outcome this tax season for your unique tax situation. All while you go about your day. It's 2025. It's time to file like it. Now this is taxes into it, TurboTax. Get an expert now at TurboTax.com. If you look at the history of the islands in the Pacific, like spend some time in Tahiti, and I looked at their traditions, they were navigating the Pacific fine. They knew where they were going. Part of that was navigating with the moon, but part of it was something else. On every ship, they had one man who was gifted in guiding with respect to what the ocean looked like to the moon and so on. That's never really been explained. They had an uncanny ability to get to the right islands on the way to their destination and to guide those ships. Otherwise, they didn't have compasses. There are books now coming out, certainly, and I found some of those books in Tahiti, about the history of that and the research that's been done into those people. But they were special people. They were gifted. That's not something that I could do. Have you heard or listened to the telepathy tapes? The telepathy tapes. So you're aware of this? It's a podcast that's about nonverbal autistic kids that demonstrate psychic ability. Provalble, they've got dozens of these cases on video where people in other rooms are looking at objects. The child completely locked off. You can't see them at all. We'll say and write down what those objects are, colors, numbers, and sequence, and very accurately. So they believe that this is something that many of these parents have talked about it in the past, but felt foolish. It felt like it was something that they would be ridiculed about and so they didn't want to talk about it openly. But once they started gathering up information, they got more people to open up about this than they start documenting it. They start coming up with ways to make sure that there couldn't be any possible way that could be communicating with each other. And it's just utterly fascinating because they're showing that there is something going on. There's some way of transferring information back and forth, including some of these teachers have figured out a way to not just receive but also transmit the same way these children have. So people that aren't nonverbal and they aren't autistic. These people are able to do it as well. They've been able to create a bond with these children and communicate with them. And there are companies in Silicon Valley that are heavily involved in advanced processing and invent programming, specifically recruiting young men and women with that kind of talent. One of my three grandsons when I love and one of them is it's not clear whether he's actually autistic in the current definition but he certainly has some of those indications of some sort of a gift of thinking and getting information in ways that are very different from the... It may be that in evolution, there is a sort of quote, lower animals can do it and we cannot is that we've developed other ways of getting information more reliable in the long run. Maybe just one of the dormant abilities that we have that most of us don't develop. And we'll not then carriage to grow it in school because it's disturbing for the rest of the class and so on. And perhaps it's something that people had before language and language and then written language and then of course media sort of eroded those abilities. Yes. And you find that also in South America and in Australia. In the indigenous people. Yes. Yeah. And natives but you know, up to the current population. Right. So perhaps it's something that we all had and we've lost it. Now, when you were initially studying parapsychology, what were the protocols that you were using? Like how were you trying to determine whether or not people were capable? So, you know, again, in my own, I've studied parapsychology more as a personal interest. But Dr. Purdoff and Dr. Targ were doing it with scientific controls. Yeah. I mean, that was a point. That to look at it from a physics point of view. You know, not just from a parapsychology or psychology point of view. So they were designing tests that were more tied to physical quantities. And one of the people that they brought in was Ingo Swann, who was an artist from New York. He was very uncomfortable with California. The sky is always blue. You know, it's boring and so on. He liked New York. He liked the animation of the city and his friends and so on. But I knew, of course, of him I had read some of the things. So when he came to a Sarai, he told me that, you know, remote viewing is one thing, or parapsychology, but it should be applied to science. And also, you know, it had to be applied to intelligence in the sense of, you know, the intelligence agencies were funding Sarai to do this. Okay. The three letter, you know, agencies were a number of them who were very interested. Because I knew that gift existed, you know, in pilots and a number of people. And so they were trying to figure out a way to utilize this for military applications. Mostly to look at developments in Soviet Union at that point. Oh, so they were trying to... But also, no lost spacecraft. They found a lost spacecraft in the middle of a jungle in Africa and so on. By South Africa. By South psychology. Who's spacecraft? Hours? No, it was Russian. Oh, so they found it through, like, remote viewing? Yes. Really. So, when... So, Ingle was starting to go around the labs at SRI. He wanted to... He had never been in a scientific institution. It's full of computers and gadgets and measuring instruments and everything else. So, he wanted to know... He saw that as the next domain where a psychology could be applied in a strict scientific rational way. So, I was one of the people that he wanted to talk to. And I told him, do you know how a computer finds data? You have a computer and a machine full of chips. How does it deal with the real world? And he said, I have no idea. I mean, I've never looked inside a computer. And I said, well, there's three ways. You know, as a programmer, I can declare a valuable. I can say, X is always going to be 3.14. Okay? Bye. But in many cases, I can give you the address of the place where I put the data. But it's going to be different. The address is going to be the same. But the data is going to change every time. So, but I can give you the address. It's 23, 14. 23, 14 is where I'm going to put... You know, the agent of the patient. Okay? But it's going to be different with every patient. So, that's the direct addressing. But I can also put in that location, I can put the address of somewhere else which I'm going to compute in my program. And that's in direct addressing. And then there's a rest of the world, which is too big to put inside the machine. I mean, the machine has a memory, maybe very big, but it's still limited. So, it's going to go get the information from some memory device somewhere else. You know, maybe the world bank and all the library of Congress. And there, I cannot give you the address. But I can give you a sort of imaginary process by which you can derive the address when you get there and bring it into the memory of your computer and then work with and he said, you know, that's it. That's what I need. And then he came up with the idea of coordinate-remooth viewing out of that conversation I had with him. So, that was my contribution to the actual project at the beginning. And then he thought the... As an address, he was going to take coordinates longitude and latitude because we were going to look at the... They were going to... I wasn't officially part of the... But I was, you know, I had passed the qualifications to be at SRI in a... the Department of Defense Project. So, I was one of the good guys. So, we had many conversation with Gaffee and so on in the lab. With... with Ingo and later with Yuri Geller that were absolutely fascinating to me. So, I tried to... In some cases, they needed to talk to someone who knew technology and was interested in this even though I wasn't, you know, on the project itself. But somebody who was inside, you know, so that they didn't... the information didn't get out into the... the real world until they were ready to actually publish it because everybody wanted to kill their project. I mean, there were so many skeptics saying, you know, this can't work. They're making it up. Right. They're fooled by a procedure tater. You know, Yuri Geller is a magician and all those things. Right. Well, he is a magician. But he's also, you know, an extraordinary psychic. So, so could you explain... So, they're looking for this Russian spacecraft. So, how do they... what's the environment in which they remote view? How do they set this up? So, Ingo... after the project was pretty much over, there was some continuous studies and Ingo brought me back to work with him because he wanted to write a book that would be a synthesis of his methodology, you know, to answer your question of how would you do this? And he had a very structured way of doing that with a number of... What he wanted to do was train people to do that, hopefully to his level. So, it was step by step. So, there was a first... You had a pad of paper, you know, and the pen. And he was sitting at the end. The table was about like this, you know, except there was nothing on it. In a room that had nothing on the walls, no windows, there was a chair here and a chair there. So, he was away from me, I couldn't see what he was reading. He had the stack of targets that were places on the earth. And, I mean, obviously, the idea was to look at what was going on in, you know, Vladivostakko, you know, some... We can see a stack of targets. Can you explain it like is it a map? Is he... is it just coordinates? It was just coordinates. So, just numbers... He has gotten the maps. And those were test things from, you know, geographic features on the earth, cities, mountains, and so on. So, he would read out the coordinates. And I had a pad of paper and the number two pencil. So, everything was very coded, you know, very strict. And I would draw something that he called an ideograph. So, it could be like this, you know, it could be a curve, it could be. And then, just first impression. His theory, which I think, you know, having experienced it, we did that for a year. Now, I had to job somewhere else, but I was coming to two mornings a week, you know, to work with him. And this was classified. So, the other people, I said, all right, no idea what was going on in that room. That was dedicated to his work. And he would read out his idea was that we can all get that signal. You know, there is a signal. If I give you a launch into an latitude, you potentially can describe what's there. If it's a city, if it's a mountain, if it's, you know, some place in the country. The reason you cannot is that the signal is overwhelming. The signal is extraordinarily large, much larger than we can hold it in our brains. So, the people who do that have a way of processing the signal and recalling it. And that's the secret. That's the main thing to me that's come out of the SRI study among many things. But so his idea was you have to stop the signal, you have to catch it. It's going to be very, very fast and most people just go on with their life. You know, they're just a passing thing. And but you can recall the signal. So, he would read out the coordinates again. And now my little scribble is going to turn into maybe a series of waves. And then, you know, a city with skyscrapers after, if we do that, the number of waves. Now, there are a lot of errors that can come in. And then we can think, we recognize it and try to name it. That's the thing you shouldn't do. You shouldn't try to name it because to name it put it in the other half of the brain, which is logical and rational. And so the idea is to label that as an error. You know, it's not a city by the bay. It's something else. So we go on and we keep just going on. So you have to do that with a very patient guide to train yourself to do that. And SRI, you know, Hal and Ingo did that very well in training the cadre of people who could be almost not quite, but almost as good as Ingo. And there were a couple who were as good as good as he was. One time, no, I said, but Ingo, you know, I'm not psychic. He said, well, you know, think about that because you've shown evidence of understanding the process. You know, there are some things that I did that would be classified as psychic. But I cannot do it. I cannot control it. Right. It just happens randomly. Yeah. What kind of like what kind of things? Well, one time I get there 830 in the morning, we close the door. And he gives me a set of coordinates, longitudinal attitude somewhere. And I get very cold right away. And I get dizzy. You know, I mean, I, I, you know, I have to grab the table. And I'm not drawing anything. And Ingo says, Jack, what's wrong? And I said, Ingo, I don't know where you're sending me, but I'm called. I'm trampling. I'm afraid. I'm afraid of falling. And, you know, I really don't don't feel well. And he said, you're on top of a peak in the Andes. Wow. So he pulls out the, it pulls out the thing. It gives it, it gives it to me that comes from, you know, a photograph of, of the Andes, taken from an airplane with this, this peak. And they had computed the coordinates of the peak. And that's what he was giving me. And I was there. You felt it physically. Did you see it? Or did you feel it? No, it was just a physiological reaction on my whole body. I was trying to think of you were freezing, peak. And I was very afraid of falling. Wow. I was falling. And had you had any of these that didn't work? Did they try any work? Oh, yeah, sure. I'm not, you know, you should not use me as a remote viewer to launch a, you know, Tomahawk over somewhere. And so it was... That's a problem that, of course, we are me, has, you know, you said good enough so we can launch a rocket. Right. Destroy that thing. Right. Who is the best at it? Who's the best at remote? Is there one person consistently accurate? There are couple and they are not, you know, Ingle was known because he wrote about it and so on. Many of them, Joe McMonnigor is probably the best one alive today. He described a structure and he described a ship that was being built by the Russians, which was a super submarine, you know, hang of somewhere. And the Navy just laughed at him. They said, that's crazy, you know, it's in their hangar, you know, away from the sea. So why would you build a ship, you know, when you don't have the ocean? Well, it turned out he was right and it was a super-class new Soviet submarine. He described the inside of the building, which had no windows and so on. And yeah, I mean, from a satellite they could see the building, but they couldn't see inside the building. He described what was inside the building. He described the submarine. He described the length and the, you know, yeah. think that they couldn't see inside the building. He described what was inside the building. He described the submarine. He described the length and they, you know, he actually measured it psychically and that turned out to be right. And then when the submarine was built, they brought some bulldozers and they dug, you know, a channel to the sea and off it went. This episode is brought to you by BetterHelp. Being independent is good, but you should never be afraid to ask for help when you need it. After all, we're only human, we can't know everything. That's why it's crucial to have a support system. People you can go to when it gets rough. Think of friends, family members, your partner, hell, even your dog. When you're feeling down, spending time with a furry friend can be a good pick me up. But I get it. Sometimes you don't want to or can't go to them for help. For these moments, try therapy. It can be a good source of support in any area of your life, whether you're working on personal relationships, job stress, or something else. Therapy can teach you a multitude of different things to help you be your best self. Like how to set boundaries, when to let go of toxic relationships, and what to do when you feel overwhelmed. And even more importantly, you can do it in a safe space. If you think therapy might be a good option for you, a good place to start is BetterHelp. They have a diverse network of therapists and everything is online, which can be very convenient if you need a last minute session. It's also very easy to switch therapists. If it's not working out, build your support system with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com slash JRE to get 10% off your first month. That's better help hlp.com slash JRE. So I had heard about those things where I explored I heard about this, but I didn't know it was that accurate. Yeah, that happened. He was as opposed to one of us. He was right enough of the time that you could rely on what he was describing. And also, they came up with a way of measuring, actually quantifying the value of your perception. So I talked to you, you know, let's do another one because I'm on the roll here. You know, after the speak in the end, he said, no, Jacques, you know, you're going home now. I said, it's nine o'clock, you know, we're going to be in here half an hour. Why are you sending me home? I mean, this is great. I got it. He said, yeah, you got it. You don't need all the levels. I mean, you got to the top level. You were there. Why did he want to send you home? He said, I want you to stay with that feeling. I don't want to do another one that you miss. So I want you to keep that in mind because you got the whole thing. Is this based on past experiments in the way they were achieving achieving results? Yes. So he did one of them argue with every test subject. Right. So he didn't want to give you another experience. He wanted you to take that experience and just keep the experience with me doing the day because I got the whole signal. Right. But and did you feel like that if you did that, it would aid you in your ability to do it in the future? It would. Yeah. So I would lose that sense of direct direct access to something that bypasses for brain. You know, I basically, you know, I was trained in mathematics and physics and astronomy. So I use the power of my brain that's analytical. You know, and I'm a good programmer, computer programmer. So this is not, this is very different. This is grabbing a signal which has everything in it. And being able to catch it very fast and just get a little bit of information and then catch it again. Recall it. You know, that's what we were doing that, you know, five times, six times, ten times until making sure that you don't try to name it. You don't try to put, you know, a description on top of it. It's just stay with the signal. Right. And that I think that's an amazing contribution from what Dr. Putoff and and Targon and some of their subjects did. Was there a specific a specific way that you achieved a state of mind that made you more able to perceive these coordinates or perceive from whatever what signal you're getting from a remote viewing? It was, I had a lot of admiration and love for Ingo for what he was capable of doing and, you know, his, his art in his personality and so on. He was, you know, very much admired in the whole, the whole team. And, and here, I think it was the structure also of the experiment. You know, I, I trusted what he was trying to teach me. I've always opened to it. Yes. You trusted it. So you're open to it. I had, you know, both the admiration and the trust. Did he ask you to put your mind in a specific place? Did there was it, was there a way of counting yourself into an idea? Is not to put my mind into it? You know, it's just to let it, just let it come just because my mind is analytical. Right. Of course. And, you know, I was always very good in math. And, you know, I mean, you have to be if you're going to be an astronomer and then so I can be very structured and so on. This is not structured. This is boom. And then, then you can begin to analyze it, but you have to analyze it, keeping your, your rational mind, you know, away from. So you just have to let the information come to you somehow or another and not try to imagine the information or create the information or see what it is. Right. Just let it happen to you. And so you had seen him do this. And so you, and you knew that this was a valid field of research. So you were just open to it and you just sat down there and tried to let it happen to you. Did it happen any other time that was that resembled the Andes peaks, where that you have that overwhelming feeling of cold and falling? Did you have that feeling with any else? Yes, I had some of that, but this one was, you know, just completely shocking because it was. And I think that's a characteristic of that when you really get it, you know, there is no question. And you know, in the movie pattern, pattern is sent to North Africa because to fight rumble, rumble is there with his tanks and the American army is going to isn't ready to invade Europe, but wants to, to start, you know, controlling the Germans in North Africa. He sent there, he lands. There is a, you know, a lieutenant there with a Jeep that takes him to the place where there was, there was a battle and, you know, Americans were decimated. You know, by rumble was just a genius, you know, German general. Great with tanks, just like he now, pattern considered him as his major, you know, enemy because both of them understood tanks. And so pattern gets in the Jeep. That's in the movie. It's just absolutely perfect. I've checked that this was his historical, you know, exact in the movie. They, they drive to the site of the battle and they get to in the desert in the Jeep. And they get to a fork in the road. And they, you know, the driver takes to the left. And pattern said, son, you know, well, we go to the right because that's where the battle was. And the, the driver says, sir, you know, we will do respect. I mean, I, I was wearing that battle in the left. He said, trust me, go to the right. And they go to the right and they get to the edge of a plateau where you see a big plane. And pattern says, this is where the battle was with a Hannibal came from the left with his edifice, you know, and the battle was there, you know, and, and I had been there. I was there. pattern thought that in his, he was reincarnated from a Roman general who had been at that battle against Hannibal and his edifice. And, you know, the poor driver say, you know, how did this happen? No, how did I get here with, with this general who thinks he's reincarnated, you know, who fought against Hannibal. And they, I've worked with people, as, as you know, run the number of venture capital fields, funds with people who had that kind of intuition, you know, and you think, you think finance is driven by greed and so on. But at some level, greed doesn't really matter. You know, it's, it's getting to the truth of something, especially in venture capital, where you're going to change the way things are done. You know, with these, these gadgets, with computers, with, you know, rockets and so on, you're going to go to a new generation of things. So it hasn't been done before. And the financial people, you've got 10 engineers in front of you who can do it. There is one who'll succeed, nine who's going to fail. And you have to pick, you have to pick the, the thinking that's going to succeed. You know, I mean, it's not, it's not the money. And it's not the technology. It's the mind of the driver who will say, no, let's go to the right. Let's not go to the left. You know, I mean, Patan was extraordinary in that, I mean, he was a remote viewer. He demonstrated that again and again. And there are some interesting books that I've collected from some of, some of his routines, you know, who you would also have to consider. That's an extraordinary state of mind to be a general in a world war. And the consequences of everything you do and what is at stake in this war is got to be a state of mind. It's very, very unusual with so many consequences, it's so much pressure that it probably makes some signals more clear if you have that ability to perceive them because you are, you must be in a heightened state of awareness. Yes. Because just the consequences of your life. Exactly. But you also have to be detached. I mean, you know, eventually he's going to go to the battlefield, the well, the, you know, the bodies of soldiers who have been killed, there are burning tanks and everything else. They show that in the movie. That's where he's supposed to go. Yeah. But, you know, his, his mind is at a different level. And when did they first start researching this? So when did they believe that this was an ability that some people had? Oh, you know, way back in antiquity. Really. Yeah. And, you know, they had seers that the king would go consult whether he, he should engage in war with you know, they had the Greeks said the Pithi, you know, who was a woman who, they had an area of volcanic area where they were fumes coming out of the earth. You know, that was supposed to be one of the doors to the underworld and so on. And there was a special cult around that place. And, you know, the king would go there before great decision and would ask the message from, you know, the underworld or the message from the, from the night of the woman who was interpreting what was coming from the earth. So that has been, you know, regarded as, you know, Hitler, Adolf Hitler was in his, before the war, you know, as when he got to be the leader of Germany, he exhibited and he very much believed in those, those powers. I think he got to the point where he trusted it too much. They're making mistakes and that could be used against him. Because the ego, you know, you have to get the ego out of the way. Right. And it's called St. Sir Harvosting, you know, for us to do, especially to a narcissist, dictator who's on drugs. That's right. Yeah. That's right. Well, that that's the always the age-old problem with Sears, like how do you know who's a charlatan and who's real? Because there's always a bunch of fake psychics. There's fake palm readers, fake tarot card readers, people that are just con artists that are just trying to swindle people out of money. But that doesn't discount the possibility that some people have these bizarre abilities. And that is something that people have sort of recognized forever. But it's always been dismissed, especially in this modern day reduction as culture that likes to only look at things that are, you know, tried, true, proven, agreed upon, you know, and then trust the science like this concept that... Well, I think as, you know, in science, I mean, the burden is on you as a scientist to come up with an experiment that will discriminate between the random things. Right. And, and, you know, we'll give you, it will give you guides to, you know... Well, I think that's what they've done with it telepathy tapes. And I'm hoping the success of this and then they're going to do a whole series on it where they're doing a documentary and they're showing all the footage. So you're going to be able to see it for yourself. I'm hoping that this stops the ridicule because there's a bunch of scientists wouldn't, and I think this is with the UAP topic as well. The UFO topic as well. I think there's a bunch of people that don't want to consider it because there's too much bullshit out there. And there's too much of a possibility that you could look like a fool and to a very respected scientist whose research is very important as we were talking about was with the IBM thing where there's hundreds of millions of dollars that are dedicated towards yeast. Why would you risk all that in the credibility of all that on this nonsense about people seeing things with their brain in a closed room, finding coordinates, pretending they're on top of a mountain, all that kind of stuff? Well, fortunately, you know, certainly in California there are people who can take risk and put the few million dollars behind something. And as you know, I come from France and in France it's very, very hard to do that, because the system is very structured and they can venture on so on. Even though France has had some of the brightest people in that kind of research. So it's just a cultural limitation of the culture. You know, sort of everything has to be rational because America's a little more chaotic. And they also, as you know, France has had for a long time, has had a project on UFOs, a official project. And that takes reports from the public and they investigate them. And it's a very small team, but they have access to all the resources of French research so they can get the weather people, they can get the, you know, the Air Force, they can get the radar people, they can get all of that. So they can tap into the resources of a lot of different departments of the government. So it's very powerful. So they will explain, they find a rational explanation for about 95% of all the reports, which is true. I agree with that. I've been there. So it's about 95%, you can explain it. It's not hoaxes. Those are people who really think that they've seen something unusual. But what was unusual to them may have been the moon rising through the fog and it looks like an elongated disk. And then after a while it's things changed and so on. And then they there's a few things. They really think they've seen a flying saucer coming over. There are about 200 or 250 possible physical things that really could surprise you, that are unusual, that would create conditions under which a normal person would think that they are in the presence of a UFO. Then, you know, what's in our thing is the other 5%. The other 5% is annual face. You know, I have reports of something that moved like the tick-tack, from the French Air Force in the 50s. It was a French jet over Morocco that was flying and there was a radar tracking the jet. And I had the reports from the French Air Force with the chart. And that the thing he was chasing went up, you know, in the fraction of a second went to the top of the atmosphere, just like the Nimitz case. So those things are not new. I mean, they are in the funds if you take the trouble to look at the facts. And they're in the files far back enough in history that it's impossible to imagine human technology achieving these things. Absolutely. Especially in the 50s. Right. Well, the can of the normal case has gone into space. Yeah. There's a bunch of cases that rule out the possibility of human technology. When you're talking about people using propeller planes and seeing these things, we were at a time technologically worth. It's not possible to imagine that someone had gone that far beyond us. Now we are in that time where you see things you go, well, how much of that is some sort of top-secret government program, some military program, and they have drones that can move it extraordinary speeds with some undisclosed propulsion system. That's possible today, at least theoretically. It's, you know, we entertain those ideas. But back then, this is one of the most fascinating things I told you last night that I consumed three of your books in the last six months. And there was this series of three that you did that had a bunch of different encounters, not just right now I'm on the invisible college, but the last ones that I read were the ones on various contacts that people have had and the similarity of these stories, they go way back way back way back before it was sort of a cultural artifact. Like right now, I think in people's minds, the gray aliens are so iconic, a flying saucer like that. That's a copy of the sport model from Bob Lazar's adventures. These things are in pop culture to the point where you almost would expect to see them. You know, you look for them. If you see something, you could imagine that you could twist it up in your mind and make it like that. But the problem is these stories go way before that. They're too similar. They go a long, long way back, and there's too many that are very, very similar to what we're talking about today, to the point where a rational person would have to say, maybe there's something more to this. What do you got there? I brought you this, it's a token. It's not a coin. It's a token from Burgundy in France, from the few centuries ago. The Duke of Burgundy was under attack. There was a lot of turmoil in French politics and the king was fighting the noble, the great nobility and so on, was in kahoots to get rid of the king and so on. They were going to be attacked. He needed money to raise an army and he appealed to people in Burgundy to send him money. This was a token that the king, the Duke, would give people who had given him money to raise this army. On the face of it is this disc that's protecting the land from forces above. There are all these arrows raining down on the land and the land is protected by this flying disc. It doesn't mean that they had seen the flying saucer at that time. But the idea has always been there of disc-like objects that were not meteors, that were not all the mutual explanation, that were real disc. You find that in legends. You find that in history way back. You see you can find an image of this. You found it? Yeah, that's it. Yeah. Yes. Wow. It's protecting the land and it's hovering in the sky, protecting it from all the thunder clouds above. Well, there were a few of those things in history. As you know, I've collected those with a group of... Couldn't that be interpreted as a shield? Well, it is shown as a shield that's going to stop all those arrows. But that's what they use to stop arrows back, then they use the shield. Yes. So that doesn't just make... I mean, that doesn't seem to me to be a UFO. It seems to me to be a shield that they would protect. Yes, but it's also... It's not exactly the shape of a shield. My most shields are more oblong, but some of them are round. But the point is it's hovering in the sky, protecting the land underneath them. Mm. Wow. And I think some of the more compelling stuff is like the stuff in the ancient Hindu scripts, the V-monners and all these different flying crafts that people described, that they've always been a thing that people have described. And we've been able to trace it to actual investigations or actual records, because of course, when people described something like that, especially there was some sort of being associated with it, you know, it could be the devil, it could be like... Right, right. So they had to see a priest and confess and... You know, they were in trouble. If you reported that thing most of the time you'd be in trouble, right, it couldn't be a normal thing. So today they just fire you for whatever you work, because they're probably a great neighbor. Maybe you're a cook and then stop these. They don't burn you alive anymore. And people... Yeah, that's lucky. But people do have a fear, a legitimate fear, of being ridiculed, and that could stop their ability to be promoted within whatever organization they're in. You don't want to think, oh, there's Cookie Bob over there, who thinks the aliens are watching us. The best cases I get are from executives in Silicon Valley, whose family has seen something or who have seen something. And they've described, you know, frankly, U.S. folks to me. And... There's another one. They can't get later. So that looks way different. So that coin is much more compelling, because that looks like something flying the sky above the city. That doesn't look very shield at all. And what is that peak at the bottom of it? Oh, it's the same thing. Whatever. Yeah, that's very different. You can tell much more. Those things have been in the culture. Yeah, now they can start off repressed in the culture. And the other part of the project is don't want to look at that. You know, they don't look at that. But then there's a really old painting, like a biblical painting of these people that look like they're flying around and like seated in these crafts. Yeah. They're in the sky. I've never seen any sort of a conventional explanation of what is that artist depicting. So usually the explanation when you read whether historians have said, it's supposed to be some god or some higher level entity that's coming to protect people and so on. But when you look at the detail, I mean, it really looks like a machine. It really looks mechanical. See, you can find that image, Jamie. Do you know the one on Proxamels? Can I ask this one? Yeah, that's exactly. But we will be like the one on the lower right. Well, both of them. But the lower are like, what is that? That looks like a craft. It looks like someone's seated in a craft. It's an, you know, an envoy from God or an angel who's been sent. But the problem with those is that the painting, it may relate to something that was written in the third century. The painting is a 16th century painting. Right. So we didn't look at that much. I mean, it's interesting from a like the one with the Virgin, with the, you know, so it may be that the, the artist was witness to something and he wanted to memorialize it and he put it in his painting. But it's not tied to the time of the Virgin. You know, right, right. They just added it in there. Can't, so that's supposed to be in the back. We stayed away. to the time of the version. Right, right. They just added it in there. They can't show that. It must have been the back. We stayed away from that. We wanted to go to records of somebody having actually testified that he saw something, or she saw something. Right, not just artwork. But it just is very bizarre that this artwork continually depicts people in crafts. And look, what is that thing? Yeah. And there is a communication with the man who's looking up at it. He's looking at it. And there is a sense of that he's actually seeing it having a sense of what it is. It's like an easter egg that someone put into the painting. So this is very strange that the artists put that in as a side, of course, the main theme is the version of the child. What's that one over there, Jamie, in the second row that says, inside ancient, you had that one. What the hell is that? That's what really freaks me out is the paintings, on cave walls that look just like greys. These bizarre paintings of things that just look like they are people wearing helmets. And the most interesting to me come from the Sahara. Friends were anthropologists who worked with the UN in Africa and so on, and in part of the Sahara. And one theory they have is that the culture that eventually they moved to Egypt came from the Sahara. So I say, well, Sahara is just sand. Well, it's just sand today. But we know that at one time it was flourishing. They were forests. There was water. In fact, there is water, but it's underground water. It's a large amount of underground water. There was a sea there at one time. And so there probably was a near-ear civilization. And some of those come from the Tassili. The Tassili is a region in the Sahara, where there are a lot of those representations. So there were a lot of people living there at one time, and they painted that on the rocks. See if you can find some of those, Jamie? Yeah. And then you see similar things that indigenous people in Australia have painted. Similar things. It's all over the world. Yes. And completely separate environments, very similar features in these cave paintings. And I think archaeologists wouldn't disagree with that, I think. They would say, but the problem is that we don't correlate it. I mean, they didn't write anything. Right. It's open to interpretation. We don't have a good correlation. So we have to keep looking for that. But that's fascinating. But in our book, we made the rule that, number one, we don't want isolated human figures, even with suits. And so we really want a device, a flying device. Otherwise, you could feel 40 books with images of strange creatures. Right. I mean, what are the things that people see in around the ranch now in Utah? Yes. I was on a high in all of that. So have to be careful on the boundaries of those things. But we wanted to get to a place where there was testimony about somebody seeing a flying desk that was strange to them in their culture. And remember, in those cultures, those were agricultural cultures. So with people who were used to interpreting the weather, looking at the faces of the moon, looking at the rising time of the sun, and all that was important for their agriculture. So they knew their environment very well. Better than we do as people living in cities. So we can take that to some extent that has a scientific value, especially when you can build a model of a number of those across different centuries. But in that book, we were careful to break the book into sections corresponding to a different evolution of the culture, explaining first a couple of pages what was happening during that time in terms of new inventions. Like when the telescope was invented, when certain things were discovered and so on. So we were careful to put it in context with every reinterpreting the description by the witness in the context that was appropriate. Well, it was very thorough and very objective, which is what I really enjoyed about it, where you were very clear what we absolutely knew and very clear what could be nonsense and myth and that one of the things that keeps occurring over and over again is these similar stories. The stories are really similar from the 1700s to the 1800s into the 20th century. And then again, now it gets more muddy because now you have a bunch of people that realize that there's value in concocting a story and then talking about it and selling a book. And I think there's people that are grifters. And I think they probably had a few of them on. They are capitalizing on this desire that people have for stories. Also now we think that the government has the answer. Yeah, so people spend their time writing to different agencies and listening or listening to reports from pirates, which is fine, of course. And people in the military, people in the intelligence community, but those are very valuable because they have now they have instruments to actually measure what they see on the F18 and so on. And they are covered by radar and by AWACs and everything else. So we can rely on that. So scientists and many people like the numerical aspect of it. I don't do that. I mean, I don't pretend to have access to that. I mean, we had access under Bigelow, and under Bass to some of that, including some of the classified things that had happened. But there is a much richer pool of data which is, a friend tells me about the sighting in the country somewhere. I can go there, I can go see the people. And I can find out exactly what happened. And I continue to do that. And that's most of my data. And it's 10 times bigger than the stuff they talk about from the Pentagon. I mean, it's real data from that. I don't need to have a clearance to go see the people and sit down. If I'm lucky, they'll invite me for lunch. And I can talk to the kids. I can talk to the wife. I can talk to the people who took care of the cattle and they'll tell me. And that's where most of my information is really coming from. And it's not, it's just very much in your face. And it's consistent. How consistent are the shapes of the craft? It's a tough question. You know, many of the descriptions have to do with disks. And exist for different sizes. Some of them are very large. Some, a number of descriptions have to do with, for a long time with cigar-shaped objects. cylindrical and rounded at the end. Sometimes with what people describe as windows, that may just be openings with light. You know, in the side of it, doesn't have to be what we think of as a window. And then you have some irregular shapes, you know, just bowls of light. That physicist interpret as maybe plasma, but plasma doesn't survive in the air. More than a minute maybe, but people have seen some of those things for minutes and longer, long enough to take pictures of it and it's not necessarily glowing. It's not necessarily luminous. The way, you know, plasma would be. So we don't know where they are. And they've been reported all over the world. Again, there are paintings of that kind of thing from the 18th century or the 17th century. So that I've collected and published. So what are the most compelling paintings? What are the most compelling paintings that we could, it's find right now from like 1700s or 1800s? I think there is a beautiful painting of hills and three blue spheres that are not moving, that seem to be suspended in the air, very distinct blue spheres that were seen and somebody, you know, recorded it and somebody did the painting of the scene. Those are things that people wanted to remember because they knew it was- And what year was this painting from? I don't remember the year. I couldn't tell you. But it's a very old painting. 16th, 17th century. Do you know the name of it? Like, so Jamie could try to find it online? No, I could send you the picture. Okay. Okay. So there's also a bunch of depictions of egg shaped crafts. Yes. This is very common as well, right? Yes. And the couple that you had in one of your books from, was it the mining people? From, was it California or was it you? Was it the modern? Yeah. wrote a book, The Shape of Power, Horace called Trinity about a next shaped object that happened 1945 near White Sands. That, and now we have re-investigated it. The first book was criticized and, you know, appropriately by someone who said, I hadn't gone too enough of the written records. Well, now we've done that. So we've re-published the book. It's called Trinity. And it covers three cases. In all three cases, the object is x-shaped, the size of a medium sized truck. It would fit in this room. No, it would be about the size of this room. Then there is a case in Socorro, and there is a case in Valenzol. Socorro and Valenzol, and people have concentrated on the first one. You know, they won that because it's two years before Roswell. And there were witnesses there. You know, it was where there were no witnesses or people who came later who found the stuff and they reconstructed the story and it's a very interesting story. But at Trinity they saw it arrive and they saw it crash. And they were there for 10 days afterwards watching the recovery. So we, and they went inside. I don't know, one of them went inside. And his father went inside also. So we have a very rich description of that. And where is it in the literature? No way. I mean, you know, Paola Harris found this, did research for four years on that. And then told me about it. And then we did another four years of research together at the site. And we found a lot of correlations. But there are the Socorro case and the Valenzol case. Could you explain to me before we move on to those other cases? What correlations did you find? Well, in all three cases, it's an egg-shaped object. In all three cases are traces that could be seen, could be described, could be analyzed. In all three cases, the beings are short. They are, you know, about three feet, three and a half feet. They breathe air. I don't know what kind of extra tries to trace to your lizard that comes here and breathes the air. Okay, we don't go, if we go to the moon, we're not going to breathe the air. How do we know that it breathes at all? How do we know that these things breathe at all? Just think it's the... They have no breathing. Right. How do we even know them generally? No, no, no. Biological. They head to eyes. The small nose. Small mouth. But couldn't they possibly be some sort of a creation? Instead of being a biological entity, couldn't they be some sort of artificial life? So I've asked Gary Nolan about that. Yeah, I'm not a biologist. And I think it would be known if somebody had created a NATO human. I don't mean somebody. I mean, another life war somewhere else. There were stories of the Russians actually thinking about creating a dwarf, you know, human to pilot their ships because they didn't expect to have the energy, you know, to have a big rocket. So now they found a total of... Also they were trying to get tiny, so they could get the power of their ships because they were lighter. But the CIA was looking into rumors that the Russians in the 50s, you know, before Sputnik, that the Russians were trying to create a... a humanoid that could pilot of Sputnik. Well, I know that the Russians, there were some talk of them trying to create a human, a hybrid. They were trying to do something with chimpanzees and try to create some sort of a human, chimpanzee hybrid for war, which is a terrifying thought that they would... First of all, if they were successful, how terrifying would that be? But just that they were interested in doing that, creating a race of chimpanzee human warriors. There was no... To my knowledge, there hasn't been any correlation of that. And the creatures that are described in Socorro in New Mexico and in Valenzuel in France. So those are three cases that I've been very involved in from the beginning, from day one. Involve creatures that are about three feet tall, that breathe our air, recognize our signals, communicate with us in funny ways, even mentally, I mean, the witnesses describe getting images in their minds and so on, in all three cases. And what's interesting is people can argue about Trinity all they want, that they argue about was well. But the case in Socorro and the case in France, in Valenzuel, were investigated by governments, not by the local UFO group, although the local UFO group did a good job in all those cases. But they were in Socorro, it was first day, the local police, local policemen, saw the craft and the beans and described what happened. He was terrified, you know, when the thing took off. He thought it was something to do with some new gadget or some work in the desert. It's an area that's still in the same state today. I've gone back there with Dr. Heineggson, you know, with Paul Heinegg a few months ago. I've gone several times there. And so after the police turned out the FBI was in town on another case. They had no jurisdiction in New Mexico for that particular case. It wasn't a federal case. But they helped preserve the traces, you know, the FBI way. And the local police was happy to have them there. And then there was the state police came in and they did an investigation. And then people from the base, you know, came in with experts in explosives, experts in recovery of weapons and rockets and so on. Because they felt it might be something that had come from, you know, from the Trinity range that was out of its way and had crashed New Socorro, in which case they might have responsibility including financial responsibility, if something was destroyed or whatever. So this was very serious. I have the whole fight. Okay, so big fight. Nobody's looking at it. I mean, the investigation in Washington now, they're saying we're going to look at the cases of the last 12 months. Well, what kind of science is that? Can you imagine scientists reading this? And this is where they are going to solve the UFO problem by looking at vague pictures of lights in the sky for one year. You know, while they go back to those records, those are federal records. Okay, the case in Valenzero, five agencies of the French government. So this guy was a farmer. He had a field where he was growing plans for to make perfume. So this was high level, you know, expensive crop. This wasn't just, you know, a profile or something. And he goes there at five o'clock in the morning because, you know, he wants to do some, to water the thing and so on before the sun is up because it's going to be very, it's a self of France. It's going to be very hot. You can't work in the field during the afternoon. So he wants to be done with that. He sees this contraption, you know, in the middle of the field crushing the, you know, the plants. And so he sneaks in and he's paralyzed. Okay. Now there is an egg shaped object just like they won, you know, at Trinity, just like they won in Socorro. It's a size of a midsize truck. There are two creatures in front of it. Human, you know, human looking, two eyes, breathing air. They look at him sort of amused. And one of them has something on his belt. It takes out points pointed at him and that's when he's paralyzed. Now he's not, you know, as you know, I'm not a doctor but I've gone to doctors about what kind of paralysis is that where you can stand up and watch something, you just can't move. They said, well, there is a type of paralysis that will just inhibit the motor, you know, a motor nurse where you, but you'll still be up and aware. You're not going to fall down, you know, in a heap. And from there he sees them going back inside the thing, the thing takes off. It takes off like a shutout of a gun, it vanishes in me there. Now he goes to see the jandams. This man is fairly wealthy. He owns quite a bit of, you know, several fields, expensive crops. His wife is the mayor of the town. The jandams are going to be very careful with him because he's also from the resistance in World War II when he was young, he joined the resistance and the resistance in that part of France fought in the Alps against the Germans. And, you know, they were regarded as heroes of World War II. And so the jandams are very careful with him. There are some things he's not going to tell the jandams because he thinks, and I went there, he didn't want to talk to anybody from Paris, he didn't want to be on TV. He wanted to concentrate on his experience because he thought there was going to be something else. And he was aware of some of his buddies. This is a battle of France where people talk but they have secrets too. I mean, historically, you know, there are things like that in the US, you know, bouts where people are not going to talk to strangers. The only reason I could go there was that I was, I went there with the lady who was from Paris, was from with the government. He was with the gold government. She had the rank of ambassador and she had vacation home there. So we went there for three days and she knew everybody there. And he told us what he thought might happen again. And so he didn't want to show down. Why did he stand with what he was doing? Why did he think that something was going to happen again? They, evidently, and you know, he swars to secrecy about what it was, but evidently there was communication with the beings when he was there. And so these beings just tiny look like people, did they have different features than us? Or was it just you? They are just like the ones at Trinity and like the ones at Socorro. So in that book you have actually two, two and three, you have seven creatures that are humanoid, that breathe our air, that seem to understand us, you know, the visual, you know, there is visual contact. Well, we can have visual contact with animals. I mean, that doesn't mean they are human or mid-air human, but there is messages that come through all of that, that the witnesses are reluctant to talk about in all three cases. So in Socorro, finally, the air force went there. They threw the air force out because the air force said, well, you know, that's just a gadget and from the base. That was stupid. So they finally sent Dr. Heineck there. And Dr. Heineck asked me to organize the files that were coming. I wasn't North-Wreston at the time, you know, working working, that my PhD already and I was on the staff of the Computing Center and we had a small team trying to help, you know, free, trying to help Heineck keep the files together. So we were, you know, in communication with him the whole time and then I put the files together and I have the file, you know, this is the official file. So these people were reluctant to talk about what these creatures were communicating with them. But did they talk about it at all? It was, it was very personal. Very personal. Yeah. There had been a communication that transcended their life. There was something else, something outside. So you could almost call it sort of a religious feeling but it wasn't about the dignity or God specifically, but it was about this, you know, the other side of life. And some, a big meaning for life. That's their interpretation. It may not be, there may be other things that they are trying to communicate. But it was very profound. Yes. But in all three cases had similar stories in that regard. And in all three cases, there are trail traces that were measured. There are, you know, there is technology of sorts. And in the case of Socorro, people came up with all kinds of ideas that maybe it was a balloon. You know, I mean, special or special balloon, right? They were only 12 of them in the world and so on. Well, in the book, people haven't noticed it. But in the book, I was able to solve that problem because I found a transcript of a conversation with a man who was head of a multiple at the, on the, you know, army range in, at White Sands. And he had given his team some instructions on, you know, how to make sure that the motor pool was working really well because White Sands is so big when people went home, they could get lost, you know, at White Sands. And then how are you going to find them? I mean, there are tracks, but there is no paved road at the time. How are you going to, you know, find them? So you can launch a helicopter the next day looking for, you know, a lost car somewhere with a family in it. But so he made rules that they had to call periodically to repolt where they were when they went home, you know, 50 miles away across the desert. So, so they could find them if there was something wrong with the car. He's driving home with his family. This is after the so-called thing is done, you know, they are all interrogating. Lonnie Zamora, the cop, who was driving that thing. And he sees a light over the mountains in the southwest towards Mexico. But it's still, you know, it's still in New Mexico, but it's in that direction. mountains in the southwest towards Mexico, but it's still in New Mexico, but it's in that direction. Life is not the star, it's really bright. And the light gets brighter and brighter, and his car dies. Now he's head of a motor pool for the base. Everybody reports to him, and they have all the army cars and trucks and everything else, the half tracks. So he looks at that thing, he tries to call his team, the radio doesn't work, radio should work, radio doesn't work. And the thing gets very bright, and then it recedes, it goes away, apparently it came in. We don't know if it came in or if it just got bright. Okay, the car starts, he goes home, and then the next day he goes to his shop. He gets his staff together, he says, you guys are going to take this car apart. I want to see every screw and every piece of it, and every level and everything, and the seats and so on, I want to see all of that on the floor. And you're going to test it, and you're going to tell me what's changed or if anything, how that car stopped in the middle of a desert. And they couldn't find anything. And that report was an official report, okay, that was never published. And it nails the whole thing, you know, that this was not a balloon, this was not an hallucination, the patrolman wasn't drunk, like they accused him of, or making up a story and so on. The lanyz Amor, Dr. Hainek interrogated him, he said he wanted to talk to a priest and confess to a priest before he would talk to Dr. Hainek, okay. That's the kind of man he was. And they essentially destroyed this guy because they thought it was, you know, bad reputation for the town of Socorro, the tourists wouldn't come there because I'd be afraid of strange things flying. And therefore said, well, it's a one witness case, you know, there's a patrolman who saw this. There were 12 witnesses. There was a guy who was driving on the main road, the same road where the patrolman had been driving, who the thing passed right over his car. He thought he was going to be driven off the road by this big, old old thing that just went right over the roof of the car into the desert. Well, he called the, he called the police and reported it, there's a written report. He signed that report. We know his name. They were without him having any knowledge of what happened. That's right. I mean, he saw this some independently. You know, one of your gadgets trying to drive me off the road. There were several people on the road on the other side of this little desert thing that's, you know, when it rains, the water, rains all over the place. Why, why she's everything out, just sand and rocks. But on the other side, there is a main road. Several people on the road saw the thing take off and reported it because it was just so strange. So the air force put that aside. They neglected to, you know, this was, and they just kept saying it was a one witness case. It wasn't. Most of those cases where they say it was one witness and you have to look at the, you have to look for the other guys. And again, you know, I brought you something. Can I tell you what? Sure. So this is something that the case was so interesting that Dr Nolan and I and a couple of friends brought it up and published it in the prime astronautics review in the world. Okay. It's so after took a couple of years for them to agree to look at it and so on to look at the analysis. This happened in the suburb of Omaha, Nebraska, but on the Iowa side, there is a town this suburb with a park. This is about a week before Christmas in 1977. Okay. People are there having a good time in the park in the evening. It's getting, you know, it's getting dark and I want to make sure I'm, yeah. They see something in the sky that looks like one of those boxes there. You know, it looks like a round box with lights around it and the lights are going, are going around sort of, and it's pretty high and it's flying over the town. And then a mass of steel, liquid steel, falls in the park. It falls on the levee in the park. There is about half a ton of it. Liquid glowing has nothing, no business being there. So you have this mass of metal. Obviously they call the low and you say it's molten. Yes. Whether it's freezing, we know the temperature and everything else. It's freezing. The grass is on fire around it. They call the farm and the farm and call the police. The police gets there and the farm and get there. They stop the fire. The fire is, I know, they would have died by itself. There's no problem there. They take pictures of the thing glowing. I have the pictures. Infrared, you know, tolerate pictures of the thing glowing in the grass, burning. I mean, liquid. And it's going to still liquid for a couple of hours and it cools down gradually. And then people take pieces of it as souvenirs. So I have the pieces of it and there they are. Now, there was analysis done by two labs. Obviously the question is, well, where did that come from? I mean, and there is chromium, titanium, and iron, which you can find in ordinary steel. But this isn't really the composition isn't exactly what you'd expect industrial steel to be. So one of the chemical analyses is done at the lab for industrial steel. The investigators call the company. The company says, yes, we make no steel. So we have furnaces, but we empty the furnaces. This is over a weekend. The factory is closed. There would be nobody there. And so they know liquid, no liquid steel in no factory on the half of it. There's a half a ton that they found sitting there. So then they call the strategic air command because a B52 is fly over that down. B52 is a big thing. And people saw something in the sky. So maybe it was the air force, politely, laughs at them and says, you know, we carry out on bombs. We don't carry furnaces with molten steel. Okay. So go look somewhere else and say good luck. By the way, this is the way you could test if this is the way. I mean, the air force, we think people think number one, there is nothing in the blue book files worth looking at. That's not true. I spent four years. Dr. Heineken copies of all the the files were not classified. There were a few random cases that were classified for other reasons, not because of the UFO, because of where it was or so whatever. That I didn't have access to. I was just a graduate student, you know, or PhD. I went through, we convinced Dr. Heineken, I convinced the air force to do a computer file of everything they had about UFOs, because before then it was just paper files all over the place. And if they were challenged by Carl Sagan or somebody like that at the time, they wouldn't be able to provide good statistics. So they agreed for me to get the files and redo, punch them into punch cards, take it to a computer, redo the statistics, looking at their explanation and then my explanation for the cases. I did the whole thing, thousands and thousands of cases. They were right that majority were explainable. But we were looking for where they once said, well not explainable, this one cannot be explained. And there are enough of those hundreds of those that scientists could have looked at. No, I went through the air force base with my French passport. At the time I wasn't a citizen. You had to wait five years before you could apply for American citizenship. So I had a small contract that was completely unclassified to recalibrate the statistics of the blubuk file. So I access to essentially all the blubuk files. But I went into the base with clearance for three days with Dr. Heineck to go to the division that was looking at the UFOs and spend those three days with Major Quintanilla and his staff going through the files. They had lots of remains of things and stones and strange metals and so on, which at the end of the project all that was thrown away. So everything is going on now. This is for you, but your special collection. This is essentially still. There we go. So that's the area where the mass is growing. And so this steel you can make on earth. This is a composite of a project. It's not exactly the steel that you would use in construction, but it is essentially steel. And so I gave my samples to Stanford so that we could redo the analysis and not the chemical analysis, but the isotope analysis. So Dr. Nolan and I took it to the lab. Dr. Nolan had two series of instruments that could do the analysis. We did both and we confirmed essentially this. So there was no special change in the isotope ratios. If there was, that would indicate that somebody had manipulated the isotopes, which is not the hoax. Then you know, for sure, it's not a hoax because that's that's high caliber scientific laboratory work. And you need special instrument experts to interpret it. But that wasn't the case. So the isotopes hadn't been manipulated. Have they found, because I've heard this about Gary Nolan in particular, that they do have samples of things that they can't explain. So I gave him essentially all my samples, all the ones that I could relate to reliable cases. Because I don't want to give him junk. Yeah, there's a lot of junk floating around that people think it's strange. And so yes, we're going through all those, you know, and the idea is to publish it as we go, to publish everything as we go. Now some that give the indication of being, but you know, as always in science, we have to be careful how colleagues will say very good, you know, congratulations. You did that with one instrument. Now you should redo it with a different lab with a different machine and see what they find because Dr. Nolan has some of those machines or machines that he's invented at Stanford. But they are tied to biology. I mean, this is not a biology. This is steel. And this is iron or copper or whatever. So we have to redo it with a different. So in this case, we have redone it with a different line of machines. There is a French machine that costs something like $6 million, feel, till half of this room, that's extremely good for testing for isotopes, but only on four different elements. With the other machine, the biological machine, we get the whole spectrum. So except for the, for some of the extreme elements, radioactive elements and so on. So what samples have they found that have been the most compelling? We're still working on that, you know, but this paper is important, even though we didn't find something out of range, but that's in a way that's validation of what you have to do when somebody presents you with that kind of sample. Those are the steps. This is why the science is today. This is what the technology can tell you. So this is sort of the stake in the ground, even though we didn't find ET, okay? But we didn't find ET science. We've found physical evidence. But we've got the technology now. We know how to do it. One problem we had was that neither one of us is an expert in materials, well, not experts in steel. So the people who this was reviewed by people who were materials experts and they came back with a whole page of questions. I didn't you look at this, why didn't you measure that? So Dr Nolan, the team had to redo about a year of work before they would accept the paper. So that's what you have to go through before scientists will look at it, okay? But this one, you know, is in the literature, in the scientific literature. It's not in some UFO magazine in New Mexico. And we can now we have the methodology we can apply to the others. There's some that we've done with one machine where there are indications. Now at Stanford, it's funny because you've had three generations of people at Stanford looking at this. You know, before Dr Nolan, I was there and I was gathering data and I was using the computer to do statistics and so on. And I worked for Professor Sturak who unfortunately died a few months ago at over 100, but he was still working in astrophysics. And, you know, I was on this astrophysics staff for a couple of years looking at galaxies looking at the structure of a sun and looking at at some types of strange stars and had special emissions and so on. So I was a computer guy and we also looked at, you know, UFO materials, especially a case from Brazil, which he published and he got financial support to do the isotope analysis. And some of it was arguably different. So we want to redo it. I, you know, when he donated all his materials to me, you know, when he retired. So I have all that and I passed it to Dr Nolan. So Stanford now has a, he's acquiring reputation as being a UFO analysis place. Yeah, for sure. About they went from essentially solar physics and very high energy physics, you know, that I was working on with Dr Sturak to me with a computing center now with Dr Nolan in the medical school. So we've had, you know, they are, you know, well, trouble willing to do that. I had heard that there was some alloy that was very difficult to comprehend that someone would be able to construct that it would cost billions of dollars to make this particular type of alloy that they discovered something along those lines. Well, there are, I've seen those books. I've heard those things on the internet. Yeah. The question is, you know, scientists will want to look at this. They want to know, well, how did you do it? How did you prepare the sample? Right. We were given access to a sample that that in fact is very strange and it has different colors on it. It fits in the palm of your hand, you know, so it's a significant size. Remember, Dr Nolan is looking at individual human cells, you know, with these devices. Okay. So, you know, anything more than 10 grams, you know, we don't need, I mean, we can work with very little material, although of course we want to do different things with different parts of it. But that this thing had some very interesting in-crestation of some, a red deposit. And all the people who had looked at it, including some official labs and some signed disclaimers saying they would not scrape off the interesting deposits that were on it. Well, all of them did. You know, I mean, after signing the thing. My good time, it came to me. Most of the interesting red stuff had been scraped off. So I don't know what they did. You know, so, and I don't know what machine they used and they didn't publish the paper. It took us four years to publish this paper. Okay. The paper came from Stanford with, you know, PhDs, four PhDs writing it. So, that's, you know, the bow is pretty high. You're trying to actually publish this in an international review. Yeah. And with an interesting title too. So we'll do others, you know, that's, that's a plan. If people want to find this, it says, improve instrumental techniques, including isotope analysis, applicable to the characterization of unusual materials with potential relevance to aerospace forensics. Yeah, he doesn't talk about UFOs. That's a very tricky way. Well, relevance to aerospace forensics. People read between the lines. Yeah. What do you mean? Aerospace. Who's aerospace stuff? This, so this is the question if these, if these encounters happened, this egg-shaped craft was real. And if these small people like things that breathe air did communicate with people, where are they from? Is this something that has always been here? Is this something that visits here? Is it something that is here? So in the, the Bass project of Mr. Bigelow that was funded by the Defense Intelligence Agency, we had a template of things that they, the Pentagon wanted to have. And it said, you know, trajectory, composition, luminosity, radiation, and so on. Well, yeah, those are the things that you'd need if you were looking at a Russian aircraft, or you were looking at, you know, the limits, thing, whatever it was. But, you know, is that really relevant? I mean, in science, you don't start from the conclusions. You're going to look at this. I mean, this is not something you've seen before, and you go on from that. You know, in the Nimitz case, we've all seen those photographs, and they are, I've stopped counting how many papers are from the New York Times, on down with the picture of, you know, the photograph of the, that the, the F-18 was taking, the pilot took from, from the thing. Well, nobody mentions that this isn't a photograph. People think it's a photograph. So in the file, there is a memo from the folks at Raytheon. Raytheon makes the device. She's a big, a big thing that you hang under the wing of an F-18. That's going to take these images. It's an image. It's not a photograph. It's looking at, into the infrared. It's not looking at the details, you know, there is a number painted on the thing. It's not going to say it's looking at the heat. So when this was published by the New York Times, there was a very interesting memo with a little touch of humor from Raytheon to the Navy saying, you know those things you've published and, you know, it was taken with one of the devices that we sold you to put under the wing of your aircraft. It's not a camera, it's not a photographic camera. You gave us specifications for what you wanted us to build and that's what we gave you. You wanted something that could measure the temperature of the exhaust of an enemy aircraft that you're going to shoot down. You know, the F-18 goes behind that Russian thing, a meg or whatever and the camera is painting the exhaust from the Russian guy so that you can distinguish between, you know, American Airlines 723 and a meg. That's going to help you discriminate what kind of enemy you've got. You know, is it friend or foe? First, if it's friend, you peel off and that's right. If it's an enemy, you're going to engage the guy. Okay. That's what we gave you. You didn't tell us you wanted a device to track flying sources because we don't know what flying sources are. If you do, you know, we'll build one. And that, that, that, that memory is just so funny. You know, it's an official, you know, I make it a little bit funnier than it was, but it's an official memory when it's very straightforward. Jim, you see if you could find a good photograph, excuse me, an image of the infrared image that was taken by those F-18s. You have an image of their heat source? Yes. Of that tiktak. And then they also got the video representation, the video of the thing taking off at some extreme rate of speed. That's it right there. So that's the, that's the image, right? Yeah. Well, the, the radar said that it took off and popped up somewhere else. And so we, we accept that at face value because it's in the New York Times and that's, that may be true. In my work in, in venture capital, you know, I've looked at all kinds of technology that's around. And so I go to technology meetings. Those are open. They're not secret or anything. And people talk about their, their gadget or their device. They are looking for many, you know, to make in, in, in larger quality. So I found myself in a conversation with a guy from one of the aircraft companies in southern, southern California. And I asked him, you know, there is, there is a device that has a funny name like this pro or something like that. And it's, it measures the, it either requires the, the radar signals. It, I think it's a this, the SPR, you know, for the radar. And that, that gadget I never heard of it. And it's actually not classified. Now, it was developed initially so that you could analyze radar data that was coming to you. If somebody was painting your aircraft on the radar, you could detect the characteristics of the radar pulse. Why would you want to do that? Well, you want to do that because it, and it, I said, well, what does it look like? You know, I said, classify, you said, no, it's not classified. You know, many airplanes, civilian airplanes can carry it. You put it in the nose of your pipe or cab or whatever. And you fly around Los Angeles and it will acquire the characteristics of all the radars in the Los Angeles area digitally. It's a digital thing. It's a computer system that requires radar data. And then it feeds back radar characteristics of any air. that requires radar data. And then it feeds back radar characteristics of any aircraft you want somewhere else. So if you want your public app to look like a B5220 miles away, you turn on, I mean, I'm making it a little bit simple. But you program the thing, and you can redirect the defense, the air defense, for example, to another place. So you can send a signal to another place that makes it look like there's a B52 there. Yes. I'll make it look like you've disappeared in me there, and reappeared somewhere else. Digitly. It's a digital radar feedback device that, once you know the characteristics of the radar that are painting you, you can, I mean, obviously, suppose you want to travel to Moscow over the iron curtain without being shut down by the Soviet air force. You'd want to redirect all the radar. So I mean, you're on 20 rados. Right. One of the things that they said about the Tiktok was that when they encountered it, it was somehow another blocking their detection signals. Well, you know, I don't know that this, they're from, I don't know how far it's gotten in the last 30 years. Right. The guy was talking to, was telling me about technology of 30 years ago. Wow. That blew my mind. I didn't know you could do that. Right. I didn't know until just now. You could just paint. So that's, I'm not sure where the technology is and who is cleared for that. Pilots are cleared for certain things, obviously, for all very equipment on board. They are not necessarily cleared for. So you have to ask, in the case of an image, what currencies did these pilots we see on TV, what currencies did they have? Did they have the electronic countermeasure clearance that built this LA habit? I mean, some of them didn't have the camera. Some of those were on TV today talking about these images. They, the image didn't come from them. It came from one of their buddies. Right. You know, it came afterwards. There's also the question of where they take place. So how far they take place? This, I've always questioned where they take place because they take place in the same areas where the United States always runs military training exercises. They take place off of San Diego, off of the East Coast, all these areas where we know that they run exercises all the time, restricted airspace. If you were gonna test equipment. I think this was an international waters. Yes. Yeah, it was. But it was still off the coast of San Diego where they do these things, which is why the fighter pilots were restricted. I mean, the Russians could fly there. Right, not that area, but isn't the area of the East Coast for some of those things restricted? I don't know. Okay. There's no longer no longer no longer. There's no longer no longer. This was restricted. Says China's electronic war gadget turned small drones into flying stadium on radar. So this is what I heard from him. January of this year, and then I'll show you something else I found from there. Also they can make it look like flying saucer. So an iPad can make it look like as big as the sports. Whoa. Look at this. Similar to a giant flying saucer, suddenly materializing in mid air would be reminiscent of a scene from the science fiction film. But is achievable, according to peer reviewed paper published on January 8th. Whoa. It just also, then the month before that, here's their new stealth fighter that's painted with the stuff he just said that. I just got to ask. Gathers the free position. I love them. You know, this isn't my field. Yeah. This is just something I stumbled across typing in the words he was saying. It's definitely just pretty cool. So they give up their testing this too. What I was getting at was, if you're the United States government, if you're the military, and you have this kind of equipment, and you want to test it, what better way than to test it on people that don't know your testing and on them. Send your fighter jets out there, have them encounter these things, run your whatever experiment you're dealing with making something appear and reappear and take off and give them these signals, given these disruptive signals, and see whether or not they, the problem is they had visual confirmation of these things. That's the real problem. The problem is they actually saw these things. Like the TikTok was they visually saw four people, right? I have a colleague in Silicon Valley who's been the distinguished army career. And he told me that there were, in fact, tests of especially nuclear facilities, not necessarily the military, but mostly the military facilities, to test the ability to penetrate the perimeter. So those flights are not cleared with the people who manage the plant. So it's either a nuclear plant that makes fuel for bombs or it's a base where nuclear weapons are stored. And there are guys around the perimeter with machine guns. And they are going to sound an alert. If they see something coming over the fence. Well, suppose you can over the fence looking flying saucer. Are they going to start shooting or not? OK. So he told me that he had actually flown some of those missions. And I know another member of a bass team who confirmed that, told me he had been on some of those missions. They make their plane look like they put lights around it. And so it can look like flying saucer, essentially. Look like what a UFO, what would be a UFO to the guard? So that the guard is, they want to see, they can penetrate. If you can disguise yourself to the extent that psychologically, you can inhibit the reaction of the guards and you can fly over the fence. Because if you can fly over the fence, you're in. You can do a lot of damage. Wow. So pretend you're a UFO. So those are, but I don't think they do hundreds of those. I think they probably do it very carefully at a couple of places. But it's interesting that they have that ability. That's fascinating. That throws a lot of this stuff in the question, like what are we actually seeing? Yes. But it doesn't explain all these things. And that's the problem that I always have is that they're just the abundance of encounters. And how similar a lot of them are. And then what it must feel like, I've never had an experience, but what it must feel like to have that experience, what that you probably would be very, I wouldn't be reluctant, because I'm a known person to talk about silly things. But if you're not, if you're like a serious person, you have some sort of an encounter. I would imagine there's a lot of pressure on you to not tell people. If you're a lawyer or a doctor or you're any sort of respectable person that's a serious individual in whatever you're doing for a career, you don't want people to associate you with nonsense, or think that, oh, maybe Mike is losing his mind. Yeah, you can. Yeah. Just make people read out. Yeah. And you're an ability to. So maybe you tell your friends, maybe tell your mother, maybe tell your wife. But you probably don't tell the press. If you're a scientist, I would imagine you would have to have significant evidence for your stick or neck out, or your person like yourself that's been very brave for all these years. Because you were talking about this stuff in the 1960s, which is pretty crazy. Well, I had seen Central Youth, like it's also, when I was 15. So can you describe it? I grew up in the town that's about 45 minutes out of Paris on the road to Normandy. And my father was a judge in that town for a while. And beautiful afternoon in the summer, I don't know the exact date. It would have been late June of July, 55, and 1955. So I was about 15, 16. I was still in school. And then the following year, I was going to go to the university. And my mother called me. I was working with my father who was relaxing doing some furniture. And I was helping him. And I heard my mother called from the yard. and went down. And saw an object that was absolutely a saucer. It looked like it was over the steeple of the cathedral there. And we were about half a kilometer away from it. And it was just suspended. It was silver. And there was a clear dome on top of it. And we both saw that. It was very clear. And then the next day, I asked a friend of mine from school, we were the two good students in physics and so on. And I told him I had seen that. And he said he had looked at it with binoculars. He had seen it too. And he had looked at it with binoculars. And I got him to draw it. And he drew exactly what I had seen, essentially, a lens-shaped thing with a dome on the clear dome on top. How long did you see it for? I saw it for less than a minute. I think I went inside. I don't remember what I did. I, logically, I probably went inside to get my father so that he could see it. And then when he came out, it was gone. Well, he didn't even come out. He said it was probably one of the new planes that were flying around. Because this was a time when the meteors and the early jets were being tried and they were training pilots with them and so on, and both for civilian radiation and for the air force in France. So I said, well, let's wait. Maybe this will be disclosed at some point. So I didn't say anything about it. Also, the son of the judge, family of the judges and supposed to see strange rings in the air over the town. Right. So it was sensitive. What he was, you went here 15. How old do you know? It was 1955. So back then. It was 15, 16. OK, so we could also apply that. If it was a jet, it would probably be very loud. Well, and also it wouldn't just stand there. It wouldn't be able to sit there. And it was just in quiet. After that, I understood that it was, after that, I worked at Paris Observatory. After I had my degree in astronomy, tracking satellites, which were very early satellites. And we were government office. So people were writing to us with what they had seen. And most of it, we could explain. For one thing, they were seeing echo, and they were seeing some of the Russian rockets. So we would write back, I mean, we had to write back, to French citizen. I had a card with a French flag on it. And we were serving the population. So we would explain those things pretty much the way they do now. You've seen the moon rising for the fog, or you've seen satellite so much alpha 23. And but then there were cases where just like that, where they saw something we could not explain. But then we would tell them that we wouldn't publish it. We wouldn't send it anywhere. For one thing, it wasn't our job. Our job was tracking satellites. But that one experience that you had when you're 15 is what ignited your interest in this for so many years. Well, if you hadn't been doing it, I mean, the thing that's very important about people like yourself is that you're so careful in how you document these things and the conclusions that you draw. Because I think this field of UFO study is filled with so many people that claim to have answers, claim to no things. And this is going to happen, and this is coming, and this is disclosure's imminent. And that's not, it never comes true. It's always, you're just left waiting for some new evidence that supposedly they have. And this is the more frustrating aspects of it like when talking to Christopher Mellon, he's telling me there's high resolution photographs and video and how about show me? Show me some stuff. Show me something. Because as a person, I wasn't when I was 15, I didn't say anything. So I don't have that experience that you have. I just have this fascination with it, but also tempered by a little bit of cynicism. Because there's so much malarkey that's attached to this subject. Well, and some of it is legitimate. And I think you follow this in general. They want disclosure, disclosure, disclosure. But we don't know. I'm very respectful of when I had clearances, I was just very respectful of those clearances because there are people who know what's on the other side of that. There was one case in the Air Force files that was classified. I mean, it was marked in the index with a star. And I'm punching the card. And I put an asterisk there. And I had to ask Dr. Hainak, you know, what happened? Can you tell me what happened there? And he said, yeah, there was enough time that I can tell you. This came from a woman in Alaska called the Air Force because she thought she thought was a flying source. So certainly something that should not have been there, it was dark on the ground, but the sky was still light. And there was definitely a light that looked like it was under power, that was flying west. Now west of Alaska, there's a chloride peninsula, and there's a Soviet Union. So she thought it was a UFO. So it was reported as a UFO. But it was classified. And it was called unidentified. Well, you know, that was inside joke. It was a U2. But this was at sunset. And the U2 was illuminated by the sun. I mean, U2 is painted in such a way that it shouldn't be visible from. But there are some conditions where you're going to see it. And so it was classified. And if you had the clearance, you would read that. It was an identity site. It would be listed in the statistics as an identified. But you actually, exactly what it was from the beginning. Interesting. So some things are listed as unidentified because it's so classified. Sure. Yeah. That makes sense. I have no problem with that. Right. But tell me, if you ask me to write a computer program about it, then you'll tell me if it's worth my time or not. What was your take on the Ryan-grave stuff? Like Ryan-Graves and the fighter pilots that started seeing these squares within a sphere? To me, that's still a question. And the people I talk to still wondering, what is that? It, there are strange physical systems that are floating around to gather faint signals. And they have very strange shapes. So it could be, those are balloons within balloons, with little things attached to them. Going back to the days of 1947 looking for atomic explosions, a Russian, that's the way the Russian tests, atomic tests, were detected first, was with balloons that had large antennas, that were. The thing about the Ryan-Graves stuff, those are the physical characteristics, like in the way it moves. These things were able to stay stationary in 100 plus not wins. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah, I have not researched it. And I wouldn't be the guy to research it. If we are being visited, how many different civilizations do you think are visiting us? Because if there's all these different characteristics that these beings have, if some of them look like tall albino, almost like human beings with large eyes, some of them look like the grays, some of them look like dwarfs. Yes, and that's an embarrassment of riches. Right. Of course, that opens a question. Is it a simulation? And Reiswynne has published a couple of books about that. He's a friend of ours and Dr. Nolan. And we've had many conversations about that. We could be living in a simulation of things where the people running the simulation might send whatever they want. I mean, it would be like a video game. So all of a sudden you've got a new. But that's not completely, you can only go so far. In fact, first reaction is, well, but look at the detail, we can't reproduce a detail on that scale. That's true. But wait 10 years and we'll be able to do it. I mean, with quantum computing and also. So that's not a good argument. It's an OK argument now, but it doesn't stand a test. The other argument is, who would be doing it and why? I mean, that's true that there are some strange things. I mean, the fact that the moon is exactly the size to hide the sun. Yeah. It's exactly perfectly. 30 minutes of arc, like the sun. So it gives us total legipses. And it gives us a measuring tool. The Greeks knew roughly how far the sun was with respect to the moon. They knew the ratio of the distances. They didn't get the exact distance. But they already knew that because they had done the math, the geometry. So that's pretty strange. I mean, all the protects are environment. And let's see the people on Earth that seem to be accidental, that are just right for us to exist. Yeah. So that I'm not completely happy with that explanation. No, I'm not happy with it. But it's very compelling. What's fascinating to me is that it is inevitable. That if technology advances the way it is currently within maybe even our lifetime or within another lifetime and other 100 years, we will most certainly have an artificial reality that you cannot discern in discernible between that and the reality with currently experience. So if that's inevitable, you would kind of assume that perhaps 30 taken place. And if it had already taken place, it would probably be very similar to what we're experiencing. Whereas enough of it seems fake and enough of it seems scripted, enough of it seems very coincidental, how things line up that it almost does seem like a simulation sometimes. Well, but there are also things that are strange but that we could research that we are doing a very bad job of researching. There was, I got a phone call a couple of years ago from a woman who had been a student at a school, a high level preparatory school on the east coast. And I had published a book in the 80s, early 80s, about UFOs. And she was head of the lecture bureau for the kids. And she thought it would be fun to ring me there to talk about flying sources because it would excite the students. So I went there and I gave a lecture at the level of, but those were very bright students. It was sort of an elite girl school. And then she drove me back to the airport and I went home. Never heard from her again. Well, what, with 35 years past, and she calls me. And she says, you may not remember me, but I was the one who brought you to give the lecture at the school. Do you ever come to Washington? And I said, I do remember you. And I go to Washington a couple of times a year. And she says, well, I'd like to tell you about an experience I had. And next time you come to Washington, bring me up. And when you're done with your meetings, I'll pick you up and I'll drive you to Dallas, airport. And so I do that. I call her. She picks me up in a very nice Mercedes. And she says, I've never forgotten your lecture. I saw something here on the way to the airport where we're passing now that I'd like to describe to you because it reminded me of your lecture. And I had never heard that anywhere else. There are trees along the freeway on both sides. Beautiful. The freeway was dark and the sky was still blue. She said, I saw an elongated object, which was like, to me, twice, 747. With what people would probably think of as potholes or windows, they were just lights along the thing, thing was elongated. And it was moving slowly, minding its own business. It must be on 10 radars, including the airport. And it was moving over. And then the sky was perfectly clear. No clouds, no fog. It blended with the sky. I could just see the outline still. It didn't speed up. I could see the lights, and I could see the lights fading. And then there was nothing there. And I remember in your lecture, in the 80s, you talked about things that could be going into another dimension. But I thought that was interesting. And the kids thought it was an interesting idea. And in science, people would talk about different dimensions and physics and so on. But I had never seen it mentioned anywhere. So there it was. This thing faded from our universe. And I have no idea where it went. But it didn't speed up. So I said, I think in our lunch, can I publish that? It said no way. I'm the CEO of an international commercial company. We work in several countries. And I can't have my name associated with it. Now, I've had probably a dozen cases like that with people from Silicon Valley, people, they report on Wall Street about how their company is doing. They don't want to report. They're saying, are you the same guy who sees flying sources? You're the CEO of this my courtship company in San Jose? So they don't report it. But they want me or some of my colleagues to know about it, because they knew it could contribute to the research we're doing. And Dr. Nolan said that experience as well as you know. But it's not going to the air force. It's not going to the newspapers. It's not going to the New York Times. Now, if those things can just jump out of our universe and go somewhere else, that rewrites the whole thing. We're not talking about propulsion. The way we think about propulsion. We're not talking about environmental environment. We're not talking the passage of time in the same way that I would experience with my watch. And so we're talking about something. It has the rules are different. And we need to go up and start thinking along those rules, or at least the possibility of those rules. It doesn't prove that there is another universe five minutes ahead of us. But there could be. And then all the papers that they published saying there couldn't be flying saucers, because there isn't life closer than 2,000 light years from us. And they would take it. couldn't be flying saucers because there isn't life closer than 2000 light years from us. And they would take, I don't speak of light, it would take 2000 years to come here. Well, there could be another universe, five minutes ahead of us, it would take them five minutes to get here. So, that would explain why we have visitations for our history. And they looked the same throughout history because our technology, this technology or this microphone didn't exist 20 years ago. Right. You know, it's a new microphone. And there were no microphones, you know, 200 years ago, there were no microphones at all. So, how can those things look the same? How can we compare them to something somebody saw in the 18th century? Right. Right. That shouldn't happen. And, you know, I know there's technology stuck. Right. Right. Right. Yeah, that is a fascinating aspect of it. Right. You would expect that, if you thought about how fast our technology evolves, technology from 1947 from some other planet would be exponentially more advanced than what we experienced in 47. Be just based on how our technology evolves. And you'll have to think, I mean, we think about an aircraft in ways completely different. I mean, there are things that, yes, it started, came from the Wright brothers and so on. And they were speculation before on how you could fly. But what an aircraft does today is, is radically different. The whole physics is different. And it will only talk about 100 and some years ago, which is pretty crazy. You go from this thing that Wilbur and Orl were right, you know, kind of like, get it to take some air for a little bit to the Chinese jet, which is disguising itself from radar and travels it in the same speeds. And then the possibility of other propulsion systems that have been kept under wraps. Oh, to the, the Harrier that stays, yes. And then lands like that. Yeah. No, just the technology that we know that we're aware of over the last 200 years, it's pretty extraordinary. And if you imagine something from somewhere that's had thousands of years to evolve past us, there are a couple of things I wanted to bring up that are in this in the book. Well, one is in the book, the other one isn't. It's in the book is I've tried to continue the Paris ecology experiments that were done at SRI and now at lots of other places. And I got advice from people you said, if you put yourself in some types of conditions, you could try to manifest another form of intelligence or another form of essentially an operation. It's not necessarily related to UFOs. But if you can do that, that would teach you what you could do also with some of the encounters that people describe. That the witnesses tell me. So if I'm a good scientist, I should put myself in their place first and experience it myself. So I did a couple of sort of mental experiments like that in my home. I was alone at the time in my home. And nothing happened. And then nothing like what I expected happened. And then I was asleep one night. And all of a sudden I'm propelled outside of my body into another room. And there is an entity there, a massive sort of rectangular mass, you know, an entity. Clearly, you know, something knows where it is and is thinking. I'm terrified. Not terrified so much of the entity. It's like a sort of black rectangle. But I'm terrified of being outside my body. I know people do experiments with that. And there are people who can do it almost that well. I've never tried to do that. I think because I've heard, you know, cautions that it's very dangerous because what if you don't find your way back? So I'm terrified. I get, I find myself back in my body. I get it. You know, I sit up completely terrified, crying, screaming, which is not usual. Because it was just, you know, it really was horrible. Then I rationalize it. You know, and that the experience wasn't supposed to happen outside of my body. When people describe entities like Whitley Streeber, these tribes agents, so on, there is a very strong psychic, you know, impact. But to me, that was, that was very shocking. It hasn't happened before and hasn't happened since. I'm not trying to make it happen. But I wanted to flag it and to get a advice mostly from other people. Did you feel compelled to try it again? I would try it again. But you have not yet. No. No. I could understand. It was that terrifying. If you want to scream. I can't get counts. So from, you know, my peers. That's like similar to the monolith in 2001, right? Yeah. Well, you know, there is a scientist. I know, well, in Silicon Valley who also started a number of companies that publicly traded now, who invented the integrated circuit. His name is Federico Fajin, he is a physicist from Italy with a PhD from Italy. He came to Silicon Valley in the very early days of the transistor, worked with the initial teams and those places. And then, you know, there was a problem of how can you pack those things together in smaller and smaller places? And he's, you know, recognized as the father or one of the two or three people who invented the integrated circuit. So for a long time, he was celebrated in that capacity. What he didn't say is that he had seen the design outside of his body one night. And that he had had multiple experiences outside of his body. Now, this is someone, you know, one of the fathers of Silicon Valley. I mean, I recognize him as one of my mentors, you know, in venture capital, in high technology investment. But now he started to, I mean, he's made enough money that he doesn't care anymore. And he's sort of semi retiring. He doesn't like what's going on it. All right. Now, and it's probably going to go back to Europe. But there are a number of people like that whose names are in the Wall Street Journal and New York Times who've achieved something. But they, you find out that they also had and they, they experimented with it in his case. He experimented systematically with, you know, the ability to go out of his body and, and and acquire this information from some other source. Well, for a vision, there isn't much, there are a couple of books that mentioned, you know, steps you can take. But it seems to be pretty much up to the individual. In my case, I certainly wasn't trying to do that. You know, it just, I was precipitated instantly to the place where this, this being was. Okay. There were also a couple of things that I never wrote about, not that I wanted to hide them or was afraid of them. But I wanted to some understand the context of it before I did. And I, I talk about it in this book. In the late 70s, my wife, my first wife, Jeanine was a psychologist. We, we bought a place in the country in, in Northern California, place in the, you know, redwood forest. Because I wanted to re-experience the pleasure of doing astronomy as an amateur, you know, a small telescope and so on. But I don't care. I want to look at the moon. I want to look at planets. I want to look at Magealanic, you know, clouds, if I, you know, whatever. And the, so we built this, we had, there was a house there, but I built an observatory in the middle of the forest. Well, clouds of snabber, this was a redwood forest, you know, and, and cluttered and, you know, unspoiled. Pretty much inaccessible. You know, if you didn't own the land, you know, you couldn't go cathed trees. So those were, there were some old redwoods there. And the closest neighbor was about three quarter mics away, three quarter of the mag, away. And I felt this is going to be like a discontinuity in the forest. And maybe it will attract whatever is out there. And maybe we'll see you at first. We never did. We owned the place for 18 years. We'd go there with our kids and it was wonderful. And, but when they are not every weekend, but pretty much, you know, as much as we could. And then our kids grow up and move away. We moved back to the city. We sold the place. The last night, of course, we had cleaned the place. We had, we were selling it to friends of ours, our neighbors, our winery. They want to, they want to expand the land. We had some flat land they want to use for the wine and they want it to house. And so, but the last night, everything has been moved out. My wife is still there because we had the car that was going to be taken back to the city and she had her car. And she was ready to go middle of the night. There's a light that's filling the house. You know, by then there are no curtains. Nothing filling the house blue, you know, sort of UV or white blue, ultraviolet light there. She goes outside and the light is making everything clear, the forest, everything else. And it's moving. It doesn't have a specific shape. You know, it's like a mass of light with light all around it. It's going down the driveway, which is a dirt, dirt road to the main road to the small road. And it's just moving along politely in front of the ranch and down, down to the street. It has no business being there. You know, no sound. It's not a car, it's not a car on fire. It's not the light. Again, everything is all the details on there. You can see the through the grass. You can see the leaves on the trees. And why that? Maybe you called for it and it took a long time to get there. Well, you know, all they just wanted to say, goodbye. Yeah, maybe maybe they were there the whole time and they just didn't want to show themselves. Then let's put on a show for Jacques. There was one time we used to sleep in the observatory. There was a small bedroom there with all books that I had collected. And she woke up and she saw a light that was like what people described, a small light. She didn't see where it came from or where it went. Then it was moving along the walls there were two of them. And then he vanished. You know, she woke me up. But I had not seen it. It was gone by the time I woke. I talked to a man when I went to visit Skinwalker Ranch. There's a few people wanted to talk to us but then once we brought the cameras out, only one guy wanted to talk to us. And he was very rational, very normal guy who lived in a modest home and told the story about this ball of light that entered through his home. And it seemed to be somehow or other aware that he was there. He felt like it was if not a living thing controlled by something that was alive. And then it went through the walls and disappeared again. Said it was in his home for a few minutes. It's moving around. Well, as you know, Mr. Bigelow has done the experiments of his own with lights and with things like that. Putting interesting objects in some places that are enclosed and seeing if something is going to look around or move them and so on. So very interesting. Well, it's such a fascinating subject. And like I said, I really appreciate all your years of research and the way you're so measured and so objective in your analysis that really helps people like myself get at least some sort of an understanding of what's going on. Well, what's important is to have guidelines for research. I look to some other people you have here, you know, than some other exploring, you know, try to learn from them and sort of refine my my own criteria. Yeah. Well, thank you very much. In your book, again, the one that's available now, this is Forbidden Science 6. This is the sixth of these books. And scattered castles is a it's not classified. It comes from the classified world. It's a repository of classified projects. So if you're cleared at a certain level, you want to know what else is there that you would have access to or where certain things are being sent to you and you're authorized to, you could look up the names of those projects. It wouldn't tell you what the project does unless you're cleared for it, but it would tell you that there is a project. And so those names of secret projects are picked by a computer, they're random. And I thought this was funny, you know, scattered castles is sort of like, you know, all these files about strange UFOs and strange creatures. Wow. Again, we did it. Thank you so much. Thank you for everything. It was great having dinner with you and help put off and everybody else has nice well. So I really appreciate your