Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. And now, good to see you. You too. Thanks for having me. My pleasure. Yeah. How many podcasts have you done? I don't know. I don't know the count, but maybe tens. Well, when we were talking and we were talking in the lobby, I was like, this dude would be a good guest. Because we were talking about ancient Hindu scriptures where you were talking to me about something that sounds like a nuclear bomb. Yeah. And I was like, oh. The Brahmastra. I need no more podcasts. Yeah. So the Brahmastra is part of Mahabharata. You've talked about Mahabharata in a particular manner. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Mahabharata is one of the two Hindu epics. The other one is Ramayan. But Mahabharata is more interesting. It's more complicated. It's like a lot of different stories interleaved together. And the Brahmastra is the equivalent of the hydrogen bomb. And how is it described? It's described as a weapon of mass destruction. You want to annihilate human population. Should not be used at any cost. There's a moral contract. Like you clearly have to be violating so many things at a deeply moral level to even wield it. And it's not actually accessible to most warriors. It's probably like two warriors in that era who are allowed to use it. And it has to be passed through special access. Like a teacher has to pass it onto the secret to use it. Almost like a new thing about it is like the equivalent of nuclear code. And Arjuna had it. This particular character in Mahabharata called Arjuna, he was allowed to use it. And then this other person was this, basically, Arjuna had a teacher named Rona. And Rona had a son named Ashwatama. And Ashwatama was always jealous of Arjuna. Arjuna was not thrown a son, but he was his model disciple. And so Rona passed on the secret of the Brahmastra to him. And Rona's son also wanted it. But because he was his son, he also passed on the secret of the son, even though the son wasn't as good as Arjuna. And during the war, Arjuna and Rona fought on the opposite sites. It's just a circumstances. And it's dad died. Ashwatama's dad, the teacher died in the war. And so the son got mad and unleashed the Brahmastra. And Laar Krishna had to come and save the planet to not get that destruction force. How old is the Mahabharata? Again, there's a lot of different opinions on this. So I don't actually know for sure. My understanding is at least 1,500 to 2,500 years old. Like 1,500 years ago is the minimum 2,500 years ago is the maximum. So it happened in some period in that 1,000 year time frame between that. And there's still unclear if a lot of it is just being much energized. And what actually happened was just a war between kids. There were two groups of people. The Pandavas and the Kauravas. And each side thought they were fighting for their own rights and justice. But at the end of the day, you can crudely understand it as essentially fight for the kingdom. Basically, there was a previous generation and two brothers. And both the brothers had a bunch of kids. And those kids were worrying to get the next in line. And that ended up being a massive war and a bunch of other allies fought on each side. And so many amazing weapons were used as part of the war. And a lot of these weapons are extremely like describing extreme level of detail that is pretty incredible. There's a lot of detail around targeted weapons. So you could precisely identify a target and just shoot at that. And then, Laura. It's explaining what the weapon is. Yeah, so there's one weapon called the Divyastra, where you can just specifically target any particular person or a group. And it would just automatically direct it so often do it, almost like a semi-autonomous weapon. And then, Laura Krishna had this weapon called the Sudarshan Chakra. It's basically a discus. And then you can just release it. And it will go in specifically identify somebody and chop up their head and come back to your view. It's so direct itself. So what I was amazed by is how interesting it is in terms of all the autonomy in the weapons. Some of the autonomy are autonomy, where the weapons could just be directed at people or directed at a group of soldiers. And it would just go and do its job and come back to the leader. And there were so many different usras, Divyastra, where an astra, an Agastra, Ramasra is obviously the ultimate, the hydrogen bomb equivalent. And all of these are described in a lot of detail and like who has access to it. And of course, it's a mythology. So it's described as these arrows in your back of your shoulders. But you could understand it as somebody having just access to a lot of weapons. And then whoever was powerful would go capture and colonize and gain power. And essentially a fight between a group of cousins, that's the bottom line of that story. Now, if we think of history as this linear progression from caveman to us, and we hear about autonomous weapons that were written in the Mahabra to somewhere around 2,000-plus years ago, we go, well, mythology. But if not, if there's been some sort of rise and fall of civilization, if there has been catastrophic, whatever it is, asteroid impacts, shifting of the poles, whatever it is. It's caused great disasters. You can imagine that these people are remembering a time where there was some sort of very advanced civilization. And this is what they're describing. Like if you knew for a fact that there had been a great advanced technological advanced civilization, when we have evidence that they had some technology, like the pyramids of Giza and stuff, like how to do that, there's some technology involved. But we don't have evidence of the technology. But if we knew for a fact, you would look at the Mahabra to go, oh, this is history. They're just explaining it in a kind of crude contemporary way for the time arrows instead of semi-autonomous drones with exploding heads on them. I mean, that's what we have now. All those things that they're describing, hydrogen bomb, semi-autonomous and autonomous drones. I mean, they have autonomous fighter jets now. Like they don't need people anymore. Like this, we're in that area right now. So when you read about something like that from the Mahabra to go, like, okay, what was really going on? Exactly. Yeah. I mean, that's always been my fascination with those epics. And the level of detail, which they described all these weapons, and who had access different levels of access, the status required to have access, and how it was used in the wars, different formations of the soldiers. They had all these crazy formation structures like forming the army like a lotus, forming the army like a, there's something called a chakra view like literally like it has to have concentric circles. So you cannot actually get into the innermost circle without going through the outer circles. And then you can get killed by each of the flanks. Whenever you're trying to enter in. And the secret of how to actually break into these view has means formations was only known to a few people. And it's incredible. Like you could say, okay, like somebody had to be extremely skillful to have that sort of like visualizations and imaginations of describing story like that. And obviously like Tolkien has done an amazing job with a lot of the rings, you know, and creating so much detail. At the same time like a lot of it actually coming through and real life in some form. Again, not exactly the same weapons, but similar style makes you wonder, was there actually something around then? And people have tried excavations in all these areas. That's like two main areas in the Mahabharata. Hasina Poor was the name of the kingdom. And people have done excavations around there and have like found some artifacts that might date back to those years. But there are also some details that are describing the picks that don't quite align with reality. For example, all the men, all the main warriors in that era were described as like very tall, very big, seven, eight feet, whatever. You know, I don't even know exact numbers. But studies by archaeologists also say that people lived in those years in those regions were probably not more than six feet tall. So it's not clear exactly like what happened, what was correct, what was not correct. And we just have to keep probing more. But I find the idea fascinating to think of like what could have existed in sacred texts that was only partially communicated to the next generation and having a lot of like reinterpretations. Another thing that is very interesting to think about is Vedic Math. So that basically Vedic Math is like a branch of mathematics that some people in India are growing up learning, like I read it myself too. And some people actually practice it just to be sharper at mental math for doing their exams like GMAT and things like that, GRE. And it has like a line in the Vedas that says, oh like one from the last digit, two from the first digit, whatever. So many different ways of multiplying two different numbers like 97 times 96, oh like subtract the last digits, put it right, multiply the first digits, put it in the left, that's the result. And then you wonder like, oh wait, the Rig Vedas so old is as old as, it's the oldest sacred text out there. How is it describing computation? That feels very unreal. Like do they actually know or understand advanced forms of computation even back in those days? And how old is Rig Veda? I don't exactly know how old it is. We put that in a perplexity. Yeah, let's do that. Let's just find out. Yeah. Yeah, it is technically the oldest sacred text out there. And so what's interesting is I wonder how old the stories were by the time they were written down. Like how much of it is relayed person to person for years and years, just like the Bible before it's ever actually written down. Scholars usually date the composition of Rig Veda to about 1500 to 1200 BCE. So it's oldest layers roughly 3,200, 3,700 years old today. Like if there really was like every ancient culture has a story of a flood. Everyone, they all have an apocalypse. And my bar had the same thing. Was it my bar? My bar had the same thing where there was a big, like almost like a tsunami like thing. I don't exactly know what it was called, but that was the collapse of Lord Krishna's kingdom, Dwarka. After the war, a lot of people died, but some people survived. And even those who survived got wiped out by a calamity or like some kind of like fight among themselves. And most of the people who participated in that era actually died. Here it is. The primordial, how do you say it, Manu? Yeah. Manu flood. Classic came to great flood myth where the righteous king, Manu, is worn by a divine fish about an imminent deluge that will destroy humanity. He builds a boat, loads it with his family. It's like, no one in the ark. It's the same thing. With seeds and animals, ties it to the horn of the god in fish form, which toes the boat to safety until the waters recede and the world is repopulated. They all have the same story. Yeah. That's what's really crazy. There is a concept in Hindu philosophy called the Yugas. I'm reading a book about it. Yeah. Yeah. So there's different Yugas. And Yugas are thousands of years. And the concept is that the Yugas keep cycling around. And so we are in the Kulluga right now. And before that was a duapar Yugas. That's when most of them are about to happen. And before that was a trade that Yugas, where the Ramayan happened. And before that, there was another Yugas. What is next after Kulluga? No, there is nothing next after Kulluga. It goes back to the first one. I forget the name of the first Yugas. Because the interpretation that I'm reading is that we're not in Kulluga anymore. And that Kulluga ended in the 1900s and Dwapar Yugas started then. No, no, Kulluga right? 100%. 100%. So why do people have different interpretations? Like is there a... Yeah, there's like a guru interpretation. There's like one specific guru that has this interpretation that Kulluga ended in the 1900s. Okay. And that we're moving on. Interesting. Yeah. But I don't know who's right. Because it's an enormous cycle, right? The cycle is a humanity. Yeah, thousands of years. Yeah, thousands of years. And so... So these are the four Yugas. And so why do people have different interpretations? I'll tell you the book I'm reading. Yeah. See if this book is discredited, young Jamie. It is by a guy named David Steinowitz. Stein, Steinmets. David Steinmets. The book is called the Yugas. Interesting. Yeah, I mean, the problem is when someone's got their own interpretation or some gurus interpretation, it doesn't totally align. It's hard to know who's right and who's wrong. Yeah. He's understanding our hidden past, emerging energy age and enlightened future. Yeah. So that will go back up to that again. So this is in the description. See what it says that? Where it says in 1894, an Indian sage gave a guss an explanation not only for our hidden past, but for the trends of today and for future enlightenment. So there's like one guy's interpretation that this guy is going off of. I guess the difference might be that he thinks the Yugas cycle is 24,000 years, I think it's probably much longer than that. Yeah. For Yugas together is 4,320,000 years. You know, it's really nutty. Yeah. One of the really nutty things is both in the ancient Sumerian texts and in some of the ancient Egyptian texts. There's depictions before the flood of people who've rained for thousands of years as kings. Yeah. And it's common. It's not, and it's also the referenced multiple times and different scripts that are from different parts of what was Sumer at the time. Yeah. It's really weird because they take it as established history once it gets to a certain age, once they get into like whatever the age is where they can verify that this person was the king for a certain period of time. But it's all in the same texts as people that rained for 6,000 years. Yeah. It's really, and then one of them just wipes out the whole thing. Yeah. And I mean, this is also somewhat like tangentially related to the Fermi paradox. You know, like if you assume all these things are happening on earth itself, that entire civilizations are getting wiped out. And like we always wonder, you explore the topic the most and very aliens. Right. And there are different arguments that like, OK, like the reason we haven't quite found that is because the great filter exists. And there is like one entertaining theory that I like just for the sake of entertainment is almost all civilizations end up advancing technologically a lot. And either a calamity-wipes model, like they build some misalign AGI and then AGI-wipes model. And because of that, they never actually like end up being visible to us. Or the other theories that like they're like, we haven't quite built the white, nomenf probes to actually go find them. And both of them are plausible. And there's no clear way to like, no, unless we actually like send out enough probes. This episode is sponsored by BetterHelp. We've come a long way with mental health, but there still work to be done. BetterHelp's 2026 state of stigma report surveyed 2,000 Americans revealed that 85% of Americans believe getting support is wise, yet 74% say society discourages people from doing so. One thing to can help is to have more open conversations about mental health struggles and encourage people to seek out help, not judge them. And you know what else helps? BetterHelp. They make connecting with a professional therapist simple. And it actually works. Their live sessions have an average rating of 4.9 out of 5. Don't let stigma stand in the way of support. Start therapy with BetterHelp. Sign up and get 10% off at betterhelp.com slash JRE. That's better HELP.com slash JRE. There's a bunch of possibilities. I mean, there's almost too many to count. But there's the possibility that they are observing and that they don't want to interfere. And that we are on some sort of evolutionary cycle, cycle of cultural evolution, civilization evolution. And one of the things about this, the crazy ages that comes from the Sumerian text and from the ancient, the hieroglyphs that depict the ziptet. How do you say it? Ziptetty? No. How am I saying that? What is that text that ancient member we talked about? It was Ahihi Hawasani tonight. It's existence. Ziptepi? Is that it? Either way, you're dealing with these kings that reign for thousands and thousands of years. Well, Davidson Claire is in the middle of this research now that they're working on life extension drugs. Like that are actionable. Yeah. Yeah, that's it. Ziptepi. Yeah. I've heard of that. So these, but this is what's so weird. If they look at hieroglyphs, they get to a certain point and they're like, oh, kufu, he was real. This guy was real. All these people were real. Yeah. But then they get back to these guys that reign for thousands of years. They go, oh, that was unfortunate. Yeah. But why is it that all these people have these stories that align with this timeline that's pre-flood? It's all like the same story. And then if you're talking about these ancient Hindu scriptures that are discussing technology that seems remarkably similar to technology that we have today, the monos are flying cars basically. And probably what we're going to have 100 years from now or whatever it is. Or what we could have gone that way in the past. And it's very entertaining to think of like, let's say something happens to us. I don't want anything to happen to us. But let's say something happens to us. And what people really believe you were launching reusable rockets or making FaceTime calls to people in Australia. Yeah. Like, even fundamental things like all we were doing today, I think it's all like incredible. Like, there's a lot of things that could be just technological ideas or maybe people actually had it in the knowledge of it was lost. And it's not been documented. It's not been passed along. And so we are skeptical if they ever had it. And so we end up reinventing it in different forms again and again. And we keep cycling through this process. Well, it also could be that this is the natural progression of human curiosity. The human curiosity and ingenuity always moves into these very particular ways. Like, what's the best way to defeat my enemies? If we're always going to be territorial primates, we're always going to want to defeat our enemies. We're always going to protect ourselves from being invaded. So we're going to make better. And just with technological innovation, it just goes down the same path. Oh, we figure out bullets. Oh, we figure out nuclear bombs. Well, we figure out, well, we don't even have to use an actual plane. We can use an autonomous drone. And that delivers it. And then scale upwards and onwards and AI and then also life extension. So if these people were able to make the pyramids, like, there's a lot of speculation as to the timeline of the pyramids. But let's just say they really built it 2005 and a BC. Let's just say back then. What the fuck were they using? Like, what did you do? How did you get these stones down from the mountains where 500 miles away? What? How about that one? Yeah. We were going to get to that for sure. There's a ton. No, thank you. What's good to go to any? How about these temples that they find in India that are carved entirely out of one piece of stone? What did you do? How did you do that? How long ago did this happen? How many of them were buried? And then they had to uncover them. And then like figure out, like, what is this? Who made it? There's no timeline. No one really knows. There's no evidence of tools that were capable of doing this kind of work back then. And they're huge and beautiful and perfect. And they have like acoustic properties. And the geometry is fucking fantastic. It's not so bad. It's not so bad. All of these temples were actually just built, not just they were specifically the locations for them or picked out so that you get the right seismic vibration so there in terms of like proximity to the ocean, the gravitational waves from the sun and the moon. People actually made that level of like, look at this man. Imagine the undertaking of carving that temple out of the side of a fucking giant piece of rock. Yeah. You screw up one thing and it's over. There's no simulations. You just have to build it. What did they have? This is the question. Like imagine today, if we had to do this, look, it's possible. This is a possible endeavor. It can be done. Yeah. But imagine what kind of technology would we have to need to map it out to make sure that it was all precise. That it all, I mean, it's precise within like millimeters from point to point. And everything is done out of one piece of stone. Like what did they do? Was it chisels? Did you do that with chisels? That's crazy. How many times do you have to sharpen your fucking chisel? That's nuts. Or do you have something completely different? Because some of them were intricate ones. See if you can find these. Some of the crazy ones inside these temples, there's sculptures that are three-dimensional and they're carved like inside of the sculpture. So there's like an outer area. And then there's these all these openings. And then inside it's highly detailed. Like how'd you even reach in there? It says they use chisels and hammers. And I don't think that's awesome. And careful geometrical planning. I'm going to be trying to do that. They see it like this is how much work someone could do in like 12 hours with a hammer and they get nowhere. Let alone like perfect and looking good. Yeah, it's nuts, man. And there's a lot of evidence of stuff like that all over the world, which is really weird. You have the stuff in Peru like Saxe-Houm-On. When you look at these stones that looks like they're melted into place and they're 900 tons, like what did you do? Yeah, how did you even get it up there? How'd you, where'd they get it? How'd you get it there? How'd you line it perfectly? Built in only 18 years. How do they know that? How do they know that? Because it's attributed to one king. Yeah. So King Christian I, 756 to 773 CE, maybe. How do you know though? Yeah, this is the archiologist said it would have decaculated it would take him the 100 years to do it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this is very like different history and accounts are all like muddled up. Well, it's a real problem. History is a real problem. But yeah, it goes back to the thing you were saying, right? What is one thing that's common across all these different ages is the human curiosity. So I mean, that's something that I would love to get to your take on this. Like I've been talking with this idea called the curiosity premium, which is the most effective people, the most successful people have always been the most curious people, the ones who have been good at asking the best questions. And they tend to do better in every aspect of their life. And you're a good example of that. So that's why I'd love to get your take on this. And the reason I believe that is because long term, people who continuously ask questions tend to do better, they make more money, they have a higher quality of life, they're happy, they have more compounding relationships, people find them more interesting. And so they compound their relationships over time. And so naturally they end up succeeding. But their spirit of inquiry, their intrinsic curiosity doesn't actually stop once they succeed. It only, they just channelize it even more. And so that's why it keeps compounding. And I would argue that it's the only quality. It's the only quality that makes us really human. In this world where we can seek a lot of information and get information very faster than ever before. It feels like that's that one universal human quality that's existed since ancient time, since the oldest text. Like in fact, in the Rigway, you're explicitly encouraged to seek wisdom more than wealth. And it's not just an idea specific to Hinduism, that specific idea exists in the Bible, it exists in the Quran, exists in the Torah. It's not that seeking wealth is admonished by religious texts, it's actually that it's more important to seek wisdom. And you know, like you can, why I said you're a good example of that is like, sure you have a very, very large podcast, but the way you're running it is like you're just curious about a lot of things and asking a lot of questions. And I think that's that one quality that's very important. So and I feel like it's the oldest thing is the only thing that we've known since ancient time. Being curious. Well, I think it's stimulating to people and genuine curiosity is stimulating to other people. When someone is genuinely curious about something I become curious about it, I think it's contagious. And I think that it's also an authentic quality. And I think there's something about really wanting to know something and being interested in something. And if you're curious, generally you're going to ask more questions about something so you have a deeper understanding of it. So if you're trying to do whatever you're trying to do a sport a game, you'll probably get better at it because you're more curious. Because instead of just assuming things, you'll ask more questions, you'll re-examine things. It's one of the most important human qualities. And to me, it's one of the most attractive human qualities. It's always been. When I meet curious people, I'm always interested. I'm always like, like, tell me what you're curious about. And I'll tell you what I'm curious about with talk. And this podcast started out genuinely because, well, there's a lot of us just talking shit with friends. But it also led in to one of my very first guests, actual guests, was Graham Hancock. And it's just because I was curious. Because I had read fingerprints of the gods. And I'd seen him talk. I'd seen speeches. And I'm like, I want to know, what do you know? What do you think's going on? And he's another guy, incredibly curious. And absolutely fascinated with his takes on ancient history. He has been talking about this subject a long time. And when he first wrote fingerprints of the gods, I think that came out in like, I want to say it's like 97 or 98 or something like that. And I remember reading in so many of my friends, like, you know, educated friends, like this, horseshit, why you're paying attention to this. More and more and more as time goes on, it's been proven that he's correct. The timelines shifted back. And from the publication of that book, the discovery of Go Backly Tappie and the surrounding area. As time goes on, it's been proven that he's correct. The timelines shifted back. And from the publication of that book, the discovery of Go Backly Tappee and the surrounding area, like it's like, okay, now we realize, well, there was some crazy shit going on at the very least 11,000 years ago. So we pushed civilization back 5,000 years. So like, and this is just what we found now. And we keep finding things. Keep digging, keep looking. And then you see the stuff that they're finding underneath the pyramid with this radio tomography where they're looking under the pyramid that seems that there's structures under the pit. We've seen that stuff. I haven't seen that. I had the scientist that's involved in it. He's an Italian guy, Felipe O'Biondi. And he came on the podcast, Wonderful Accent. Almost as good as yours. It was amazing. But he's describing the use of this stuff and that they've used it successfully on known areas in pyramids and other structures. And they can, in fact, they, there's a, in Italy, there is a particle collider that is underneath a mountain. And using this technology, which is satellite based technology, they get an accurate description of this particle collider. This, I think it's 1200 meters underground. Like how far is that thing underground? We'll find out. But it's like deep under stone. And they find that they can get an accurate, like, it can actually give you the dimensions of this particle collider. They have like an image of it. And this same technology is showing that there's these columns underneath the pyramid in various places that are 20 meters wide. And they have coils around them. They don't know what the hell they are. And the, the whole structure of this thing, it's not small. It goes almost a kilometer into the ground. There's like this enormous like bottom of it. And it seems like it's something that's constructed. And so they're like, okay, well, the pyramid is crazy. It's crazy enough. But if there's something underneath it that's a man made or someone made it that's a kilometer deep into the ground. Like what the fuck are we even talking about? Like who made this? What, what did they have? 1.2 kilometers into the mountain. That's nuts. It's a half a fucking mile in it plus into the mountain. And this thing can see through all that and get this accurate depiction of this particle collider. And it's showing with multiple scans, not just one, multiple scans and different technology. The same exact images, the same exact structures underneath this fucking immense 2,300,000 stone structure that almost perfectly aligns to true north, south, east and west. Like what? What was going on? Don't tell me police. Don't tell me copper tools. Like what the fuck was going on? Something crazy. And I have a feeling our simplistic explanation of it is just doing no one any justice. It's doing no service to history. It's doing no service to our understanding. They've got to be a little bit more open in the fact that they are perplexed. And not just perplexed by stuff like this. This is a 3D print of an actual vase that exists in Egypt. That they found in tombs of the old kingdom. This thing was somehow another. It's made with dye, right? So it's incredibly hard stone. And made to like a thousandth of a human hair. And it's yeah, like crazy dimensions. Like the way the precision of it and wasn't turned on a lathe because it has handles. Yeah. So you look at the handles on the side where you can't carve the, and those are perfect too. Like the alignment of it, everything. And it's like you just look at it. Oh, it's a boughs, no big deal. But no, it's kind of fucking crazy. Like how did they cut that out? There's also these, there's all these core marks in some of the stones that they find in Egypt. And they've analyzed the amount of revolutions per minute that you would have to go through to be able to cut through something and leave these lines and then to thighs explanation. Like what is this? This is great. This is not sand and copper and just rubbing things. No, this is some insane technology that we don't understand. There's scoop marks out of the bottoms of some of these stones. It's like what the fuck is this? I just scoop rock. Like what, it looks like ice cream. Like they just went, roop. Like what are they doing? There's so many questions. What tools did they even have to do all these things? They had copper. I mean, there's some evidence that they had some iron and then I think Tutankhamen had a dagger that was actually made from meteorite, which is interesting. You know, like when they could find meteorites and make things out of them was very valuable, obviously. But just the sheer volume of work that they did there. Like you look at the temple and man, you look at the three major pyramids. You look at all the different temples and all the construction and the older you go, the deeper into the sand they go, the more complex these things are, which is even weirder. So it seems like civilization after civilization just, there was probably a rise in fall with their technology as well. Absolutely. I think it's, it's, it's incredible that none of this knowledge was properly documented ever. And it's a whole like line of work to just go and understand like, how do you even rebuild these things, leave alone, how did they build it? Well, think about what we're doing, right? So all of our knowledge is essentially stored on hard drives and paper. Those are the two things that are going to deteriorate the quickest. Maybe we should take a dump of the internet and put it out of rock, go preserve it somewhere. So that yeah, even if our, our civilization is wiped out and all the data centers, all the gone or whatever, whatever comes next and go figure it out. Well, I mean, then you've got to always assume that even if they found a hard drive, that they would like how long would it take for them to back engineer what we did and figure out what these ones and zeros actually mean. Yeah. That would as, which is one of the most bizarre and fantastic accomplishments, modern civilization is like, this is a terabyte, yeah, which is nuts. Yeah. I don't know what your first computer had. I don't remember. Definitely not, not even a gigabyte probably. No. Yeah. Like a few hundred megabytes. Like a five. You're hard drive. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I remember when they first came up with gigabytes, I was like, this is nuts. Yeah. You remember like when Gmail launched and gave everybody like free email storage, unlimited email storage and the bottom sliding bar would just keep increasing in terms of the total allowed size. Yeah. And that was nuts to me. Yeah. Yeah. And I think yeah, we take it for granted that we have like infinite RAM and infinite hard disk and nobody has to worry about like, you know, you're back in those days, you're worried about like taking too many photos on your phone. Right. Right. And then you could go delete all the old ones or bad ones. Yeah. You run out of storage. Okay. Yeah. And then you have to buy like an external hard drive to keep storing things. Yeah. I remember that stuff from your phone to the hard disk. I remember the old Android phones, you get an SD card. Yeah. You can slip one of those in there and you can just store images on that. Yeah. Save space. Yeah. And all that stuff is so vulnerable. Yeah. It's so vulnerable. And if a completely alien society had to come down and find our hard drives and they went a totally different path of technology, they'd have to back engineer reverse engineer everything that we did try to figure out. You know, what, what are we using? What operating system? How's the operating system work? Is it Unix? Is it Linux? Is it like what is it? How do they do it? It would be a nightmare. They would need an advanced day. I like to like figure it all out for them. Right. Yeah. So that's just if the hard drive survived. Right. So if there's some massive flood, cataclysm, whatever, some horrific thing that damages all of our electronics, which is totally possible. You know, just some solar flare, some intense. You know, just another lab leak. No. Right? Yeah. Just time. Yeah. A lab leak and time. Yeah. Yeah. It's nuts. And we could go back to zero real quick. And we would basically be like preppers and harder to hurt. It would be harder versus engineer everything again. It would be almost impossible. Which is why I'm really fascinated by the flood, the post flood timeline. Because if these people like Graham Hancock and a lot of these other folks that have speculated that there was probably a very advanced civilization that went in a completely different direction many thousands of years ago, if you look at like the emergence of like Sumer and Mesopotamia and that area, which a lot of people attribute to be the earliest known civilization, that's around 5000 plus 6,000 years ago. Right. Roughly. So the flood is like 11,000 years ago. Plus. So you're looking at like 5,000 years of what? It's not even that long in the grand scheme of things. No, not to the earth. But for people, pretty fucking long. Exactly. Like, think of how long it took us to get our shit together. It took thousands and thousands and thousands of years of people probably being monsters. Just being the worst of the worst. And that's probably the only way they survived. There's probably a lot of cannibalism. There's a lot of murder. There's a lot of like horrific shit going on for 5,000 years until people slowly but surely figured out agriculture again. Started building walls. Everybody relaxed a little. Cussive solid weapons, keep people away so you can work on math. And then next thing you know, civilization emerges again. And it goes right, you know, goes right back onto the cycle. And then you start reading in the Rig Veda about stuff that happened thousands years ago. Oh, what the fuck is this? Like what happened? And that's my belief. I think there was something going on on earth. Many, many, many thousands of years before established beginnings of history that was very bizarre. And probably technology that went in a completely different direction than what we're doing now with combustion engines and circuits and all the different things that we use. They probably figured out some other kind of technology. Exactly. Which is totally possible. And it's amazing. Like it's amazing to think of like what if we could rediscover all of that again. Yes. Why would love to be able to. I would love to just have a way. If I could choose one window in time to go back to see what it would look like, I would 100% pick engine Egypt while they're building the permits. So on. True, the fuck was going on. Yeah. There's just just put me in a big hamster wheel. There's a big plastic bubble where no one could see me. Just let me violate space and time and exist there for just a few minutes. Just let me look. I think that would be the most insane thing that you could see about humans and human history. Yeah. I just want to know what they knew, what they had, what they used was just. What's been this thing, Petra's same time period, at least attributed to 7,000 roughly BC. Jesus. And they, you know, how would you write? How? The details of all those car, carvings is insane. Insane. Yeah. 1,000 BC. What are the tools? What the hell were you use? You make a temple out of the side of a fucking mountain. Look at the size of it, man. The size of those columns. It'd be hard to do anything like this even today. It would be incredibly difficult, insanely time consuming. Yeah. The Caliosa temple, by the way, I don't have it up right now, but it's 16, 50 or so. and a thousand people who tried to destroy it. Not for three years of doing nothing. They stopped. They barely made a dent on a couple statues. Yeah, a lot of things when invasions happen in India, like, they tried really hard to fuck it up and couldn't. Oh, that's crazy. That's crazy. That's very robust. LAUGHTER That's a great way to describe it. It's just, there's so much of that stuff that's so interesting because it's so undeniable. It's so undeniable in its scale, so undeniable, and its complexity, and the planning, and the understanding that you had to have a deep knowledge of geometry, of measurement, you had to have accurate. Yes. Everything. Thirtiness, like, resist like calamities. And in India, you had that. Floods. What tools are you using? Yeah. Like, how are you doing this? How are you coordinating all these people? Right. Getting them to do stuff. Sure, conditions must have been very harsher. I'm sure people didn't really have a choice, but to do these things, because back in the days, the only way you could take care of your food, including in shelters, like you commit your service, a labor to the state, to the kingdom. But you could also ask, what gave them the initiative or drive to go do these things? Yeah. Well, that description is perhaps of a later time. We don't even really know what civilization was like when these were constructed. Yeah. The real problem is the material science. The real problem is like, there's a lot of things that you have to have to make those things. It's not as simple as a sculpture, like Michelangelo, making a sculpture out of something that's like fairly easy to carve into. It starts as far as stone goes. Now, this is the scale. It's so undeniable. Like something piece of our understanding is missing. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, looking at all this, everyone should just be like a lot more humble. We don't actually know that much. What we know is so little, like whatever. The same thing as what Socrates said, what we know is very, very little. And the only thing we should all strive to be is just be curious. And I think there's a lot of tendency for people to think, oh, we have all this advanced technology. We were so amazing. Look at us. And it's like, wait, hold on. You don't even understand what happened thousands of years ago. And there's so much out there to just go and explore and learn and get better at understanding more. What is this place? Yeah, this is unreal. This is called the Elora Caves, Timeless Wonder Carved in Stone. They're all, I think it's all the same area. Yeah. It's the same Elora Caves. And the Shiba Temple that you saw. Look at that. My God. Look at this stuff. It's insane. And again, there's no steel back then. It's actually really symmetrical. It's not even like, can you go back to the first one with the symmetrical top? Yeah. Look at the symmetrical top. Yeah, it's nuts. It looks like that mall in New York. They made were the world transportation. That's the worst. Yeah, but way more robust. I mean, how? What were you, this is the thing. It's like the material science aspect of it. It's like you don't have the ability to do. Look at that top one. Go to that top one again. The one that you just had, Jamie. Yeah, that one. Look at that. That's crazy, man. I mean, I am just blown away when I see stuff like that. My mind just starts racing. And I just think, how did you do this? Who was involved? How was it planned? How was it so symmetrical? What were the tools? Like what were the tools, man? If you don't have steel, you don't have, what are you using? How'd you do that? I mean, most of it has done with stone clearly, right? So I guess, I guess, I doubt it. I bet they had something else. I bet they had something else that over time eroded just like metal would today. I mean, if you left a shovel outside today, and you came back to that same spot 500 years from now, there's nothing. A shovel's gone, right? Yeah. And you've got to assume that these many thousand-year-old temples that were carved out of a fucking mountain, whatever tools they used probably got absorbed by the earth. And the only thing that's remaining is giving me a weird thought. Like when they make a big building downtown, though, they only bring the crane in for a temporary period of time. And there's only so many cranes on the planet currently, too. So right. True. If you take it, you move it. You go take it to the next spot. Yep. Yeah. True. Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. Especially something like this. Like if they had heavy equipment and machinery and whatever the fuck they were using, they probably moved it and then moved it out. And then it probably rotted away. And now it's gone. If there was machinery, if there wasn't, like there must have been something else. Some other kind of like some technology that we haven't even imagined. But it's like their commitment to art, too, was so fascinating. Because these aren't just structures. They're in fashion projects. Yeah. Intensely beautiful. Intensely ornate. Yeah. So it's not just that they wanted to build like a functional structure. Yeah. Good architecture. No, it's a fascinating artwork. And it's so intricate. There's so many different features and so many different images of different people and beings and animals and elephants. There's one more temple. Like you could pull out like, let's call it Tanger Temple. Oh, I've seen that one, too. Yeah. Yeah. That was done more recently in the age of the Cholas. And it's pretty incredible. When did they do that one? I don't know the exact number. But more recent than the ones that you saw. All of them are not, man. And then there's stuff like that all over the world. Whoa. This was done as a project by the king to basically make a name for himself. Wow. That's incredible. Is that multiple pieces of stone or did you carve that whole thing on a stone, too? Probably multiple pieces. So that's actually like construction. Yeah. Not like removal. The other ones are essentially a giant sculpture. Wow. That's so pretty. Like how geometric it is. Yeah. That's what amazes me. Like they didn't actually have all these simulations and cat tools and all these things. Right. And what year was this made, Jamie? It was so. It's just so incredible how much of this stuff exists where it's really baffling. Like I just found out recently that the Aztecs didn't build those temples, that they found them. Really? Yeah. They found like the, to note shit lawn, they call it the place where the gods were born. The Aztecs found it and uncovered it. And then on the, who's it to note shit lawn or teal to a con, whichever one it was on the consecration day when they were done with like whatever they were doing with it to celebrate the killed somewhere, between 20,000 and 80,000 people in four days. Damn. Not exactly the mindset of the type of people that would construct something like that. Yeah. And so the people that found it and it might have been sitting there for a thousand years. And then they came along and said, oh, this is cool. Let's live here. Okay, but what was the society that lived there before them? And where are they and what happened? And how they do this and why they do it and why did they have it aligned with the constellations? Like what were they doing? Yeah. It's some of the, some of the calculations are pretty, pretty amazing. Like how they timed it, how they positioned it, how they cared about planetary positions and stuff like that. Surely some of it could even be pseudo science, but whatever. I think just the level of like calculations they were making back in these days without powerful computers is just outstanding. It's just nuts. And it doesn't make sense. It's like, okay, they're making without powerful computers. So what are they using? I mean, at one point, the word computer just meant to human. Right. Like human beings would be doing the calculations. That was their only job. Like to really like multiply two numbers. Like to make some astronomers were actually the first mathematicians. The term mathematician and astronomer were used so not to miss the at one point. Really? Yeah. Why is that? Why is most of the stars and math? Yeah, because like starting the stars and while making a lot of geometry calculations and that was kind of actually one of the first set of mathematicians in India, people like Aria but Basquerah, all these guys were actually astronomers too. They were not just mathematicians. And Aria Bata was earlier still like the idea of using zeros and then he had a lot of like contributions and geometry. And he was doing all this like just because he was interested in astronomy. Isn't there evidence of Pythagorean theorem in ancient? Is it ancient Sumerian? It's something that predates Pythagoras. Interesting. My theory is that even though it was not formulated as a Pythagorean theorem, like I'm sure people had to understand concepts of science and cosines and like, you know, whatever is the right angle for the right inclined to get this right level of like geometry, you need to have some implicit understanding of it to build these kind of structures. There's no way you could do it without that. Yeah, 100% and you have to have incredible measurement tools. Like not just the actual mathematics. Okay, the oldest known evidence of Pythagorean theorem dates from old Babylonian clay tablets from about 1900 to 1600 BCE, roughly 1,000 years before Pythagoras. And they're wild. Like, ha, ha, ha. Clay tablets often cited use what we now call the Pythagorean theorem to complete, to compute rather than a diagonal of rectangles and squares, including an excellent approximation. Look at this. This is nuts, man. Vaded, ritual texts explicitly states the rule equivalent. I don't know how to say that. What is that? A squared, B squared, C squared. Go C squared. For the diagonal of a rectangle, that includes numerical examples predating or roughly contemporary with classical Greek mathematics. So completely different parts of the world. Yeah. And they're coming up with the same stuff. Exactly. Because they're all curious, that's it. Yeah. They're all curious and eventually all curiosity leads to truth or some form of it. I would argue that anything that's of impact on the world has only been done by curious people. In hindsight, we label those people as successful as smart or rich, but the common trade across all of them has been curious. Well, that's certainly a powerful trade and people that aren't curious are not fun. Yeah. They're not interesting. Because of that, they don't attract other smarter, interesting people. And therefore, they won't be able to do something very meaningful in the world. So it's less about any of the complexity of personal relationships and personal life, too. It's not just about professional success. Like you have a more fulfilling life with your wife or your kids if you're a more curious person. You ask them more questions. You take interest in them. So that's the one quality everybody wants in personal relationships is like taking interest in them and actually understanding them better or being curious about common things. And so it's not just just being curious leads to success. It's more that people around you want you to be successful if you're curious because you will have more compounding and fulfilling relationships. I would agree with that. Yeah. I'd say it's one of the more important qualities of human beings. I mean, it's led to everything that we have today. All curiosity is led to all of our architecture, math, everything, art, everything. The transistor. Like, you know the story of the transistor? Yeah. So Bell Labs was basically employing history adjusted as many telephone engineers back then as the number of software engineers say. But only three people cared enough to question whether you should use these really hot, giant vacuum tubes for amplifying telephone signals. So vacuum tubes were very big, power hungry and very hot. And so they were not fault tolerant. And it's very expensive. And so three people questioned the need for that and came up with the idea of the transistor to amplify current. And that was the Nobel Prize winning discovery. And not just that it was useful to amplify telephone signals. It basically led to the rise of modern computing. And we wouldn't have an iPhone like this today if not for those three people. Do you know the 10-foil hot conspiracy theory about transistors? No. It that there are back-engineered from the Roswell crash along with fiber optics. Tell me more. So we read this on the podcast. Remember Jamie, there's the two scientists that were attributed to this one scientist said there weren't even remotely exceptional guys and that they gave them the credit for this so that they didn't have to reveal the true nature of where this technology came from. I see. Interesting. So again, 10-foil hot securely on our heads. This is not something I believe. This is just something that's fun. There's a few inventions that came out of that time period roughly after 1947. That are weird. And one of them is fiber optics and one of them is a transistor. And these are supposedly attributed to back-engineering programs. So the Roswell crash, I don't know if you ever paid any attention to it, it's a real weird one. Because the cover of the Roswell Daily Record said that the government has a crash disc that landed in the desert. A bunch of witnesses, a bunch of people saw it. It's also people that saw supposedly saw physical bodies of these creatures. And supposedly, again, who knows what's true? But Truman went to the site. He visited it. And then the planes, two separate planes, were flown to Wright Patterson Air Force Base, which was, I think was just Wright Base back then. I don't think it was Wright Patterson. But they flew them out. And the idea was this material was so important, they didn't want to risk one plane crashing. So they flew it in two different planes. And that this stuff has always been known to be stored at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. That's what everybody talks about. And then a lot of it was moved to Bell Labs. And there was a company called the American Computer Company. And back in the day, the American Computer Company was just like, it was a consumer website where you could go and say, oh, I need a Windows computer that does this, that, and the other thing. and you could just put in whatever your specs were and they would build it for you. But they had a whole section of their website, dedicated to Bell Labs and back engineered UFO technology. And all they talked about, and this one, like whoever ran it was like a fucking cook, I don't know. Is that still around? Good. Website? American Computer Company is still around? Interesting. So this is like the 1990s. I think that's right. Your theory, I mean, not that you believe in it, but your theory is that the transistor was not like invented, it was known, and it was given to the other. This apparently a giant leap between the first ideas the transistor and then what actually came about and how much money had to be spent to create it off of this leap. This was this assertion by the scientists that were trying to examine this. The thing about Bell Labs is there's a military base right outside of Bell Labs. And they say, well, that military base is to Card New York City. But New York City is quite a flight. Away, but Bell Labs is right there. And they were working on some deep, dark shit at Bell Labs for sure. Because I've had a bunch of people on that were talking about remote viewing exercises that they were doing at a Bell Labs. We've had a bunch of people that came on and talked about various programs that were going on, that were like top secret programs that were happening, that were being run through Bell Labs. There's some weirdness to that place. Like real weirdness. Interesting. Yeah. And it's fun. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know that. Because it definitely feels very disconnected. Like, OK, like you were using all these vacuum tubes. And then suddenly you're like, OK, like, what if we just use some eigen There's definitely a pretty far drift from what you're doing currently to what you're supposed to do and And also the the idea of the first transistor and what ended up being used in chips The junction transistor are quite different too. So they're like big leaps in terms of what the core idea was It's not an incremental change The way I thought about it was like, okay, that's like 10 so years of work And that's why they made a big change and so if you actually looked into the individual milestones they had maybe it would have looked pretty different But your conspiracy theory is pretty interesting like it's always fun. Yeah and and also there's just too many stories of this and David Grushes You know on oath said that they there are back engineering programs and he was read into these and that they've been around for a long time But this is the assertion of that movie the age of disclosure that the real problem is that they have misappropriated Funs and lied to Congress and so they come out and tell you okay We do have this program. Well guess what everybody goes to jail because you guys are a bunch of liars and you've been stealing money And you've been doing it whatever you want to do with this money. I don't know like how much how much? How much oversight is there and back engineering UFO programs? You know so probably a lot of people getting trouble a lot of people go to jail on top of that These things are all being done by weapons manufacturers, right? Like where are you gonna bring them to? Well you're gonna bring them to Lockheed Martin or you're gonna bring them to you know rocket time or it's gonna be someone that does that kind of work Yeah, you're not gonna do it on your it's not gonna be like we'll do it No, you're gonna have to bring it to people that already make spaceships or bring it to people that already make jets Yeah, and so they have a massive competitive advantage over any other company that's doing it So then there's other companies that also had contracts with the United States government they can sue and So he lays out all the problems with disclosure and their assertion is that The only thing what we need if we really want to find out the truth is we're gonna need widespread amnesty for all these people that were involved My problem with that is that's what I would say too if I had been stealing money for Decades and decades. I'd be like all right. We did your amnesty and I'll tell you where all this stuff is I'm like how do we know what this stuff is? Whether or not these are just top secret military programs with advanced propulsion technology that's unavailable to the public and They're gonna say that is aliens and they back engineered this and they did that like They clearly don't want to tell people they don't want people to know think a large part of it is probably because they could get in trouble But I think also a large part of it is because it's fun to keep secrets from people. Yeah Especially when you're the government. Why don't fuck those people. Yeah, fuck them. They don't even know UFOs are real Meanwhile, you know, we're going into a bunker in the middle of the mountain and we're remote viewing You know, it's it's probably there's probably a lot of fun involved in having access to information that most people would kill for yeah I mean there's so much information that We just we just don't have access to Which brings me to this question? With it seems like one of the things that's happening with both with AI and with technology in general is that You've more and more access to information and more and more answers to questions than ever before yeah at a certain point time There's gonna be no bottleneck. Yeah, and we're gonna know everything about everything Yeah, so how is anyone in government? Gonna keep a secret. How is any corruption ever gonna be possible? It's a certain point time all of it will get uncovered like it's much more difficult to commit murder now with DNA evidence, right? Back in the 1800s like I didn't see nothing. Yeah, I wasn't there and then you're free like now They do your fingerprints now. They get your DNA now. There's flak cameras. There's like more and more and more It's harder to get away with things. Yeah, so it seems like to me like whatever they have Whatever anybody has Ultimately, there's gonna come a point in time where there's so much data and so much information and you could run all your questions like There's an AI fact checker for politicians now. Yeah, so while politician is giving a speech You can run an AI fact checker and in real time it will tell you whether or not these people are full shit This it seems like the direction is there's not gonna be anybody full shit in the future because it's not gonna be possible Yeah, I mean the governments still would have access to things that the human beings wouldn't have access to like like regular people and particularly the defense related weapons related like for example When they did the Venezuelan thing Mm-hmm. I don't think people in Venezuela even understood like what even those weapons were What do they we did they they were described as something The the literal words used were like alien like technology so we even we didn't know that the United States had access to that quality of defense technology until that incident happened So there are obviously going to be secrets right especially the highest stakes things I would say like building frontier AI models is similar to that Of course as more more models are getting open source. I think the knowledge is diffusing but still The the true amount of details you need to actually train it really amazing frontier reasoning capability model It's still not like widely diffused. So I my my things my my my Hypothesis is that whatever is extremely high stakes Will still not be widely diffused It's it it at least there'll be enough Structures and place to keep it secret forever not forever, but for a while for a while. Yeah, that's the thing long term short like Things to get out and people do understand long term is what I'm looking at like look when we're looking at history We're talking in these like when we're looking all these different temples and knowledge different things We're talking about thousands and thousands and thousands years and thousands of year time span in between each individual one With our world we're talking about Massive change in 200 years. Yeah, like this country's 250 years old think about how cookie that is yeah That is a blink of an eye in history. Do we understand everything that happened in the United States? No exactly So there are still some details there sure hidden from us like we don't fully understand everything right for now Yeah, but my question is as time goes on 250 years from now isn't even possible to keep any secrets from anybody and Is that a good thing? It might be a good thing. It sounds horrible to people because they're like oh my god What about privacy right but also what about lies? Yeah, no more lies like everyone's gonna know what you're thinking Everyone's gonna know everything people do all the time. Yeah, I mean if you're a true surveillance state Obviously there are no secrets right Except about the government itself That's the problem. Yeah, does it bottom neck with the government or does it get to a point where there you can't even have government secrets because as Technology evolves and as human civilization evolves Secrets will be less and less not just necessary But secrets will be problematic because there'll be an impediment to knowledge the impediment to understanding the true The true scope of what the world is like the true nature of all of our various moving parts Yeah, as long as the human quality the intrinsic human quality of curiosity and truth seeking this which is you know Universal it's existed ever since We know human beings if that continues and that continues to be the case then people will have enough incentives to figure out the truth. Yeah, and And if something is actually hard to get to it only motivates you more to actually go and find it for sure But so my question is where does this all go? You know and you obviously work in AI and when you think about AI and when you think about just technology in general and you extrapolate you just take it from here and you just Plot it out like what is a possible scenario of 250 years from now Like what does it even look like what does the United States look like at 500 years old? It's very hard to know I'll be very honest. I think it's very hard to know it even five years from now How it's gonna look like that's crazy. Yeah five years ago was like five years ago Whoever is at the top most in AI. I don't even consider myself like that But whoever is the most frontier level of decision-making in AI five years ago I don't think they predicted the exact state we are in today Nobody did if they did they would have already procured all the compute and like you know Manufactured all the chips bought all the fabs. They've done all that right? Just this counterfactual Everyone's like bottleneck by not having enough compute and like we have we don't have enough chips We don't have enough power these are all the problems that if you invite anybody in AI and ask What is the bottleneck in AI today? Everybody would say power? I think Jensen was here and he's the same thing right? Yeah but Okay, like if you predicted this exact stay five years before Wouldn't you have secured enough power and started building more power plants yourself and start getting permits and like started like planning out capacity? No, nobody did that Everything's reactive to the demand that we're having today, so and that's just five years. Yeah, that's just five years So when you asked me to predict 250 years like I just have to honestly say I don't know Do you ever sit back and think about it though? I don't think about it What it could be I don't think about it. So there are like a lot of fun I use perplexity a lot for these kind of things especially those new feature computer inside it and One one one one this is just for hypothetical scenarios. Let's say there is an AGI right? I've seen you ask a lot of people about this and and a lot of conventional answers is like oh like we'll just become managers of the AI's don't worry but If the price of cognition is the price of compute managing an AI is also pretty much doable by the AI itself Because it's the bottleneck is not like unique Cognition capability there so the value of the society will automatically shift to what is scarce and Fundamentally what is being scarce is like asking like high quality questions about things Okay like what if like we just completely spend all our time Understanding the past like that's an interesting endeavor. It was not cool before, but it'll it'll become cool again And like we usually use the view like archaeology or history is not something that's like worth having a career and because it doesn't pay Well, but what if it's actually such paying you go a lot more now that like actual knowledge works being done My eyes and I think it's all mundane and all the price of that is basically it's zero Right in archaeology would be one of the few things that it wouldn't have access to because it doesn't have the actual ground I can't get into the ground and do the scans and well, let's say we have like robots to go do that But but you're still gonna be the one probing right because you have incomplete information all the time Even the idea for okay, let's go explore this particular area Let's go understand better. Let's let's go try to reverse engineer Let's go try to build this again. Oh, how would it be if we wanted to do the same thing on the moon? There are like so many interesting projects to work on for us as long as we are We stay curious and we stay interested in like a lot of things that we've done before and try to understand like civilization That I'm not really concerned about like what things we get to do. We might be doing a lot more cool things for what it's worth Like I don't know if anybody would be like coming and telling you that oh, it's so cool to like open and excel sheet every day and make financial models Compared to like this got to be somebody out there that likes that. I mean that's something about like the task you do and and what You get paid for like what is the job title blah blah blah and some people associate their personal work with like Where they work at and how much they get paid and I think that that thing is gonna collapse in a world where like The price of all that cognition is gonna be the price of compute What do you think happens to people if a Large percentage of jobs get replaced by AI I think they'll find new things We've always gravitated towards things that are scarce because that's where the value lies and so if if You know have you what one interesting analogy is Have you the Gulf states where there's an abundance of resources and export Their resources to other states and that pays for the whole state You know how like they offer everybody? free electricity subsidized health subsets education and like no taxes when I first went to Dubai like in almost like 20 years ago They told me like people don't pay taxes here and nobody pays for electricity here and education is like super cheap and I was like wait. How's that real? and and The way that's real is that I mean of course Texas also has no taxes and you know any well-run state can do this But the way it's happening is that because the government provides you all these things it becomes a wrong TA state like you offer political acquiescence to the state and What ended up happening is Citizen's day or expect the state to find them jobs expect the state to take care of like job displacement for them So they don't worry said made them a little more lazy so that's not a good future to have where? Some people talk about AI subsidies and AI dividends that get paid to everybody I think we need to do some form of that but that that an entirety won't solve the problem right well the thing about Human nature is sort of undeniable and if you give people the ability to be lazy a large percentage of people will take that That's right large percentage won't though. Yeah There's gonna be enough people that are inspired to do something and they say okay Well now my basic needs are taken care of let me pursue my actual interests and find purpose in that Yeah, because that's a lot of people find purpose in whatever their occupation is yeah, and if we can shift that Defining purpose in which your actual interests are yeah, and then really pursuing something whatever it is Yeah, then you'll still have meaning in your life and we've just something come up here keeps going back to staying curious Yes, and finding value in your relationships your your family caring for each other If you ask a lot of retired people actually retired people is a good demographic to understand What would happen what what are things people find meaning in after like works taken off them and all majority of the answers are always like family caring You know personal like like relationships and Community like these are the things retired people keep doing to like you know keep them so active and make up everyday and have something to look for So all those things will become even more important at a time when like work itself doesn't mean much Doesn't mean humans won't be status seeking. I think we'll still be but status is not gonna come from Whether you're working at you know like a particular famous bank or a tech company or whatever It'll be driven by like How interesting you are are you interesting to talk to when I can talk to an AI like despite that? Are you still interesting to talk to are there certain things? I get out of talking to you that Completely change my perspective about like a bunch of things or is it just fun to hang around you? Can we have a compound relationship together? And I think again it goes back to like you know being curious about things Well, this is best case in area right worst case scenario is civilization upheaval chaos civil war and It's possible it's possible even without an AI right? Yeah, so we've gotten real close to it a couple of times exactly yeah, so and and and and and we did not need an AGI like scenario for a Civilization collapse in the past as you clearly seen right a calamity can just take out all of us Why bought everything sure especially natural ones. Yeah, that's why I'm not a big fan of everybody claiming that the AI is gonna You know kill us so like AGI is gonna destroy humanity and like it's too dangerous and we all need to stop Doing these things but at the same time continuing to say as innocent and continuing to make money you you have to have one's consistent position my position is that Whether AI or not I think being curious is gonna serve you really well I think it's gonna help you have a better life and There are two past the curiosity one that can kill it and one that can super charge it in my opinion the one that kills curiosity is algorithmic feeds The the brain rot that you're fed every day of it just you know this continuous doom scrolling That's bad And the one that can super charge it is AI Okay, like now that you could just ask Whatever you want if everybody has like a pull it up Jamie for them, you know, right and that's amazing. So okay, so all you have to do is Be curious about a lot of different things and of course talk to interesting people Engaging the interesting activities together if money is no longer an issue you can fund fashion projects yourself You don't have to like require government funding or right venture funding like what if you just wanted to build a mini K of yourself, okay, like you find a piece of land somewhere there's a lot of land in America May more than than we know what to do with it and and and surely we can build a lot of interesting things there well, that's a good glass half full scenario and one of the things that I keep coming to is this whole idea of People working and making money and having careers and having portfolios bank accounts on This is all very recent in human history. Yeah very recent very recent very recent But we've become accustomed to this as a way of life and we I Microsoft Microsoft built this concept of a knowledge worker Because they wanted to sell more office software Really yeah like like this whole idea of putting a PC on every desk and making you like glue to the PC was there That was Bill Gates mission put a PC on every desk that fucking wizard What a what a credible accomplishment because boy did they nail it? Yeah, so it was not about making computing like beautiful or anything in the way like Steve Jobs and mission did right It was just about like buters sell more software sell more computers because that way you can sell more software and And if you sell more software you become rich and and and and the company this was a machine though is this you know built it's essentially a large sales machine that's built to sell software and and and and Now they sell cloud but whatever like that that that's essentially the the reason that like you know We all got trained to use software People who have intended tutorials on how to use excel how to use word How to use all these email tools and then now that became the upskilling you needed to go work at different companies and then Right code and like whatever right so that if that part's gonna be done by me. I it's not necessarily a bad thing Because this is not actually the way you Feel a real purpose and fulfillment in your own life If if you were never exposed to that Whatever you had as the intrinsic curiosity in you That that's probably what you should be doing. Yeah, there could be a completely new way to live life. Yeah, where we're not dependent upon labor for basic needs and But then it's gonna be incumbent upon people they're gonna have to figure out a way to be either self-starting or we're gonna have to expose people to Things that are gonna excite their curiosity and make that a mandate. Yeah, it has to start from schools. Yeah, and as long as we keep rewarding people for having answers and sort of asking interesting questions It's it's gonna be a difficult change Like in schools you're always rewarded for being smart based on whether you have answers like many different questions Like who cares like all the swimming questions can be answered by a eyes Have you ever like flip the script where you say okay like I'm gonna the smartest person the rumors of one who has the most interesting questions Okay, like what what kind of students can you cultivate based on that? Like imagine if the room had no pressure to always know the answer But the freedom to ask all of a lot of questions where because sometimes if someone asks a question it'll it does Make you pause and go I never even thought of that, but that's it Like that's the question. Yeah, and it takes a Meaning so many people have so many different perspectives which is one of the more interesting things that I've experience doing this podcast is I get to talk to so many different people and they Very so widely there's so many different ways of looking at the world and so many different ways of engaging with the world and so many Different things that people are fascinated with that they spent their entire life studying and pursuing It's like you get this rich tapestry of the human experience. That's just I would have never been exposed to this many people Yeah, and in turn I've been able to expose these people to all these other folks that are just listening and watching right now And it's fucking incredible and it's such a for me It's like the perfect job I've never had a job that moral lines with my own personality as much as this because I've always been that kid like shut the fuck up with all the questions I've always been that that's a system right it's not it's not your fault right like it's actually the reason you're successful Now is exact thing that people told you to shut up about in the past Right. Yeah, so you know hey you you know stop bothering my lecture You know asking all these unrelated questions. It's mainly a frustration of the teacher that they don't have the answers to you right or sure and and and Now that that bottleneck is gone We did this experiment with one one instructor at MIT who taught the introduction to biology class Where he came and told us that he's going to give perplexity to all the kids all the students and They would use it as part of the lectures So so instead of fighting AI You just give a ass everybody and let them ask whatever questions they want and they can actually use it in the exams too so so how do you even design questions for an exam in in such a world is Maybe you just encourage people to pose a question that AI can't answer right now and that becomes your research project and You turn everybody into a scientist Fundamentally like there's this belief that scientists have to go through a rigorous PhD and like you have to get you know a Credited by like an amazing university to be that sure, but Anyone who's curious can be a scientist the only thing that's required to be a good scientist's intellectual humility To understand that you could be wrong about things things that everyone takes for granted. You could still question them and When you when you're presented with new evidence and new data you're willing to change your mind and you're willing to operate with Ambiguity and uncertainty about the world That's that's basically all the qualities you need to be a scientist and you can run your experiments You can gather data you can gather evidence and you can consult people you can bring in experts and talk to them and And as long as you're uncovering more more about the world You are a scientist you don't need a PhD to feel that you're you know allowed to be a scientist or not And I think that's the most important quality we need to Inculcate in our kids the upcoming generation So that they all feel more liberated. Okay, like finally. I don't have to memorize this textbook or these literature materials and like I don't have to feel bad if I get like 12 out of 20 Okay, who cares like he has always going to get 20 out of 20 That's not what you're meant to be like good at of course mass of the foundations to basics great but Your jobs to actually pose interesting questions Yeah, and the intellect suit excuse me intellectual humility is so important Because of one of the things that was really weird about the whole covid pandemic was that we weren't supposed to question science Yeah, so like that or when Fauci said if you question Anthony Fauci you are questioning science That's because they try to assign credibility through their degrees. Yes through their affiliation Appeal to the not through the scientific method right Anybody should be allowed to ask questions as long as they are open to new evidence Yeah, and that's the most important quality of scientists Well the scientific method alone I mean it's one of the most important things that we can use to try to figure out what's real and what's not real and as soon as someone says Don't use it. Yeah, so don't question. Well, wait a minute and then there was this an actual government pushed to silence questioning and legitimate Researchers were kicked off of Twitter because they didn't back the narrative. Yeah, like this is all anti-science This is hard. This is not your questioning science will science demands questioning. Yeah, it's what it is Yeah, when you don't understand something the the best thing you can do is ask all possible questions Right, and so curbing that is almost like a way of saying Look, I'm gonna tell you what happened you need to believe in my review and I'm not open to new perspectives I wonder if anybody has used AI to try to map out possible scenarios for where technology leads human civilization and what could be done to mitigate the problems and push it in the proper Direction like have a bunch of different models. Yeah, of how this could play out. Yeah, I mean I try to do that for fun, but I haven't done it in a series enough way to how I think a proper answer to that right, but I think like you know a lot of things that we are doing today will not be considered needed or valuable I and and maybe a little bit of taking our own lessons from the past I don't know if you when you grew up as a student did you have to like be good at mental math like multiplying arbitrary numbers was that Consider the same as smartness or remembering people's full numbers or something. Well, you had to because there's I mean you had little Adric's books as we just carry around like a little adult address book that I keep on my desk Yeah, a little tiny thing with everybody's number and name that's the only way I knew people's numbers And I remembered a bunch of them like all my friends. Yeah, I had all my friends I don't have any of my friends numbers remembered. Yeah, maybe my wife and my friend Eddie I have two numbers in my head, but but was there a time and people thought somebody was smart based on how good their memory power was. Oh Yeah, definitely but do you would you say that now? Well, people are impressed if you know things now. Yeah, I have a bunch of like Weird information obviously that I've gathered through so many years doing this podcast and just so many years of being curious You know like sometimes even my own daughter's like, oh fuck do you know that? Like this is what I do like that's my thing. Yeah, you know, I pay attention to stuff. Yeah But yeah, I mean Memory itself is always very impressive and someone has an excellent memory. Yeah, and can pull up facts of the past Yeah, we automatically equate that to intelligence. Yeah, I think it's impressive, but it's not necessarily a sign of being intelligent, right? Like I think that's just a look you have a very fast lookup table in your head. That's great. It's very valuable But I still think like being smart is all about posting the most interesting Questions also the decisions that you make and whether or not you self correct. Yeah, when you make mistakes Yeah, yeah, yeah, all those things exactly so when you when you have an amplifier to intelligence like an AI all the time very Lookups is essentially something you can delegate Reasoning for decision making is something you can delegate but posing the right questions together the right data and then forming your own judgment based on what it reasons and comes up with and Finally having the courage to make the decision. That's still you that agency that intrinsic curiosity to ask the right question the scientific intellectual humility to like you know gather new evidence always questioning your beliefs that that is still you and so I Feel like that is essentially what would be considered smart in the ages to come if somebody's like You know like a proxy scientist or whatever like no more Doesn't have to go to like my dear Harvard get a PhD to be a scientist or to be considered a scientist Because all the scientific literature is open and like so accessible to everybody and you can you can you can even take a paper written by an expert and Using AI understand it deeply ask a lot of questions and maybe even disprove what they claim to be true That's the whole peer review process right the peer review process is all about questioning somebody's paper and That's why like you know what whatever you said happened in COVID days is is wrong The peer review process is all about questioning somebody's paper. And that's why like, you know, whatever you said happened in COVID days is wrong. Like, you should be allowed to ask questions about even eminent scientists' work. It's okay. Like if you're dumb and you had the wrong questions, sure, you're going to learn from that. It's worse than not being allowed to ask the question. Yeah, great. It's going to be interesting to see what the future of education looks like, like how valuable are degrees when essentially AI is going to be able to do the majority of whatever work you need done on variety. Like how good are they right now at just law? Like you could ask questions. Pretty pretty amazing. Yeah. Pretty good. How good are they at mathematics? Perfect. How good are they at coding? Way better than people. Yeah. And at a certain point in time, it's going to be interesting to like, what is education now? Is education just providing you with information? Because that information is readily available. Yeah. Or is education teaching you how to think? Yeah. Teaching you how to pursue your interests and be curious and have intellectual humility and understand what you know, what you don't know? I think that that's what it should be. I still think institutions will preserve their brand value because there is a certain aspect of education that's outside of learning, which is just having access to other curious and intelligent people. Sure. And community. Yeah. And brands that drag good communities, peer groups, love, blah. But the actual process of learning sort of has to change. And what you're rewarded for has to change. So fundamentally everything flows down is downstream of the incentive. So if the incentive is scored the highest on the exam based on answers, you're not really changing much. If you need to change that process, you need to change the process of what do you reward a student like? What is a plus or a? Right. That's where we need to start at. Let's also, we know we talked about this the other day, that the education system in this country was designed to make workers. Exactly. That's what they did when the first started doing it. Yeah. The term. The curriculum was designed around that. Yeah. Well, in India, it's still the case by the way. Really? Even if you're a computer, even if you go into a computer science degree, I don't know if it's still because I shouldn't speak. But at least when I was there and for many years after, the first two years you just spent learning hardcore electrical and mechanical engineering, you would learn like welding using late machines. You would have to let go and do workshops, carpentry, a lot of these things. It was fun. I think there's a lot of value in that. So in hindsight, I actually think it was fun to learn soldering and how to make circuits on redboards and circuit boards. But if somebody was just interested in some, just writing code, let's say, back then, all this is kind of like pointless to learn, but you had to go through it to be qualified as an engineer. And the reason the curriculum was designed that way is because that's what the labor force was required back then to build all factories and all these things. So you had to learn mechanical engineering, you had to learn fluid mechanics, whatever. But I think that that should also change because if the way like you do work changes, then what your train for in college should also change. And it's much harder to change these things. People are much slower, they're scared to do changes, disruptions always look down upon. And so I think we should let's at least start at the incentive structure right from the schools, right from the colleges. Like let's not like reward people based on like how much well, it seems like in the future when things do radically change, and they seem like they're inevitable, they're going to radically change. Universities and schools are going to be rewarded for having developed thinkers that are able to adapt to this new world. That's right. Yeah, so they're going to have to figure out how to adjust their curriculum. Yeah, because the tools are so spectacular now that just this idea of just memorizing information is it's not that's not what you're going to need to get by in the future. It's not. And I guess like one proxy different schools use is like maybe if more entrepreneurs arise out of your school, you're probably creator a lot of independent thinkers because they are willing to take a fresh perspective to raise a problem and build their own thing from scratch. And fundamentally that's what America's always been about is you know some the American dream of coming here and like having your own idea and still be taken seriously by a bunch of people. The whole idea of venture capital in Leagues this year or like family and friends around this whole idea of just having your friends help you to bootstrap a business and then turning it into a success. And success doesn't mean like multi billion or 10 billion or whatever right like as long as it pays you enough that you don't have to work for somebody else and you can live a fulfilling life and you can just go explore your passions. That's success. That's actually a better success than creating company based on what other people want you to do and then hating your job for it. Yeah, and having a yacht and being miserable and working every day. That's why I said like not the smartest or the richest people are not always the ones who are the most fulfilling lives. The most curious people have the most fulfilling lives because they have better relationships. They're actually able to sit and look at something and you know be curious about it instead of like being worried about what's going on. Well what did the American dream what was it to you when you weren't in America? Like what what is it like? What is how is it discussed? Well to me like I always thought America is the only country where you can come here and have an idea and people listen to you and and and encourage you to go pursue it. The risk-seeking culture is just incredible here. Everybody everywhere else you cannot are like either explicitly or implicitly or forced to defer to authority. Okay like go and ask a permission of this person go and ask a permission of that person or get their approval or get their insight or sure you can get their consult everybody out there but if you have a thought that challenges what they believe in this country still encourages you to like go pursue it. And so yes like when I came here obviously you know Google was the number one company that everybody wanted to work in but it's also the same country where it allows you as a new person to start a new idea that challenges one of the biggest companies in this own country and it actually wants it. People actually want new ideas and and then you can consistently see that there are like always going to be more and more new ideas and new companies to be created here and so that spirit of like questioning is encouraged a lot here and it happens in academic research. I started off as an academic even there a lot of ideas when I had it and I would share to people you know people actually give you very honest feedback about things but they don't stop you from working on anything and that's fantastic because that's very fresh it's really liberating and that's not anywhere else. I would say it's not an indie. It's a simplification to say it's not any anywhere else but it's not as encouraged. It's not as encouraged the incentive structure is not quite there and ability to like be taken seriously for some crazy ideas as is why America is still at the top but it's crazy to me that if the American dream is so compelling and so many people come here for it why doesn't the rest of the world sort of adopt those values? It's hard you know like it's a lot of it is cultural like America was was was born was made from from like you know a piece of land essentially right and a lot of ideas that we built here a lot of industries that we built here were all like created here from nothing and that required you to like go take bold risks. I think Jeff Bezos said this in some podcast that where else would you like be able to go raise like a few million dollars for an idea that has like five to 10% chance of working and then fail at it and still go and raise another few million dollars for your next idea. No but nowhere else people are willing to like people who get rich here actually want to encourage and be part of somebody else's crazy journey because it's hard to pursue all crazy bets yourself. So it's an ecosystem and once something becomes an ecosystem that has network effects so it's very hard to copy that elsewhere. And so your value is measured in your curiosity and your willing to work your willingness to work on whatever it is that is your pursuit. Yes and then eventually adjusting and learning and catching fire with one of them. Correct and you have to work hard like you know like I'm a big believer in intense hard work I think nothing great can be accomplished by being soft and so all this like recent push for you know having a lot of work life balance. Sure if you have work life if that's what you want and I think there are certain jobs that will give you that but when you're trying to do something from scratch and you're trying to create something from nothing it's not meant to be easy. There are some sacrifices that have to be made and you're signing up to be part of that experience that surreal joy you get from doing something that's felt almost impossible to achieve. And you're not staying up later or waking up early because you're getting paid more. Maybe you might not get paid anything maybe this whole thing goes to nothing but that experience you're getting of being part of something that feels very hard to achieve is what you're signing up for to be part of. Yeah and if you're not find something else. It's fine. Respect that wrong with that. Exactly and the country has enough jobs provide for all kinds of like needs right and everybody goes through different phases in their life sometimes they feel a little lazy or like disillusioned okay and so what I like about this country is that there's a lot of curious people here there's a lot of like so many different people you know like whether they use AS and RAS they're all like finding meaning and like so many interesting projects. Well obviously I don't know any other country really because I was born here but the people that do talk to me about what the American dream is like from another country they're the most passionate and the most supportive of this this idea this experiment in self government and this the just the whole idea that the country operates on that anybody can chase their dream. Yeah you can if you have a dream and you're willing to work hard you could actually do it in this country. That's right yeah that's you know it's most the people that are most passionate about that idea oftentimes are people that come from somewhere else where that wasn't available. And it's not just like you know people coming from one particular country and on the it's it's the attitude it's the the way the system works and rewards you to like be bold and take bets against established players it's okay right it's okay to like be an upstart a challenger and people love that like underdog and I think you know that's fantastic like and that culture is continuing yes they're all like multi-trillion dollar companies here and they're all going to become even bigger but people still want the young hungry person to also be successful. Yeah well they love disruptors yeah and people underdogs in this country yeah yeah it's it's it's it's universal it's not specific to technology right like I'm sure everybody would love a hundred ox story that wants to go against like Coca-Cola or Pepsi or something sure yeah oh in sports it's our favorite sports yeah we don't like when the guy who's supposed to win wins we'd love when the guy who's not supposed to win triumphs yeah yeah yeah underdog story yeah that's a very uniquely American story to me that's what this countries I mean sure there's a lot of obstacles and challenges just like every other country there are things here that are challenging but it's one thing that has consistently stayed true one of the big fears that people in America have about technology in particular is that without being aware that this was going to take place everybody gave up their data everybody gave up their data and didn't recognize it was a commodity that in turn made these corporations immensely wealthy and powerful and then they have the ability to shape narratives and that that concerns people because using their ideological position as leverage to try to push that through technology that has a immense control and influence over people and that we didn't see technology and corporations is having that much control over how society views itself and how we interact with each other and there's a real real concern that these companies got so big and have like there's a guy named Robert Epstein who's done a lot of work on um married or curated search engine results and how much that can have have you read seen any of his stuff I think I've seen this yeah how much that can affect elections yeah how much that can affect people's perceptions on any societal issue that's coming up yeah and it's concerning it really is because they do curate search results it's not simply you know you just run it out there and you get this is the data no yeah you know if you look for specific political figures depending upon where they fall in the right or left spectrum and depending upon which way the company forms the the corporation forms falls rather you'll get different results and that sucks you know that's it's very concerning that people don't recognize they don't they don't have the ability to see how that is dangerous for all of society yeah to have that kind of power and wield it in that way where you're not being honest about accurate objective information you're pushing particular ideologies yeah so I think it's kind of like uh this is almost an effect of the asymmetry that exists between the amount of AI power that centralized systems and centralized companies have and the amount of AI power as you as a sovereign individual has so when you don't have the AI's to just go judge for yourself like what you should be reading and fed you're obviously like under the influence of what you know whatever big tech companies controlling the information for but when you have access to all those AI's you can actually just customize what you want to see by telling the AI like hey this is what I think you should actually question and tell me until now you never had that power for yourself you're finally getting it right and eventually we will be able to have our own LLMs like our own models we would be able to host in our own hardware we don't have to rely on like one centralized model given to us by like any specific model company and using that you can shape it to your your beliefs your custom you know your your custom data and and uh so when you're consuming search result you can actually task that AI that you control and you run so nobody can shut off access to it to tell you like hey like can you actually like give me a contrary and perspective on this or like can you tell me if these search results are actually biased so I think we need to give individuals more sovereignty but more access to their own AI's that they own and run on a piece of hardware they own themselves and this is the whole like this is going to be reading to the whole rise of local AI's so as AI models like today they're very power inefficient they're running on large data centers but in a year or two from now whatever capability that exists in the most power hungry data centers will be you it'll be possible to run it in some box that you own may not yeah it's already happening it's already happening that like there are like interesting hardware projects like the Apple Mac mini and video DGX where you can actually host a reasonable size model and put it in a box and have it run and you don't have to pay for all the tokens it produces you you just have to plug it into your power core and it works and you know Duncan my friend Duncan trustful he does that yeah and and and today the capability of that model that can run locally is not quite there so you would still prefer to use something that runs on the data center but eventually this is going to be a spectrum that's going to be some percentage of tasks that you would start delegating to this local system it'll be a hybrid model and over time it could end up being the case that you could buy something that feels like a refrigerator for your home which is your own AI box and host a model that you control so nobody can arbitrarily shut off access to it one day and then you can you can have that be your weapon against what the big tech ones you to be fed or believe in so this is the only way you can fight this because they have far more computing power far more data far more algorithms than you so the only way you can fight that is you have something you own yourself and with the rise of open source models open source LLMs you can just and progress in local hardware and and build Apple and video and tell they're all doing amazing work here you could potentially change the future and give people more power and this may not be as expensive as people think well that's a good solution because I've always wondered like is are these searches like using Google is that going to be a relevant one day because you already can just ask your phone like I most of the time if I want to have an answer for something I just ask perplexity is like what is it yeah instead of like having to sift through all these Google searches yeah and try to figure out what it's showing me first and get to page three words what I really want to know yeah I can get the accurate information then follow up questions are instantaneous yeah and and and and even the models that are running the complexity app today they're all in the cloud eventually you'll be able to do that on a box that you own you can still you can still use the front end the UI of the app but you can control the compute that runs on on on on piece of hardware you may ask why why do we care okay like what if some someday like the data center gets taken off like he ran was bombing data centers right like what is someday like the government decides that model is no longer available you you want some control over like like what models you can run and like you can you may even want to shape it to like your context that you never want to be living on any data center and and and and I think that's where I believe the individual gets more sovereignty against big tech and that's how like we fight surveillance or like centralization of power yeah and certainly pushing narratives um what do you think happens with social media because social media and as you were talking about before like algorithms like that it's one of the biggest problems in terms of the way people view the world yeah I'm curious what do you think like you know like my opinion is that it's not good for the kids terrible for them yeah but I think they should have some exposure to it because I think it's good to know that it's a thing and I think children are fairly resilient and they learn but the anxiety levels of kids is much higher than ever before yeah suicidal ideations higher self harm yeah yeah I'm a little my belief is that um when you're just fed of feed and and and and the algorithm of the social media companies decides what you're going to see next it it curves your curiosity and I don't I don't think things that curb human curiosity should be encouraged yeah I agree and so if the app is deciding a way of air it asks you what you're interested in and helps you to come up and find things that that are very related to what you're interested in right that's awesome but that's not how it works it it's literally like it starts with something you start doing scrolling and then start showing you what you just grow and then you end up in an echo chamber and and that's not that's not necessarily good well you can get trapped yeah you can get I'm in a trap of schizophrenics lately on Instagram but it's just mostly schizophrenics like people that tell me that the rightful president of the United States and like the tele-guys and showered in days and you know and if you have a phone you can create an account and you just start uploading nonsense and then for whatever reason I've watched a couple of them so now they just keep showing them to me as full of AI slot right now yeah a lot of AI slot like it's it's not even clear and it's not labeled also clearly but where it's being made with AI or not so often so essentially it's leading to a complete laws in in trust where when I see something I don't even know if it's real anymore right and it's gonna get worse yeah it's gonna get worse to the extent that you're you're gonna like your default would be that this is AI and then like you're gonna have to go through multiple years to finally verify if it was real and and even like verify the account is supposed a lot of AI stuff so it's not it's not about like whether the account is verified by meta or some or whatever right so I think fundamentally I'm I feel like okay the way I think about what are pieces of technology if did not exist would be a really bad thing for the world and what are pieces of technology did not exist wouldn't even matter and and I feel like social media is more towards the second yeah like you know searching for information and answering questions and like getting you know AI still like do things for you help you learn new things faster all that stuff is some we need more of that but because it's supercharged are curiosity where it's like brain rot feeds with AI slop doesn't actually super charge of curiosity it actually curbs our curiosity and so if we believe that if you believe in the curiosity premium idea we need to encourage things that super charge of curiosity and discourage things that curb our curiosity do you anticipate a time where we recognize the dangers of algorithms and there is some discussion to either curb them or allow people to have control over them in a real meaningful way like you could dictate maybe through AI even that there's an AI interface to your algorithm that understands your particular emotional needs your curiosity like only show me this yeah this is what I'm interested carpentry and basketball games yeah show me those things yeah I don't want to I don't want to see who's getting divorced I don't give a fuck about this yeah yeah so here's the thing you can still customize on most of these social apps you know if you it'll be deeply buried somewhere in the setting somewhere and you can go and say stuff but the reason it's buried is because once you you always have to say it or like it's the starting entry point for your experience there your engagement time would go down because once you consume the content that you really want you you would go back to your work which is what you really need to be doing but that doesn't help them sell more ads right and so it deans incentives are not aligned and and so Elon has this really good metric he talks about where it's like a total amount of under-graded minutes spent on the app should go up it's hard to measure it's hard to measure it's more like a in spirit the right metric but this metric is also why it's hard to make money on ads if you care about this metric this is why X doesn't really make a lot of money on ads compared to you know Instagram or YouTube right because you're kind of like optimizing for interestingness like doesn't mean X has everything right there's a lot of chaos there's a lot of memes there's a lot of like weird shit going on there as well but in general social media is not necessarily like great for I think it's terrible for people but it also provides you with a way better understanding of what's going on in the world than has ever existed before X particularly X particularly because it's it's a place for like discourse it's it's a text-based app more than a video based app right so naturally like people tend to engage in discussions and debates and you know there's a lot of curious debates going on there and a lot of interesting viewpoints expressway people so I think in terms of the undergrad minutes it's actually one of the better social media apps but apps that are purely based on like video or images and largely video these days I think that's just off you know just trying to get your eyeballs in time yeah those are the mind numbers yeah they're just numb your mind I mean it's depressing when you go to a metro and you just see people just scrolling through their feed nobody everybody doing it you look the entire car everyone's doing it it's just insane yeah it's weird yeah I always say that if there was a drug that existed and maybe people stare at their hand for six hours a day everybody would be like get that out of here yeah but that's essentially what we're doing yeah because like most of what people are looking at most of the time they don't even remember yeah they're scrolling through this thing it's brain rot it's brain rot it curves at curiosity yeah I mean Apple has these settings in different apps have you tried this very what you can set the timer for every app no I just use discipline I don't I don't engage very much anymore I very I dip my toe into x every day for a few seconds okay what's everybody mad at what's going on who stole this who how much corruptions here who got killed there okay bye and then I just check out I'm I don't want to do it yeah and Instagram to me is just nonsense it's I just look at that every now and then for nonsense and occasionally something interesting really YouTube is my main go-to thing yeah because YouTube is my most unreaded minutes yeah YouTube for me is always interesting there's always like some cool thing on cosmology there's some inch I watch fights on YouTube I watch professional pool matches that's what I do in the most that's where I really like find my actual interests and yeah fulfill my curiosity long form content is what human mind should be trained to consume more whether it's books whether it's like you know yeah 30 minute videos explaining something and you you need to train your mind to actually complete it that's actually the biggest problem of the younger generation of more they're the real experience short form video they're unable to actually like complete like long videos anymore that's true but also at the same time the rise of podcasts is happening yeah and it's great it's great well so there's it's not it's not universal it's like there's a lot of people that don't find fulfillment in all the doomsday all the nonsense yeah they really do want yeah I'm particularly just focused on the younger generation I'm sure like people like us can adapt to like okay let's say maybe have a temporary addiction to social apps and you can but a lot of the young people or the people like I meet kids like at the mall that are 11 that listen to my podcast really yeah wow I know it's nuts they go I love your podcast my God let's you listen get out of here no I'm always joking about it that's really cool but no there's a lot of like particularly young boys that come up to me all the time that are interested in it that's amazing I love it I love it because then they're gonna get exposed to some interesting ideas and yeah it'll also encourage them to have those kind of conversations with each other right yeah who's who's podcast do you listen to I love Tim Dylan's he's probably my favorite because it's the most accurate and also satirical and hilarious view on everything that's going on in the world in terms of like war and world news and culture shit and he's my favorite he was just on here yesterday I don't fucking love that guy to death he's so funny he's so crazy it's like his mind works in such a unique way and it's developed because his podcast is different where he very rarely has guests so most of the time it's just hymn ranting and it's producer laughing and he's the best rantor that's ever lived I don't think there's anybody that's even close he's the goat like there's like I don't think there's any argument every comedian agrees like as far as like just the ability to just sit in front of a microphone and rant like Bill Burr does it well he's good at it there's a few other guys that are good at it no one's as good as Tim he's the most consistently entertaining Sitting front of a microphone and rant like Bill Burr does it well. He's good at it. There's a few other guys that are good at it No one's as good at his Tim. He's the most consistently entertaining and Then for just mind not mindless but like to escape I listen to a lot of archery shows and hunting shows And whether they're talking about different tactics and hunting or different techniques and archery new equipment and new innovations Archery is an interesting thing because every year bow manufacturers make a better bow and like tiny little engineering changes of these bows like it's a weapon that's been around for Who knows how many thousands of years but what the and you're able to feel those in person? Oh, yeah I feel the difference every year Hoyt puts puts out a new bow and every year I'm like mother fucker They did it again. It's better. So just tiny changes less vibrations in the hand more balanced in the shot You know more forgiving in terms of accuracy I Love that stuff so I get really fascinated by engineering really fascinated by Automotive engineering. I'm really interested in like that's another thing where like every year people figure out to make a car that Can hold more G's on a skid pad that can get around a track quicker like every year They're battling to see who can get around the Nurburgring quicker and what are they doing? They're adding horsepower increasing suspension travel and Suspension tuning rather and making them more compliant or making them stiffer and making them more adjustable and then like tire compounds and I'm just interested in Anything that where someone's working on something and getting better at something or Getting new information. I love history podcast. I was do a bunch of history podcast So that's most of the time when I'm if I'm listening to something I either want to be entertained or want to be educated educational Yeah, yeah, and that's entertaining. Yeah. What about you? What kind of stuff do you listen to? I mean, I listen to your stuff I listen to Lex this guy. I mean, you know, you might you know, you had him on like recruitment of course sure Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, he's he's awesome. I listen to his stuff and I mean I also watch like some interesting videos about you know stuck concept. I don't understand There is this YouTube channel very Tashyam. You should check it out. What is it called? Very Tashyam How did spell that V E R I T A S E U M very Tashyam. What does it mean? I think is this one's name No, very test. This means like seeking truth kind of thing. Oh Okay, yeah Okay, yeah, one 8.9 million subscribers Yeah, I'm pretty a lot of people agree so they make all these very interesting videos about like Stuff that you know, you would be curious about but you never actually bothered to ask that or learn more about and explain some of the most under understood companies or like phenomena and I just love watching it, you know, I'm this is kind of like my idea of doing scrolling like I like I like watching like too many videos at once Yeah, I'm going to subscribe to it right now. It's pretty cool very Tashyam There it is got it subscribed. Bam and explains all these like fun concepts that are You know you take it for granted like okay, why is Google Maps really fast like okay? It'll tell you what's going on how the data is used across so many different people at once and all these different CIA's new tech doesn't make sense exactly We were just talking about that yesterday. We were doubting it. You know the heart murmur thing. Do you know about that? No so the pilots that were down in Iran Uh-huh They said that they have this technology that allows them I think they could use it up to 70 miles and they can detect a very unique heart rate Like your heart rate is different than my heart rate They could know it's you you could be hiding in the mountains and they could find you from 70 miles away with this technology Wow Bims or leaves or something and well it's called what is it called quantum magdotometry? Is that what they call it? I think that's what it was remember we looked at that yesterday They're using the word quantum and not explaining what they're doing like how they're doing it and you're like Okay, is that real or is this some invented horseshit to cover the fact that they have some very sophisticated satellite imagery where they can have a detailed map of literally the entire surface of the world They know exactly where people are but they don't want our enemies to know that they have this capability So they're making up something. I see that was my suggestion yesterday They're like maybe they're full shit because the whole thing seems nuts. What is it called? Is it's quantum magdotometry? It was I mean you tell me. I don't know exactly yeah, so this guy He's saying it doesn't make sense. Yeah, and a lot of people say it doesn't make sense Like it doesn't seem to vibe with anything that we know that we know that we know that we know that we're in a dormitory yeah first time hearing it see the pull up the decrypt this description The official description of what this stuff is capable of so this is supposedly some very advanced CIA attack that allowed them to locate this down pilot interesting Maybe or maybe there's something else going on or maybe there's some other methods that they use that they don't want the enemy to know about Maybe some beak in these guys have on them. Yeah, I guess what's the incentive for CIA to actually describe how the technology works. Yeah zero. Yeah. Why would they tell you that? Yeah Why would they tell you they even have that that's crazy? Yeah And then jammy had a good point for the capabilities insane detecting your heart rate 70 miles away is how insane Yeah, how and though when they throw the word quantum and things on a girl Huh, hey, what happened with that White House announcement? Sorry keep Yeah, the member There's Q news coming soon and then like it's an investment Q sounds for quantum. Oh, is that what it is I thought they just announced a bunch of investments and a bunch of quantum companies maybe that's it Yeah, IBM was getting some funding or whatever So this quantum magnetometry can you pull up a description of what it is Sorry, I don't ask you to any questions at the same time Quantum sensor help rescuers Yeah, so this is it ghost murmur. Yes. That's what it's called purported surveillance technology utilizes long range quantum magnetometry. What is that? Quantum magnetometers measure extremely faint magnetic fields including the body's natural electromagnetic signals by tracking changes in the energy states of atoms or subatomic particles What Technology reported uses microscopic defects and synthetic diamonds when illuminated by a laser these centers are hypersensitive to tiny Magnetic fluctuations the heart signal while human heart beats produce a magnetic field. This is extremely weak around 50 to 100 Pico Teslas and Typically degrades over very short distances So the grospermered deployment They reportedly use ghost murmur doing a mission in southern Iran to pinpoint location of a down American airman using hiding weather in dense mountainous terrain By mounting these quantum sensors into a helicopter the system purportedly Registered the pilots heartbeat from afar Okay, does that sound like we're shit? I mean not it doesn't sound full shit but like basically at the part that sounds surprising to me is how they're able to deal with all this like distance and attenuation Across the distance right and all those interference and they claim to use AI for that But nothing is really describing how they use it Right, so if they're not describing how they use it why they've been telling us they have it Why like there's a lot of skepticism on it. Yeah laws of physics physicists point out that the heart's magnetic field is a million times Weaker than the earth's detecting it at a range of miles rather than centimeters defies currently published peer reviewed physics Alternative explanations suspect that while quantum sensors were likely on board They were probably tracking the radio waves of a survival beacon The metal in the pirate pilots equipment more using traditional thermal infrared and radar capabilities rather than detecting a raw heartbeat via magnetic fields I do remember seeing a different part of a when that story happened back in April Someone did report on like one of the military websites that there was a survival beacon that they used to track them The whole quantum number stuff is a nonsense. Yeah, I saw that too. No one wants to report that because it's not fun Right No the ghost murmur thing is awesome fun and if that is real like boy You can imagine a world a hundred years from now with it is real so it's exciting. Oh, yeah hundred years is a long time for this to be Yeah Hundred years they probably got it down pat Then that's the problem you can't hide from the robot dogs from black mayor. Yeah Do you ever while you're working in a do you ever wonder like is this the downfall of humanity? Is this a good thing to be work on does you ever have like do moments? Not on specific things I'm working on but in general I do worry about like how much you know you obviously want to like stay in charge and you know being control of your experience still be the one driving change and how a lot of agency for yourself So I do worry that like it's all about like making sure everybody's up-skilled and understanding like where the future is headed and not being like Fed only like dangerous apocalyptic messages and Because it's very essential that human beings retain their agency and Stay curious right like so if that stops being the case if you start Subscribing to the vision that okay jobs are done. You don't really have any meaning in the world And we'll pay you some dividends and you just sit at home and chill That is that is not a good thing So and and I feel like they're not enough voices in AI that are actually saying Anything different to that and I liked like when Jensen was here. I think he was a little different. I think he tried to give a more positive Version where he said okay like the the radiologist thing if okay, I'll radiology just can take a bit They start doing different kind of work so I think we need to start looking at like okay like okay first of all guys relax You have a lot of you have one Premium skill your curiosity. So let's figure out ways to channelize that. Let's change the way work is on a company So let's change the way educational institutions run let's change the incentive structures and let's help you build new ideas and new companies and Explore things that are not even being considered and the government should obviously like you know support all these initiatives So that's what needs to happen more but what's happening actually right now is Okay, like hey guys. You're all losers. You're gonna lose your jobs and and don't blame you because I'm I told you so right and And and and still give us money because we're still gonna do it anyway And so that's what's happening more and I think We should stop doing that that that's my opinion Well, it is the problem as it's kind of a self-fulfilling Prophecy and if you tell people that they're gonna be a loser and you know Yeah, the life is over. They're gonna think exactly And so giving them an understanding of like look this can open up new doors for you. Yeah And anytime there's any sort of disruptive technology there's always the fear that it's gonna go badly Yeah, this was the case with the locomotive. This was the case with Yeah When the printing press was invented. Yeah, by the way like I I did some research on this where And the industrial revolution happened People got new ideas Okay, like for example, when the industrial revolution happened Who came up with the idea of a steel plow John Deere? Until then we were using wooden ploughs to like for farming no farmer complained that hey like We need fewer farmers now because steel ploughs are able to do it more effectively No one complained you actually had more farms and more productivity more crop Beals and you're happier, but isn't that this a regular tool? Supposed to AI sure AI is different. It's not overnight gonna become something That's capable of just running an entire Multi trillion dollar company on its own There are a lot of things that AI's cannot do there's a lot of tacit knowledge in every company That AI's don't quite understand and there's a lot of New directions that you can just start working on That AI's are not well equipped to do because it doesn't have full knowledge about it And the knowledge about it is yet to be captured and some of that requires like human to human work and collaboration So we obviously have to gravitate towards what is cares when AI makes the current labor that's considered scarce because that's where the money is going in commodity Then we have to gravitate towards what is cares And the only way to do that is to seek things that we don't know about Which is only something we can discover through our curiosity. There's nothing else Whatever we don't quite understand well Whatever we don't know how to do well yet even with the current capabilities of AI That's where we should pull our labor and work for us into So it needs more responsible messaging And that's not quite happening right now I think in these responsible messaging and then in the future what it needs is like real Direction in terms of like letting people find their curiosity and find these paths of interest and find something to do with themselves It doesn't involve whatever their previous occupation. That's a relevant now That's true I think like passion for people is something that not a lot of people would be able to answer out of the box If you go and ask them, what is your real passion? And the only thing they've known in life is to just climb up career ladders and make fun money That's going to actually take them a while to even discover And which is why it's so important to get kids off on the right star. Yeah, that's that's the hope That's that's our hope for the future as the kids the kids are bond curious They don't need to change themselves to be curious. Right. The adults who probably already are like Because of this knowledge working Who can't occur the curiosity and try to fit into the existing system? It might be a little hard for them to adapt, but the kids. I think they don't have this problem So I'm actually optimistic about the future long term because the future is all centered around like whoever is like very young today What do you think about this idea that the universal basic income is going to be required? Some form of it is good It's like a dividend. I almost think of it as a dividend If a lot of spend that most companies are currently doing today on like payroll Which is paying a knowledge worker for a certain task? Think of knowledge work is basically taking information and transforming it into an artifact Right, and it's messy and complicated. Let's assume that's being done by ads. So obviously companies will start spending more on compute instead of payroll It's just a reallocation of like spend a budget Similar to like what happened in advertising industries where most of your advertising budgets went to like television and like billboards And then now it's starting to go to Google and Instagram and YouTube and all that so when that happens obviously like the eye companies are going to make a lot of money and People who helped be part of creating it or in either directly or indirectly would want to have some role to play in that ecosystem and a good way to involve them is through giving them some ownership in the company So as shareholders you if you get dividends from the profits generated by the AI It's not a bad thing, but but that's that shouldn't be the only thing Right, so this is similar to like people that live in Alaska. They get a check because correct Alaska Alaska Alaska does this And it's not a bad thing As long as they are doing some other things right alongside It could lessen the burden correct. Yeah. Yeah, and and and if people are interested in still being part of the Industries they go do things that aas are not able to do today And that's that's been the case before like when industrial revolution started The the United Kingdom actually started like like projects around building railroads And that gave a lot of people who are in the cottage industries new jobs So there are going to be a lot of new projects to just like What if we want to reimagine the government itself where the government runs largely on AI? Yeah, that was my next question. Yeah So then we need people for that. Yeah, because this is a legacy industry. It's not it's not about the capabilities not being there It's about working through the legacy and bureaucracy to like actually deploy and implement this inside the most like like largest institutions in the country and that's going to need a new set of skilled workers to go do that So some people who might be working at Microsoft or something today might actually end up working for the United States government because Microsoft may not need them especially for like you know Internally deploying AI or selling AI to their customers, but the government needs them and and and of the government can pay them Well, and it's a full-filling job to find some meaning for like doing something good for the country It's not a bad thing So I I think like just like in the industry revolution where we had New projects because the demand for AI was so big We're gonna start seeing some new projects being created in AI as well when the capabilities advance enough that they can replace knowledge workers That's the rosy scenario It's not as rosy like real world is messy A lot of things are still done through trusting other human beings Nobody's like blindly trusting AI say I still make a lot of mistakes A lot of people are hesitant to the idea of AI running government and I get it But also look at what the people are doing Look at how much corruption there is how much fraud and waste imagine if all fraud waste and corruption was instantaneously eliminated Yeah, I mean that was what you'll and try to do with doge right And and I think the bottleneck there was just discovering how slow it is to do things He's not he's not used to running that slow. Yeah, and also how much resistance. Yeah, it was just so much growth correct. Yeah, so honestly like More than AI the government is running a lot of legacy software stack Because a lot of these legacy enterprise companies just have created these multi-decade or like your contracts that are hard to get out of And the way they do that is to sell it at a much larger discount And again, like if you're on on like a specific OS, you're not allowed to change this for like 10 years You have to use the same sort of software. All this people you hired only know to use that tool So it takes time to actually change and implement new things leave alone AI just if you just wanted to like move everybody from Windows machines to like Mac machines Good luck with that. It's going to take a lot of time. That's the state of the system And so that has nothing to do with technology and so to do things in such messy systems you still need people Still need people to navigate all these Changes It's not about the capability of technology. It's more about how the system is structured And that's why I still feel there will be new jobs That maybe you know, there's a lot of new projects to be done. Maybe some good leader actually wants to change the system And it's willing to be patient about it like you know over a five to ten year horizon If you take ten years to actually like run majority of the government processes on AI It may seem slow to you today, but in the grand scheme of things. It's actually good for the country And that's still going to need a lot of Nice engineers to go work on these projects So they're not going to lose all their jobs. There's going to be some displacement. There's going to be some new projects It's going to be new priorities But it'll keep going the system will keep going because that's is how historically things have been When you think about the future of AI and you think of this So what do you think about AGI in particular? You think about Something that could potentially make better versions of itself Self-replicating. Yeah, and then how far does it go? Like yeah, so that is the that is the ultimate form of I think some people in Silicon Valley have started calling that as ASI So when you see the word ASI being thrown around like People kind of think of ASI as an AGI that can recursively self-improve itself so that's going to be on that's going to be no limits to how smart can get right and I used to think that ASI is bottom-necked by power because you need a ton of compute for this model to Keep on training itself and running its own rollouts and collecting data and then going and updating itself But you could imagine that once the algorithm is correct the ASI could be tasked with just making itself more efficient to where improvement doesn't just mean capability improvement improvement could also mean power efficiency and That way the AS recursive safe ASI that is improving itself also makes itself more compact and more efficient And it can run on less compute So that will be the ultimate project in AI think of it as almost as the last project in AI is basically cracking recursive self-improvement Once you cracked out you don't have anything else to work on In practice, I think what's going to happen is Because information is so muddled and fragmented and Living in disjoint systems. Just the way we have constructed our messy real world It's going to be hard to point even a recursive yourself improving AI at some metric and say go improve All it go reduce inflation by 5 percent Now we awesome if you can task in AI to do that if that's the job of the government to just reduce inflation Have a deflationary effect on society and make make goods and services a lot more abundant and efficient It's going to have to deal with a lot of messy legacy systems If the task is to go improve the health care We're good luck like who's going to deal with all the compliance of actually Implementing these changes inside hospitals most hospitals are still using legacy software because that's The software provider has lobbied the government in a way where only they're allowed to do that Exactly so a lot of the bottlenecks in actually having AI is just stake over and massively improve the human society and Our hospitals or legal systems are government systems Where most of the payroll is going into is this bottleneck by a lot of compliance and regulation And so that's why I feel The human beings are still necessary to affect the change Because these laws and and regulations will build for us And also seems like we have to demand that those systems be usurped Sure 100 percent and we need the help of AI to rewrite all these laws It's going to be humanly impossible to go and change One specific line here and there Right and then you're going to have a bunch of these software companies that are lobbying to try to stop that from happening It's that's why like this messiness And this need for getting all people on the same page and actually steering the society in a positive way Our jobs will probably be more steered towards that problem solving at a different level of abstraction Maybe more need for EQ more need for actually like understanding differences of opinion and still like leadership quality ability to understand people and ability to convince people These these are the skills that will be even more important will very like actual work can be done by AI's But affecting the change in our society In our country still needs human beings because the systems are messy It's a weird world. We're in right now. Yeah. There's never been weird. That's said There's a lot of things that that can still go wrong when you give power so much power to You know like specific companies and They deploy all these bots and then Anybody can use them in weird ways. You don't even know if like you're talking to a real person anymore They're like people who just run AI responses and chat with like 500 people at once And that's like a whole business and so I think it's gonna it's gonna take a lot of adjustment Well the other piece of adjustment There a lot of people are coming to grips with is that this is a new part of our conversation in that In 2020 like when I first moved here AI was never discussed. Yeah, it was not a thing. Yeah I mean we knew about it. We knew about AI, but it wasn't like you it wasn't a Huge part of the cultural discussion of what the future holds for us Now it is now it is central. Yeah, and in that short amount of time in just six years It really makes you wonder because we know how Technology progresses exponentially. Yeah, what it's gonna look like six years from now. Yeah, the 2028 like like You're definitely my prediction is 2028 election debates are gonna be largely about AI Wow Yeah AI energy crisis to power power People are gonna care about all these things because it AI is no longer a thing that is new it's part of all our lives everyone's using some form of AI in in some ways and uh It's not as dangerous as people thought It's an amazing tool for like doing work and asking questions and learning things and all these things when used correctly Yeah, yeah, you can also be used incorrectly Like everything So it's far more powerful that incorrect usage can cause serious damage Like like for example, people kids were using AI's for Like companionship Right crazy things are happening there. Yeah. Crazy things are not good. Yeah. It's even it's as dangerous as are probably more dangerous in social media And uh, it's also scary that social media companies want to build more of these kind of like companionship apps Because they know that okay, they're only jobs to get you engage more and that's the only way to sell more ads and make more money And clearly companionship is a way to get you engage more Yeah, and so that's dangerous if if ads start being part of like AI chats Yeah, because then if that ends up working then all these chat boxers is gonna be Sick offense that just Tell you stuff that you you want to hear It's also it's an indistinguishable Fact-simile that we're real person like they communicate like a real person Right, so you really think you have a relationship with this right and and and and it truly Screws with your mind It's hard to like decouple and like it takes a lot time to recover if you want to like You know unplug And so the business model incentives are not really aligned to humanity. Did you see that? AI Companion that they developed that was at the consumer electronics showing Vegas this year Which one it's like a hot Asian lady. I see Yeah, these are these are the weird kind of projects that are going on Yeah, it's a hot Asian lady that talks to you. Yeah, and you know, she talks to you through AI and right now It's just to kind of a crude sort of robot, but yeah, you could see where it's going you could see where it's going X Machina yeah, it's going yeah right there. Yeah. Yeah, that movie was amazing Quite far ahead of his time really. Yeah. That was it's one of my top 10 favorite movies of all time It's underrated actually because people like reviews on online saying it's not as good, but I liked it I loved it. Yeah, I thought it was fantastic. I like it better than her Yeah, I heard I lost her after a while. I shut it off Yeah, lost my attention. I'm sure it's good. It was a wrong time for me to watch it Yeah, but X Machina I've seen it like five times. I fucking love that movie It's just so I don't want to give anything away, but it's so incredible and so bleak and so yeah In the relationship that he has with the hot one. Yeah, yeah Believe it you like I I'd be right there with him. Yeah, it's too confusing to us Our system to have something that looks exactly like the thing that you desire that is actually interested in you It just happens to go to both all your data. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, knows too much about you knows how to pull your strings. Yeah Yeah Listen man very fascinating discussion. Yeah. I'm glad we did it This happens to be both all your data. Yeah. Yeah. No's too much about you. No's how to pull your strings. Yeah. Yeah. Listen, man. Very fascinating discussion. Yeah. I'm glad we did it. Thank you so much. Thank you so much. And thanks for having an awesome platform. Proplexity has been great. We really love using it here. It's made the show more interesting. It's cool. Thank you. It's very fulfilling because like we we want the app to be used by curious people like that. Like if you want to lift the ceiling of what our population can be, you know, not everyone is like fully curious all the time, but we're all born with it. So at some point in time the system curbs it from us. So that should be more apps that get us back to what we're naturally good at. It's a fascinating tool for technology or for curiosity rather because to be in it's seamless the way we use it on the show because there's always a question. Yeah. There's always comes up so often. Yeah. The road in for flexibility. Yeah. Let's find out what's up. Yeah. It's been great for us. So thank you. Thank you. All right. My pleasure. Bye everybody.