On Sunday, one of the weirdest images of recent  times, and there are a lot of weird images, appeared on the internet. Going to put it up  on the screen. It appeared to show an Israeli soldier, an IDF soldier, using a sledgehammer  to smash the face of a statue of Jesus. Now, when people first saw this, we  don't have a poll on it or anything, but we can imagine very few thought it was real.  For one thing, social media is famously full of manufactured images created for who knows what  purpose, mostly political using AI. They're not real. And this one seemed especially fake because  it was supposedly shot in Lebanon. and there is a war going on in Lebanon. And this is an Israeli  soldier. Now, we know a couple of things. One, what's happening in Lebanon is critical to  the security of the state of Israel. And we know that because Israel is also partnered  with the United States in a war against Iran, which is critical to its national security. Of  course, taking out the famed Iranian nuclear program is essential for the existence of the  state of Israel. That's why the United States joined in this war. But in the middle of that,  Israel had to take time out to invade southern Lebanon. Not just invade, but according to  its own defense minister, take over, settle, expel the people, and create a permanent security  zone in southern Lebanon below the river. Now, it had to have been pretty pressing for them to  want to do something like this because they had a lot else going on. And it was pressing. Hezbollah  or as it is often known uh on American television, Hezbollah, kind of the Keev of pronunciations.  People who know what they're talking about call it Hezbollah. Hezbollah. The Iranianbacked terror  militia had been attacking Israel, northern Israel from southern Lebanon. And Israel just had no  choice but to go in and kill the terrorists. So, in the face of that kind of threat, you had  to ask yourself, looking at this picture, how would an IDF soldier have the time to take a  sledgehammer to smash the face of Jesus when he's defending his own country against terror? And  so then you had to assume, well, obviously he knows something that we don't know. This so-called  statue of Jesus was probably some kind of terror weapon. It was the Hezbollah equivalent of  an exploding pager. There were probably C4 charges inside the head of that Jesus statue and  the IDF soldier, a member of the world's most professional ethical army, was just diffusing  what could have been incredibly dangerous to the children of Israel. So, this was basically  yet another necessary step taken in defense of Israel's right to exist. But then you had to ask  yourself, wait a second, why would a soldier smash a statue filled with explosives. That doesn't make  any sense. Clearly, he didn't think the thing was going to explode or he wouldn't be hitting it with  a sledgehammer. Sledgehammer that you paid for as an American taxpayer wearing a uniform you paid  for. In fact, everything that soldier has in his possession you paid for because the entire IDF  is paid for by the United States taxpayer. So then you think, well, this just can't be real.  And of course, that's what they told you right off the bat. This is not real. This is just more  terror propaganda. The state of Israel, its many agents in the United States, in our media, on our  social media told you, don't believe it. That's fake. It's AI. But very quickly, it emerged, no,  this actually was real. And that raised a whole new set of questions beginning with why would an  Israeli soldier want to smash the face of Jesus. This is a country we're often told that is a  safe haven for Christians in the region. In fact, it's the only country in the Middle East where  Christians feel safe. Obviously, that's why there's so many happy Christians in Israel and in  the territories Israel controls. Well, before any of those questions could be answered, the Israeli  media jumped in with their concerns, having confirmed it was real, here was the first response  from Israeli media. Watch. This does not look good at all for the Israelis and it's going to be  circulating online in the US as well. We know um who will take advantage of this. IRGC accounts  already talk about this. Posted everywhere. definitely Hezbollah affiliated accounts and this  is uh again another incident that uh is going to make a lot of lot of bad um portraying of the IDF.  Did you hear that? The problem with an IDF soldier smashing the face of Jesus is not that he smashed  the face of Jesus. The problem is that he got caught on camera. And in fact, it turns out not  only did the guy who did it get punished punished, but so did the guy who filmed it. Because exposing  what the IDF does to the rest of the world is the real crime and you just heard the news presenter  say that this is already on Hezbollah controlled accounts. The IRGC is making a lot of this.  What you don't hear is any examination of why it happened in the first place. Why would an Israeli  soldier want to do this? What does it reflect of the attitudes of the Israeli military and of  Israel itself toward Christianity? That's never addressed. All that matters is how the rest of  the world perceives it. And specifically American evangelical Christians who were the last bull  work of support for Israel in the last country on the globe that supports Israel with money, which  would be the United States. So the problem from the Israeli perspective is not that it happened.  The problem is that American evangelicals might find out about it. But thank heaven there is a  major American evangelical news outlet completely devoted to the protection, support, and promotion  of the state of Israel. and it's called CBN, Christian Broadcasting News. And here was their  take on the smashing of the face of Jesus. This is not a good look. A, let's start there. I mean,  it's disturbing and it feeds into narratives that people have been creating around Israel that  may not be accurate, right? And that's that's the problem. You have people saying things about  Israel and the way that Israelis and and you know, the government is is allegedly treating Christians  and other religious groups. And then you see an image like that and it's very easy to assume,  oh look, all of those people who are spewing conspiracy theories or other ideas, they they  may be telling the truth. But what we have to be careful of, and I think we've seen this a  lot in American culture, in cancel culture, we've seen it um in countless examples of assuming  uh particularly actually when you look at police officers in this country, right? That one act is  somehow emblematic of how every police officer acts. It's the same thing here. one act that one  soldier does is somehow emblematic in people's minds of what every IDF soldier is doing. Well,  there's no evidence that that is the case, right? So, we have to be really careful as Christians  and as human beings, as human beings and then as Christians in particular, to not assume that  there's a widespread problem simply because we're seeing one photo of it. Did you hear that? Okay.  So, that's the message to American evangelicals. Carefully crafted, no question. And the message  is this. Not only does this not tell you anything about attitudes in Israel toward Christians or  Christianity, assuming that it does makes you a liberal engaged in cancel culture. It's a lot  like attacking white cops after the George Floyd hoax. It means you're part of the problem. And  as Christians, we need to be very careful not to jump to conclusions. You'll notice, however,  that there's no effort to ask the most basic of all questions, which is how did this happen?  And what's going to happen to the guy who did it? If this happened in the United States or any  other country, what would happen? If for example uh an American soldier broke into a synagogue  in this or any other country and say burned the sacred Torah scrolls, would people be getting  up on TV and say, "Let's not jump to conclusions here. It doesn't mean there's a problem. We  don't have to ask why he did it. We're just going to let his commanding officer figure  out some kind of punishment and it's fine." And by the way, you're engaging in cancel culture  if you want to know more. Well, of course, that would not be the reaction. If an American soldier  broke into a synagogue and burned a Torah scroll, he would be severely punished. Severely,  and rightly punished. You can't desecrate other people's religious symbols. That is totally  wrong. And people who do it should be punished. That would be the biggest story in the world.  and the administration's anti-semitism task force would spend the next three years pushing  Congress to pass new laws to protect terrified congregants from guys like that. But in this  case, Christians whose messiah was mocked, a statue of Jesus was just smashed with a  sledgehammer they paid for. They are told, "No, no, no. This means nothing and you're a bad  person if you think it does." And by the way, that was probably enough for a lot of CBN viewers.  It's not a problem. Don't think about it. Thinking about it, asking questions about it, that's the  crime. And so viewers of whatever that just was, propaganda like that, can be forgiven for  believing that that was an isolated incident. But it's the opposite of an isolated incident.  In fact, it's a very common occurrence where the Israeli military desecrates Christian religious  symbols and churches and kills Christians. These are not accidents. This adds up to well  what the SPLC might call a troubling pattern, but it's in fact more than a troubling pattern.  It's very close to a policy and we know that because of indisputable facts of behavior in  recent years. So, for example, October 7th, 2023, Hamas launches an attack on southern Israel,  famously kills a bunch of civilians. It's bad. Everyone says it's bad. And almost immediately,  the government of Israel moves in to level Gaza from which these attacks came. Now, in Gaza is  a small but long-standing Christian community. lived there since Jesus. And they were killed,  too. Christian churches were bombed intentionally multiple times in Gaza. Christian parishioners  were murdered by the IDF in Gaza. A mother and daughter were shot to death by an Israeli sniper  in a churchyard in Gaza. And the reaction in the United States, well, there wasn't any reaction  in the United States. In every single case, Israel in order denied it happened. Then when  confronted with proof that it happened, because dead people are pretty easy to verify because  they're dead. Said, "Oh, it was an accident. We'll look into it." Who was punished? Nobody. In no  case was anybody punished for blowing up churches and murdering Christians in Gaza. At one point,  an Israeli tank fired an artillery shell into a cross on top of a Christian church in Gaza. As if  it couldn't get clear what the point of this was. The point was to take down the cross because the  cross is so offensive apparently. And that's the point at which Christians the United States again  who are paying for this who are the last remaining supporters, the last remaining large group of  supporters of the Israeli military in the United States and critical to continued funding for the  state of Israel should have asked themselves, could these all be accidents? The country with  the most sophisticated munitions on the planet is accidentally bombing churches and not just  once, but again and again. Does snipers really make mistakes like that? Shooting a mother and  a daughter in a churchyard, could that been a mistake? What's going on here? And of course,  if they'd asked, nobody did. And those who did were immediately denounced as terror supporters.  But anyone who asked would have found the truth, which is these are consistent with attitudes  toward Christians in Israel. Not by all Israelis, of course, not by every government minister  in Israel, of course, but by a lot of them. The loathing of Christianity is absolutely real.  How do we know that? Well, here's one example. That was 2024 in Lebanon. Yes, that was an  Israeli tank going out of its way taking a break from hunting down Hezbollah  to bulldoze a Christian statue of St. George slaying the dragon in the country  with the last remaining significant Christian population in the Middle East, Lebanon.  a country with a Christian president, historically Christian country. And  so you roll into this country because the first thing you do is knock down Christian  iconography, crush a statue. What was the statue doing wrong? Existing. How could this happen?  Well, because for some Israelis, a significant number of Israelis, Christian iconography  is considered deeply offensive. In fact, the most offensive. so offensive that in some  Israeli religious schools the plus sign is not used in math. The plus sign, you know, that  conotes addition. Why? Because it looks like a cross and that's considered too offensive for the  eyes of school children. And so an inverted T is used. That's a fact. You can look it up. There's  only one other instance we've seen of this in the world, and that's in ISIS run Madras where the  cross was also considered offensive. This is not true in any normal Muslim country. They use plus  signs, but not in Israeli religious schools. So, everybody is allowed to have their own religious  views and to find other people's symbols repugnant, but it might be useful for Christians  in the United States to know what they are funding and making excuses for. But of course, they don't  know this because this information somehow hasn't reached them. And if they're watching CBN, they're  told, "Don't pay attention. You must be liberal if you're drawing conclusions." But that's not  the only example. There are many examples of Israeli soldiers going out of their way to mock  and desecrate Christian symbols and churches and to hurt individual Christians. And just keep  in mind within the context of the Middle East, Christians are non-aligned. You can't call  a Christian an Islamist because they're not they're not Islamic. They're Christians and they  follow a religion that does not endorse war. Just the opposite. And so you would think that if  you're the Israeli government, the last people you would ever want to bother irritate are Christian  Arabs cuz they could potentially be on your side. And yet poll after poll of Christian Arabs shows  the main threat that they perceive to themselves and their families is not the Arab Muslims  who live next door to them, but the Israeli government and the settlers in the West Bank  that the Israeli government protects. That's the threat to them. Now, if anyone in the United  States and say a church or if Franklin Graham or some other American Christian leader were to  just pick up the phone and call them and ask, "What are your problems? How can we help? they  would learn that and they might be able to help. By the way, this is one of those problems that  Americans could actually solve. There are lots of problems around the world and it's hard to know  what to do about them. But if you're an American evangelical leader and there is persecution of  Christians underway by the Israeli government, that's actually something that you can  fix. How? By calling your congressman. The only reason the United States on a barisan  basis has sent billions and billions and billions of dollars to the Israeli government is  because Christian Zionists support it. And not just their leaders, whatever is going  on with them, but their congregants, normal, nice people who have no idea what the truth is.  And they support Israel because they believe God commanded them to, and they believe that Israel  is on their side. So if they were to speak up, if they were to gather information about what is  actually happening in this place they call the Holy Land and then call their member of Congress  and say, "I cannot support this. I am not going to stand by as you send my tax dollars to a  government that persecutes Christians." That might have an effect like an immediate effect.  Call Mike Johnson, the speaker of the house. He's a Christian. He'll tell you. Call Mike Johnson.  Ask Mike Johnson. How? Why in the world would you ever appropriate money to a government that  is murdering Christians? That might actually get us somewhere. That might actually relieve some  of the harassment of Christians in Israel and the territories it controls. And that harassment  is real. There was a study last year by a Jewish Israeli group, which God bless them, keeps  track of assaults on Christians in Jerusalem. They found in 2025 there were 61 physical assaults  against Christians, mostly against Christian clergy in Jerusalem. Physical assaults. It is so  common for Christian priests to be spit on and roughed up to have their churches urinated on or  defaced by radical religious Israelis that ask any Christian clergyman who is in Jerusalem.  Some of them are afraid to go outside. That is a fact that Christians should  understand. They should ask themselves, where is this hate coming from? And why  has it been hidden from us? Here's another tape from southern Lebanon, also from 2024.  These are Israeli soldiers inside a church mocking Christian rights, holding a kind  of black mass. This is real. Watch this. Oh, the great Mary. I need it. Shock it. That's inside a church. They not only did that,  they filmed it and then posted it because they were proud of it. Because no one told them not to  be. Try doing that in a synagogue. Don't do that in a synagogue. It would be completely immoral  to do that in a synagogue, to desecrate someone else's sacred space. That is wrong. Christians  believe that is wrong. But imagine what would happen to you if you did do that. If you tried  to do that, how long would you be free? How long would it take before you were arrested? Before you  were the most famous person on planet Earth? Not very long. We don't know the names of any of those  soldiers because no one was ever punished. Nobody cared in this country or in Israel. The only  people who cared were the Arab Christians whose church was desecrated by soldiers and no one came  to their rescue and no one came to their defense. Think about that for a minute. Think about  that. American Christians need to reassess their support for Israel and they need to  do it on a number of different grounds, but the very first one is the most obvious one.  Can you support a country that allows that kind of behavior that has a lot of people who hate  what you believe in and hate you for believing it? And that's demonstrable. And that has used  your tax dollars to blow up Christian churches and shoot Christian clergy. A country in which  Christian clergy are spit on as they walk outside. And then once you start asking those questions,  then it becomes really obvious that all of this leaving aside the theology. Is it theologically  tenable? Does it make sense from a Christian perspective that Christians would have this  commandment from God himself to form a political alliance with a totally secular government of  another religion? Does that make sense? That's the second order conversation. But the first  order conversation is how could you ever support a government that mocks your values as aggressively  as the government of Israel does that provides free abortion on demand to the entire population  using your tax dollars? Oh, they're not your tax dollars, right? The United States gives so much  money to Israel that its basic needs are met and so it can use the surplus on incredibly generous  social programs we don't have here. and it can use some of it to provide abortion for anyone who  wants one. But it can also spend a great deal of money promoting a pride parade, which they are now  doing. Now, from a Christian perspective, pride is of course the first of the seven deadly sins.  You're not allowed to have pride in Christianity. Again, it's number one on the sin list. But the  government of Israel is promoting the largest pride event they claim in the history of the  region this June in the Dead Sea. The lowest point on Earth, very close to, by the way, Sodom and  Gomorrah. Weirdly, you wonder what Mike Huckabe, the Baptist preacher turned US ambassador to  Israel, has to say about this. Nothing. You wonder what Mike Johnson, the Christian speaker  of the house, has to say about this. You can imagine that this event, whether you're for it or  not, probably won't be consistent with Christian values or even Judeo-Christian values, whatever  those are. Here, here are last pride parades. I can't. What do you think of that, Mike  Huckabe? Is that consistent with your values? Are you going  to go to the pride parade? Look, countries are complicated. Not everything  that happens in a country you're going to support, even if you love the country, of course. But  the PR effort that evangelicals leaders in the United States have made on behalf of Israel,  is so over the top, so totally uncompromising in its positive spin. Everything about Israel is  great. Any criticism of Israel is immoral. It's anti-Christian. It's of course anti-semitic.  that you have to wonder is there anything is there any humiliation is there any middle finger  that they wouldn't ignore is there any suffering of actual Christians in the region that they  wouldn't downplay in order to continue telling a manufactured story about a country that bears  no resemblance to their description of it at all. a country of people or some people anyway who  literally won't use the plus sign because it looks like a a Christian cross that is a pride  parade in the middle of the Holy Land. They're totally fine with it. Apparently, they're so used  to humiliation, American evangelical leaders, that they will even sit by and cheer as Mark  Levvin lectures them on the New Testament. Imagine sitting down with Mark Leven and saying,  "The one thing you don't understand, Mark Levvin, is the Talmud. So, be quiet as I tell you what  your religion teaches." Well, of course not. No one could be that presumptuous except Mark  Levin, who is entirely comfortable using his platform on Fox News to lecture Christians  about what the Christian Bible teaches about violence. And not only does he get it wrong, he  grotesqually inverts it. Here he is with no trace of shame whatsoever lecturing Christians about  why their God supports the war in Iran. Well, war isn't outlawed under certain circumstances.  Peace is preferred. Love is preferred. Consiliation is preferred. Right? Negotiation's  preferred. Diplomacy is def preferred. But there's evil. The Bible recognizes it. We recognize  it. But there's also this. Revelation 19:11-21 describes the second coming, the ultimate war.  As has been written, as others have written, Jesus judges and makes war, quote, with justice.  It's going to be bloody. I'm quoting. The birds will eat the flesh of all those who oppose him.  He will conquer completely and consign to a quote fiery lake of burning sulfur. There's Mark Leavin  telling you what Christianity is really about on Fox News. You have to wonder, do Fox executives  know this is happening? But that takes some brass to say something like that. And of course, he's  gotten it exactly wrong. He's describing the last book of the New Testament, a prophecy by St.  John in which he describes the end of history, the return of Jesus to earth to judge the living  and the dead. So in Christianity, it is God who makes that judgment. It is God who punishes the  wicked. Love and compassion and reconciliation are not quote preferred as Mark Levin describes.  They are mandatory. They are required. Every Christian must love. Reconciliation is a  requirement of the religion, not something that you're encouraged to do if you can spare  the time. You have to do it. So only God can judge. And Jesus is really clear about that. But  there's Mark Levin telling you that Jesus himself wants you to support tearing the eyes out of your  enemies, bringing justice through violence. It's disgusting. It's disgusting. And yet, there's  not a single evangelical leader in the United States who has the bravery required to challenge  Mark Levvin as he desecrates the religion itself. One thing that might help once again is speaking  to Christians who live under Israeli occupation, who actually live there, who live in East  Jerusalem, who live in Gaza, who live in the West Bank, who live in Lebanon, and who live in Syria.  And one thing we know about Israeli occupation, it does not improve the lives of the occupied. And  that is one way to judge the decency of any person or any empire. If a father is a good father, his  kids are probably happy and well cared for. If he's not, they're very screwed up. If an empire  is a benevolent empire, its protectorates thrive. And if it's not, they wither. There is no place  occupied by Israel currently that is thriving. and that would include the United States not  thriving. This is just an obvious observation. But it is incumbent on American Christian leaders  to speak directly to their brothers and sisters in Christ who live under that occupation and to  get their perspective. It is not enough to take an all expenses paid vacation to Israel and spend  3 days in a conference center with pre-selected speakers selected by the government and Israeli  officials and IDF officials and get your little helicopter tour of the NGV desert and all the  rest and then fly back to the United States and spew another government's propaganda  to your parishioners. That is not enough. You got to take a minute to talk to Christians who  were born there and still live there and ask them the obvious question, "How are you doing?" And one  of the things you will find if you do that is that they're not doing well at all. And they've been  leaving. They've been leaving ever since 1948, since the creation of Israel when many thousands  of them were expelled by the Israelis from their own homes. Those homes were taken. They were  bulldozed or stolen. A lot of them moved to the United States and their descendants are still  here. And they can tell you if you would ask, how are they treated by the Israeli government?  Not well. And if you ask Christians who live there now, they will tell you not only they're not well  treated, but their religion is uniquely despised by the Israeli government. Uniquely. There's  something about Christianity that's especially offensive to some Israeli cabinet ministers.  Here is one Arab Christian from right around Bethlehem where Jesus was born. The Church of  the Nativity is one of the holiest churches in Christendom falling apart thanks to the  military occupation of Israel. But here's her description of the attitude of the Israeli  government toward her and other Christians. what the settlers did, you know, they hate  the Virgin Mary and Jesus Christ, they have uh uh uh broken the statue of Virgin Mary that  we had with Jesus when they came into um and we didn't have time to take it out. they have um  broken it and um they literally hate Christians more than anything else in the world. That woman's  name is Alice Casia. She is a lifelong resident of the West Bank again right outside Bethlehem and  has been engaged for two decades in a struggle to keep her family's farm and their restaurant. Her  house was bulldozed. The restaurant was closed by the Israeli government. She's from there. They own  the land. But they have been fighting a non-stop battle against the government of Israel, as many  Christians have been in the West Bank, to keep what is theirs and to prevent being arrested or  shot. She has been hassled on a regular basis uh including physically by Israeli settlers.  Here's a picture of one encounter she had. That's an Israeli settler on the left grabbing  her. These are people from in many cases outside the region, from the United States or Ukraine, she  told us who showed up and decided that the land of Christians belongs to them. Now, we spoke to her  at some length a couple of hours ago. We're about to play you this interview, but probably the most  striking thing that she told us when we asked, "Well, what have American church leaders done  to help you? What has Franklin Graham done to help you? People who raise hundreds of millions of  dollars every single year to help Christians and to make the world more Christian, what have they  done to help you?" and she said, "Well, they've abetted, they've worked to effect to accelerate  the ethnic cleansing of this area. They've come in and offered to help us move on behalf of the  Israeli government to get the Arabs out, people who were born there, who the indigenous population  of the area, the Christians, Christian leaders in the United States have said, "The solution to  your problem is leave. We'll help you get a visa. the shame uh in that that is a true moral crime.  Starting anything new is hard. Starting a business is especially hard. Takes a ton of time and effort  and you don't really know if it's going to work. Having a partner like Shopify makes things really  simple. Shopify is the commerce platform behind millions of businesses. That includes 10%  of all ecommerce in this country in America, ranging from big names like Heints and Mattel to  new companies just starting up. With hundreds of templates to help you build your online store,  tools to help write your product descriptions, a bunch of valuable marketing features  using Shopify is like having your own marketing team. Plus, you can use worldclass  expertise in everything from managing inventory to international shipping to processing  returns, all with 24/7 award-winning support. So, if you're thinking about, should  I do this? Shopify can help you do it. Sign up for your $1 per month trial today at  shopify.com/tucker. That's shopify.com/tucker. And there's more. So, without further delay,  here is Alice Casia from the West Bank. Alice, thank you very much for doing this. I think  a lot of Americans and particularly American Christians were shocked to see the image of  an IDF soldier smashing the face of Jesus with a sledgehammer. I I I don't think they  knew that that could happen. I don't think they understand why it happened. Were you  surprised by it? Um actually, first of all, thank you for having me. It's a privilege. Um  second, no because um these settlers have been vandalizing our Christian symbols multiple times.  Uh they have been uh spitting on uh our priests and uh writing bad words on the churches. So I'm  not surprised. And uh this is not the first time. Why do you think they're targeting churches  and priests and Christian villages? They don't like Christians. They hate us. Um it's  all propaganda because the uh the population of the United States are mostly Christians and they  want their um side. So if the US Christians know how the Christians, the indigenous Christians  uh from Jesus bloodline, how they live here, they would change their mind. It's a little  bit surprising because in the United States, we're told that the enemies of the state  of Israel are Muslims and that Israelis, and that would include the IDF and settlers,  are allies with the Christians, have a lot in common with the Christians, and this is really  a war against radical Islam, Islamists, jihadis, but you're saying that they hate Christians. Wh  why do you think that is? And how do you know that? Um because in in our land, uh I don't know  if you're familiar with Makur story. they have uh invaded our land in 2024 which is after like  more than 15 years of struggling with the civil administration and and with the settlers and with  settlers companies trying to take over our land and demolishing our properties there. Um they took  advantage of the war after the 7th of October and they invaded the land and they uh have broken the  statue of Virgin Mary. They have uh uh broken also the the the icon the picture of Virgin Mary. They  have vandalized the cross. Um I have also videos on my Instagram on my social media. People can  see that. Um I have been recording everything that they are doing. But they are doing this propaganda  in order to um raise Islamophobia in the western countries in order to take over the Palestinian  lands and to annex the West Bank in the name of Islamophobia. But as Christian that has I was born  in Palestine in Bethlehem and um my neighbors my cousins are Muslims. So I don't see that there is  a really problem with Islam. It's the extremist uh people that are the problem. So in each  religion we have those extremist people. We cannot uh refer to some religion that it's extreme  or or tun uh because of their extremist people. But I think it's all of it because they want to  annex the West Bank. It's just interesting though destroying images of Jesus or the Virgin Mary.  That's not protection from terrorism. I mean, why would a soldier or a settler destroy an image of  Jesus or Mary? I don't understand. I have it here. I can show you also. Please do the picture. Uh I  also posted this um previously on my social media. Um this is the picture that they tried to cut  off and to break it when they entered our land. um they hate Christians uh because they know that  Christianity is more like you know we are very peaceful we we we fight in a different way and  especially Christians in Bethlehem and in the West Bank uh we are less than 1% and um the the the  amount of lands that Christian has is the second largest lands after Israel so they want Christians  to immigrate from the West Bank from Palestine in order to take over those lands. Well, I that's  that's shocking. Have um churches in the United States or Christian leaders or American officials,  are they aware of this? And have they done anything to help you? Um actually it's not only  helping me it's helping Christianity or what what has left from Christianity in Bethlehem because  we are less than 1% and at least 200 families has uh have immigrated since 7th 7th of October  which is a this is a big number for less than 1%. So um they are trying so hard to convince  Christians to leave the country somehow uh by Christian Zionist uh organizations or  people and uh give them support to travel to offer them job opportunities and this is a way of  ethnic cleansing a systematic ethnic cleansing. So it's not surprising there are like um some people  some priests some religious people have yes they um they talked about this but we didn't really  see the actions you mentioned Christian Zionists what are what have they done to help nothing  they are Zionist they they they only uh offer like you know um traveling to Spain to Europe  to the US to get better uh job opportunities, better life in a way that this life is like life  in Bethlehem or in the West Bank. It's not really uh uh stable. So they offer them to to travel. So  this is a systematic way for ethnic cleansing for Christians. And um and this is all because of the  uh settlers uh organizations, extremist settlers organizations are trying to take over the Orthodox  uh Christian lands. So you think that Christian Zionists in the United States are helping to  ethnically cleanse the West Bank? They're trying to get Christians out. Yes. They are helping  them with their funds, with their tax payers, with everything, with their support for them.  We are being ethnic cleansing because of them and they are not really aware that they are  erasing the history of the cradle of Jesus Christ. Because in our case in Makur like one of  the settlers told me like after we take over Mak uh which is one of the last uh also like T one  of the last Christian villages um he said that we will come to Bethlehem and we will take over  everything because Bethlehem is for us as Jews. It's it's also shocking. You said 200  Christian families have left Bethlehem since October 7th. Why have they left? Because  of the instability, because of the economics, because of the war, the the the occupation of the  alixation of the West Bank, settlers violence, the the the open air prison that we live in,  we don't have like in each village between each village and village and city, we have uh gates.  We cannot move freely even in the West Bank. So they they Would it be possible for you? Were  Well, let's just start at the beginning. Where were you born? I was born in in Jerusalem, but it  was like uh it's called Yehuda uh and Samaria. Um in the in the I have an Israeli citizenship. So,  I'm also Palestinian with an Israeli citizenship. I'm also French. And that's why um I I managed  to fight them. If I was Palestinian like within Palestinian ID, I I couldn't do that. But because  I have an Israeli citizenship and I have I have the same rights as these settlers. But though I  was treated with discrimination and my family, we had um a very powerful will uh to fight back  and we stayed and we managed to kick them out at the end. You go into the grocery store and there  are endless snacks and protein bars. Paleo Valley superfood bars are, we think, the best. Most  nutrition bars seem healthy, but then you read the labels and it turns out they're packed with  all kinds of bizarre stuff. Processed syrups, ingredients you can't pronounce. They're  essentially candy masked by marketers pretending they're healthy. I've eaten a lot of them, I would  know. Paleo Valley Superfood Bars are different, though. Paleo Valley makes its products with real  ingredients like organic fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, or no seed oils, soy, gluten, other weird  additives. And you know when you finish eating one because you're not bloated, and you feel good,  and that is the measure. These bars are sweet, filling, genuinely good tasting. Flavors include  red velvet, apple, cinnamon, chocolate chip, plenty more. They're all great. If you're  trying to clean up your diet but need something convenient to grab, these are a solid option.  Give them a try at paleo valley.com. Use code tucker at checkout for 20% off your first order.  paleo valley.com. Code tucker 20% off your first purchase. So you said if if you didn't have if  you hadn't been born in Jerusalem and didn't have French citizenship, you wouldn't be able  to speak out against the settlers. Why is that? Um because Palestinians could be easily detained  for years for nothing and even not get a trail or even a court just being postponed every  time when they can stay three four years. So as as a do you know people  who've been detained? Yes, of course. I know. Also there is a Lean  Noser. She's Christian Palestinian from uh Ramla. She's now uh uh in in in jail.  She was detained many times for nothing. Why is she in was she accused of violence? Somehow  they they say yes violence of I don't know they claim whatever they want within. Has has there  been a trial? every time they postpone and they uh change the dates and they um she went out  and they took her again. So I think they can do whatever they want with Palestinians and my  father is Palestinian. he had permission to work in in Jerusalem. And after the incidents  in Makur, they stopped his permission uh uh because they wanted to cut off the sources  of income for the family for us not to be able to pay for the courts for to pay for even if I got  uh uh jailed uh because I was arrested multiple times for nothing also because I was defending my  land and even I was calling the police to come to protect me from settlers and they were arresting  me. So you can never guess. Tell us what happened to your land. Where is it and what happened? Okay,  so El Mah is uh in area C. Area C uh you know we have A B C. A uh it's fully with the Palestinians.  B is like um with the Palestinians but also anyway all of them the Israeli can enter. C is with the  Israeli with Palestinian territory but under the uh Israeli uh army. Um so El Mahur it's area  C it's near Be Jala Bethlehem governor. Um it's all like Palestinians owned uh properties.  Um they they uh started demolition from 2012. Uh we had the restaurant and the house there and  they demolished it uh four times. Each time we rebuilt it um and the four and with the first time  they demolished the house uh and even the house was in their registration process in the civil  administration. The civil administration is the um the institution where they control the 67  areas uh uh with the Israeli government. Um, so they demolished it and we stayed in tents for  5 years in that land in order to protect it and not letting the settlers see taking it. But after  the 7th of October, they invaded the land along with the police and the army, young settlers. I'm  talking about also miners protected by the army. Um, um, they announced it as a closed military  zone. And this closed military zone, it's not even for our area, it's for another area. But this  is how how it works. They use another military uh zone and they stick it to your map to your area  and they just tell you this is a closed military zone. You could you you should leave and they keep  the settlers inside and this is what happened. Um, we stayed there for we set up a solidarity  tent for 40 days in the area and we invited like international activists, Israeli, Jews, uh,  Palestinians, foreigners, uh, religious people uh, so we can fight back uh, nonviolent uh,  resistance. Uh, we had a woman led circles. We had interfaith events to prove that even even  in the hardest times in the war, we the people can live together, Arabs and Jews. And uh after a  long battle, which is also we went to the ports, me and my brother without a lawyer because uh  I will tell you now how they use the lawyers to manipulate those cases and steal those  lands. Uh we have managed to kick them out. So um how it works Smutri is funding those  settlers organizations. So uh um there is a guy also called Ohhatal. He's always welcoming  the US. Ohalal sent his cousins Leor Tal to our land to take over it with Smutri and the head of  the settlements in Bushion uh Yon Rosental. Um you know it's it's a big web of corrupted people. um  they use um you know I don't know if you see it but they use companies those companies private  companies uh such as Himanuta himuta is the subsidiary of the Jewish national fund it works in  67 areas because the Jewish national fund cannot cannot work or act in the 67 areas so they uh  established small companies private companies to work and to steal lands in the 67 areas in in the  uh in Palestine. So how it works? It works with uh for example Himmanuta. It's a uh it's a company  that was founded in UK in 38. It was registered in Jerusalem and it works in Jerusalem but it  cannot work in the 67 areas because according to the Jordanian law number 40 that they were trying  to pass in Kineset and they they did pass it few weeks ago uh and it's not going to work anyway.  Um they they are trying to steal those lands by erasing this law and this law is forbidding  uh uh selling or or buying lands by non-Arabs. So they made a legislative process in 71 by the  army, the Israeli army to allow private companies uh foreigners or Israeli companies to do  development pro projects on those lands or to purchase those lands or only for commercial  uh uh purposes. So uh those companies in order to to act in 67 areas they have to be registered  officially by the civil administration. So we got the list of companies that are allowed to to to  to to do development sorry development projects in uh 67 areas and this co company it's not even  registered it's a it's a fake company they do for uh forge documents how it works for example  here I have the um it's a taxpaying document from the civil administration in 2014 14 in the name  of my father. So in order to get the land registry document you need to pay this tax for the land and  they claim Himanuta which is the private company claimed that they bought this land in 69. So uh  um in in after 67 when the Jordanian left and the Israeli came and took over the 67 areas um there  there is an archive that the Jordanian gave a copy for the Israelis and though this this archive has  all the uh the the agreements about the lands that has been done in the 67 areas at that time. So  um after 67 until 80 there's no agreements were done because the archive itself it says from 48  until 80 from 1948 until 80. So uh in ' 81 they established the civil administration and according  to this they started to uh change the the laws in ' 67 in order to to try to get the Israelis to  buy and sell Palestinian lands through private uh uh companies. And what they did is that they  went to the archive that is related to the to our area in Bethlehem. There is a 44 agreement  that were officially registered in this archive. uh and there it's out of u 200 pages they  registered 44 pages and there's 156 pages are empty. So what this company was trying to do  is that the 156 pages they were filling them with their own agreements as if it's in the archive. So  when we went to the archive according to their uh claims we found it empty. This is the empty pages  because they said that the agreement was done here in this page and it's empty. So it's all a forging  documents in order to to steal more and more Palestinian and especially Christian lands because  we have the largest amount of lands after Israel. May I ask what? So is that why they they tore your  house down? Yeah, it's a it's a way of pushing us to leave. Displacement of Christians, of families.  It's a way to push us like you know um they have many ways to force us to leave. They tried to uh  to spread rumors that we we uh uh we sold the land so the community around us would hate us, would  not even stand with us if they enter and um if they take over the land. Second, they've used the  lawyers, the lawyers that we hired in order, they bribe, they bribe them, they threat them, and they  do uh deal exchanges with them in order to get the case to go the way that they want. And this is  why we didn't use any lawyer the last time because we know they can manipulate all the lawyers  according to their own interests. So um they also went to our neighbors, Palestinian neighbors  and convinced them that if you want to take your land registration, you have to come and sign up  for a new map where you sign that your neighbor is not my father. It's it's the Jewish like Hima  company which is the Israeli extremist settlers uh company. So they have multiple ways for pushing  you out even by um even if you work in Jerusalem or somewhere they send you some people to to force  you to leave the the the job the work not to make you uh able to pay for your own lawyers for for  your own cost for your daily life. So they have multiple ways to to attack physically, mentally,  psychology, u economy, like everything. It's not easy. 15 years of struggle since I was very young.  I wasn't really aware of all of this until I grew up and I stood in the face of settlers violence  and land theft. Cost of living is already making it hard to live here and it's not getting  any better. Unfortunately, it's likely to get worse. And a lot of Americans fill the gap  with credit cards, not just for fancy dinners, but to cover things like groceries and bills.  And that is a disaster. It's understandable, but don't go down that road because there is a tax  in effect, a survival tax of 20% interest or more. Why would you do that? Why would you hand money  to the big banks when you could keep it for your family? Our friends at American Financing have a  better way. If you're looking to buy your first home or refinance your current one, they're  helping Americans achieve the dream of home ownership with monthly mortgage rates currently in  the fives. American Financing saves its customers an average of 800 bucks per month. That's nearly  10 grand every year back to you. This isn't just a loan. It's a total financial reset. So, debt  is tough, but there's a smart way to do it and a reckless, self-destructive way to do it.  Credit cards. And so, we recommend American Financing. They're salary based, not commission  based, which means they actually work for you, not the banks. They're called America's Home  for Home Loans for a reason. Call 8006855696. 800685-55696 or visit americananfinancing.net/tucker. So, what what happened to the house? They  knocked it down. Did or did you rebuild it? Where is it gone? Not not yeah it was gone in 2019  uh illegally of course we had a a big restaurant there and I'm sure that Smutri and his friends  uh were very um you know interested in this area in order to connect uh south of Bethlehem  settlements to Jerusalem. But as I said before, Smudri had a dream which is connecting uh  um Gushion to Jerusalem. And we as a family, we smashed his dreams. We got the land  back. Is the restaurant still open? No, it's demolished. We have nothing. Like even  they cut off 40 trees. They they uprooted 40 trees from the land. They they made it  miserable. What uh what kind of trees? Why would they cut down the trees? The  settlers they um you know they provoke. So um each time they they they destroy things,  they uproot trees, they anything to provoke Palestinians. So settlers can come onto your land  and cut your trees down. And then what do you do? like you know it was one of the most annoying  things even more than demolition because those trees grew up with me in the land. Um it's not  only trees like I have memories with family with friends with like the the business that we had.  Um so they do anything to make you angry to to do one mistake to put you in jail. Do do they  ever go to jail? They the settlers they they they attacked me and once a settler he he tried  to chuck me in the car and I called the police and he also tried to attack my mom and the police  arrested both of both of us and we slept in jail for nothing. Wait, a settler tried to choke  you and your mother? You called the police and the police arrested you and your mother?  Yes. And I have videos on my Instagram. And you This is so evil. It's hard to It's hard  to digest it. Why? Why did they arrest you? because the the police u there in that  area are most of them settlers and working with the head of the settlements  Yel Rosal and working according to his um you know instructions because it's  a big web of corrupted people so they um they do whatever they want because in that  area it's like area C it's a different than in Jerusalem or in 48 so they have settlers groups  groups that are controlling those police stations. What about the United States ambassador  to Israel, Mike Huckabe? He's a Christian. He's been to Bethlehem. He talks often about  Christianity. Has he done anything to help you? actually uh Mike Hakabi he was in Christmas in the  nativity church and I was like sitting like really next to him but he he he couldn't even hear uh  Pabala talking about uh peace or love or even the war that was in Gaza or he couldn't stand it and I  saw this in his face so he doesn't really care for Christians are there any churches in the United  States who've helped you. Um I had many visitors from churches yes in in United States. I'm from  UK and from around the world but I don't remember actually the names but yeah some people that just  come to visit but it's it's really hard to act like we saw we saw how the Israeli government  is doing and it's really hard to to act. No, no one can stop them. And even Natano cannot stop  Smutri from length of settler's violence. Do you believe Smootrich is hostile to Christianity,  dislikes Christianity? Of course he does. He He doesn't like Christians. He's so racist. He  sends his settlers. Let me tell you something. even he doesn't like his own uh uh Jewish  youth because he's sending miners to mountains uh without electricity, without water just  to take over those lands for his own profit. Uh he used miners for uh for attacking  Palestinians and the first victims of this it's their Jewish youth is their Jewish kids  because those kids have psychological problems. They come from orphans welfares and they use  them for their own political goals. And that's why I call it it's about the project land. It's  not about the promised land because at the end someone like Heron Rosental is the head of  the settlements. On every settlement he he he confirms he gets hundreds thousands of money  to his pocket. So at the end he doesn't really care about Jews or Christians or Muslims. It's  all about projects and money because he's after that he's building projects in on Palestinian  lands and promoting them for Jews around the world for millions and millions of dollars.  At the end they don't really care for their own kids because they will send them each time  to different places to take over those lands and he let Jews from around the world to come  and buy those uh apartments or places. So he doesn't really care for the for his own kids and  um he doesn't care for Christianity. There is no actions are taken for those settlers. Um it's just  it's crazy. I hope you come one day like really to I hope so too. I don't I don't know if I'd be  allowed to. Um how often do you see settlers? Every day. How close do they live to you?  It's like um it's the same area like they they have taken over u um like after we fold  them and kicked them out of the the mak and thank god we succeeded. Um they h they  are settled like 4 kilometers away from us on with caravans. Um so we see them daily.  They they they also they stole my dog. They uh ruined my uh place. They I'm sorry. I'm  sorry. What did What did you just say? They did what to your dog? They They stole it and  I think maybe they killed them. I'm not I'm not sure. But he has no I didn't see him anymore.  Like I also went to the police and I uh uh filed a complaint about them. But at the end they after  3 days they sent me your case was closed because of lack of evidence and we have videos. What  what does a video show like when they were uh um getting into the land uh through the gate  and taking the dogs the dogs every time we have many many videos about them attacking but  the police has never did anything to stop them. What? They stole your dog. They choked you and  your mother. What? Do they ever explain why they're doing this? Did you do anything to them?  Because I'm fighting back for my own rights. And um they hate me because um I never left the  land and I every time they were in my land I was coming with a group of activists opening  the gate and staying in the land until the police and army come and kick us out every time  for 40 days. I was annoying them. I made them go crazy. I exposed their forgery and that's why  they are crazy about it. Do do you worry they might try and kill you? No. Because they are too  weak, too cowards to do that. Because when I was confronting settlers and army, I knew from inside  that they are too weak to do anything wrong to me. I'm stronger because I follow Jesus teachings and  I uh I embody Jesus and I would never be uh afraid of them and I don't let this fear to control me.  That's why I'm stronger than them. Even when I was in jail, I was even stronger than them. Do you  plan to stay? Yeah, my mom. Of course. Sorry. Do you plan to stay in the West Bank? Of course,  I would. I'm planning and I'm I have set I have established my organization SE Mah which I will  be helping more Palestinians to defend their lands and to take back their lands against settlers land  theft and violence and to protect them and also to do development uh uh community development  projects in order to prevent the Palestinians from immigrating. We want the Palestinians here  because I believe in the two-state solution and it's on the way. Even people cannot see that but  I see it. But there will be two-state solution and the settlers will not like it. They  will go crazy. Where are the settlers from? Okay. Where are the settlers from? United States,  Ukraine, um east of Europe, uh even Europe, multiple places. And most of the settlers, sorry.  Some are from Ukraine. Yes. Interesting. Around the world. But I'm talking about the settlers,  the youth. They gather them also from around the world from fosters. Um most of the the settlers  uh they don't have parents or they have problems with the family. So they take them and they  offer them agricultural school which is on other Palestinian land. And this agricultural  school, they teach them how to hate Arabs, how to be uh uh uh so violent towards Arabs  and how to treat Palestinians and how this is how they brainwash them. They br they  brainwash them with the those agricultural schools which those kids are uh uh or they have to  volunteer hours in order to get paid each month. So you get me how it works? Yeah. It's I mean  you're describing what we used to call a madrasa and we would say that Islamic religious extremist  jihadis trained in madrasas as children and were taught to hate people who weren't like them and  taught violence. You're basically describing that it's the same idea. It's the same terrorism has  no religion. So when you teach kids to hate human beings, no matter who they are, no matter what  differences there are between you and them, this is terrorism. And Smutri is responsible for this  uh terrorism. And we have been terrorized a lot as Christian family for many years, for 15 years  without um any uh actions taken against them. There's never been a settler  punished for attacking you. No. No. Can you drive on their roads?  Yes, because I have an Israeli citizenship. Can your neighbors drive  on their roads? No. My father can't. Amazing. I sure appreciate you taking  all this time to talk to us, Alice, and I hope that you will get support from  Christians in the United States because you deserve it. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Carlson. I  just want to uh point out that we also uh uh have been working with American or organizations  like the DPP, the vulnerable people project, uh save Westback Christians uh.com, Gaza, like  all of them. We're we're working together in order to help the vulnerable people  and the minorities around the world. Godspeed. Thanks. Thank you. Thanks a lot  for watching tonight. See you next Wednesday.