The Joe Rogan experience the best thing is to get in the state We could just be Doug Stanhope and I go Doug Stanhope you're on and just push you under the stage and to get me into that state I have to know incorrect time I should not be shit face like I was last night. I don't know this this don't take 50 milligrams Don't take 175 don't take 50 milligrams and then I have Joe Rogan go show starts now Let's do mushrooms. Let's do mushrooms. Let's do. Oh, I'm scared on a scary to that's the point come on I've been yesterday. I did do I mean I'm doing them all the time. All right Small amounts Exactly I don't want to even say her name, but yeah, Carmen Morales. What yeah, she came out. She was named don't say her name She's a comic don't listen to me. I don't want to say her name. Don't say her name Let's call her She would want her name to be said no, no, she wasn't dealing. She's giving you drugs. Yeah, no you've given me drugs Don't tell these fucking people can you black out the Joe Rogan experience and just say the experience? Don't hope Let's say I hope when I the first time he and I did DMT. I was worried. I lost him. I was really genuinely Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. You had gone like good. You had got this snoring thing where I was I was I was like do I lift him up so that he isn't swallow his fucking tongue I was like oh my god if I kill Doug if the man showed dies because I give Doug it was it was dying by the way That we knew we were writing the last monologues ever and that's what fucked me up I'm we've told this story every time I'm sure on your podcast But we were at your house Writing we know this is the last of the monologues and they're fucking Just Pap dredge fucking awful What's up guys in that bad by the end? Wasn't that bad. Oh, it's fucking over and we're beaten. Yeah, well there was some last time you want to smoke DMT My first time like all right this sucks and we're just getting through this and then you want to smoke DMT And then I go fucking into alternate realities and then I come out of it 10 minutes later saying I remember I came out of it just saying oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness because I've just learned the fucking You know what else you said you've already seen this? You said that to me oh you've already seen this You've already seen where the picture of fucking Bill Hicks on your wall winked at me And when I said that to one with him with him the lighting the American flag would cigarette yeah, what are you? I'm lighting the cigarette with the American flag But I came out of it and I looked and I swear Bill Hicks fucking winked at me when I said that to you you went fucking looked at me like cliche But I like I swear that happened. I'm not even that big of Bill Hicks fan You were just you were just insecure because you had like experienced death and you came back One we would when I would go outside to smoke cigarettes from the writers room on the lot after that For a week I couldn't make direct eye contact with the giant dumpster size electrical generator Because I thought I could make it blow up with my mind the wiring in my head was so I've never done it since People try to drop that off at the merch booth. I should do it again. We should do it tonight Fuck no. Yeah, come on. What I'm about to pay when I'm gonna quit smoking cigarettes. You're better now because of that day I don't know. Yeah, you are. You know why because you know that that's possible You didn't know that was possible, but it's hard to break up. Okay. I'm gonna write a bit about This that now I know is dog shit and means nothing Because I've been through that experience where you go This is all so fucking life is so silly, but you still have to make a living bite dog just expressed that You don't have to doing that, but I know you have but don't worry about that. It doesn't have to be dog shit and silly It's you you don't think about that think about you Think about if you were like some 24 year old guy working in a fucking newspaper distributor office Yeah, that a bullshit job and you're allowed to listen to podcasts and you listen to you talk about your experience Don't worry about like your own Fucking weirdness and handling it. Where about what it is? What it is is like you died and came back Like you really felt like you died and came back when you came back I didn't you like I died. You said to me. Let me let me you said to me Here say your honor. This is what you said. You said life eats life You said life just eats life life eats life life eats life. It's what you said when you were coming out You were like life just eats life life just eats life. It just keeps going. It keeps going live. It's life Life eats life. I'm just trying to hang on live. It's life. It's life. It's like you're already been there You've already been here. You've already been here And all you took you took me to this place you already been there I never forget that because I thought you were gonna die and I was like god damn it Nobody's ever died from this shit like a Doug's the first guy to die. I'm like he's Like maybe I like overestimate the RPMs at his fucking engine handle in redlined But you you got through it. That was the thing you kept saying life eats life life. It's life life. It's life dichotomy of having to go from that Supernatural experience in ten minutes and then go back to oh wait now we really have to try it finishing up these dumb monologue Yes, that's okay. That's okay, too because that's a unique challenge. That's like the some weird thing we're doing like what are we doing?