The Joe Rogan experience. So then COVID starts, somebody sends me an article from the New York Times about Iowa, and I'm like, and he's like, we gotta do this. I'm like, all right. I get a number, get a private. I had to go off antidepressants. This is October 2020. So I go, I weaned myself off. I'm taking Zolaft all the time. And I'm like, why am I taking Zolaft? I'm like, I don't need it, Frank. Because the problem was without Zolaft, I wasn't depressed, but I was getting panic attacks on stage. Which is like, this I can't have this. So I take Zolaft, like, and I wouldn't get panic attacks. Only on stage. Yeah. And one time I got one like in a media, it was fucking weird. I'm like, I know this person. It was odd. I would just get them for seemingly no reason. And so go off antidepressants. Do I was go with like with one shaman type guy at my buddy's house? And it's like very pleasant. It was like we did one cup. It was me, Bianca from the store. My friend, Pijon, Sarah Mela. Like, and it was like nice. Right. It kind of felt like I like cried about groups of people. Groups of people. I don't know. Just like gatherings of people made me cry. Like I was crying so hard. Like we're like, you're nostrils are closed. And is it unusual that you experienced the kind of sadness that makes you cry? It wasn't even sadness. It was like kind of tears of like, joy, revelry, not joy, and not like tenderness. We'll say like tenderness about like like from a place of love. Okay. More than a place of sadness. Or it was like just connected to me. Yeah. Yeah. I feel connected to like the earth. I was getting like also seeing like wide shots of forests. Just like, okay. Cool. So we and then you know, last about three and a half hours, then we all hang on talk whatever. And then I find a better, that guy was kind of a lightweight. And then I find a better circle to do it in via someone that I've been on the commercial. She was like, come to the circle. I first night at the circle, it's like by six flags in LA. It's not like, it's not Peru. And it's I couldn't get the amount right. And I was just kind of nauseous and didn't really feel much. And I did ayahuasca, did two or three cups ayahuasca. I tried this thing called hape, which is the blows ash sacred tobacco ash up your nostrils. And it's like you have fucking rocks in your head. I've never felt the thing like this. And apparently it like multiplies the ayahuasca for like eight to ten minutes. It's like a fucking mushroom and to remind brothers for like just it's you're like, stimulated. And people you can do a thing where you do an intention and a lot of times you'll vomit up. You'll purge up a thing like a notion. I have a lot of, yeah, I got a lot of stories. So the ash, the ash, those of you who know. It's spelled R-A-P-E with an oom lot over the E. So it's spelled a rate, but it's with an oom lot over the E. And people, it's a thing called a tepe. And so that's just smoke. But there you go. But there's one, the first one that now that smoke. If you do get rid of ayahuasca and smoke, just do put an oom lot over the E. And the problem is rape prices. It just goes to the, if you put a thing over the E. How do you do that on a regular keyboard? You hit option and then hit E and they open up. Can you Google? Okay. There we go. Let's see. Okay. There he goes. There. Oh, wow. That's wild. That looks painful. It's wild. Look at the face. Yeah. I tried that. And so the ash goes up your nose. And you just turn your legs. Like, I was just like, yo, this shit, people purge immediately. But a lot of times you can purge up like a notion. You can purge up an intention. You can purge up. I mean, if anybody might purged up his mother's hatred of him. Like, like a thing. I'm a like, I'm basically like a goof. I'm like a new age goofballs what I'm trying to tell you. So that's the first night with the, it's my second career night. First night at the new circle. Second night I get the amount correct. And I was an atheist. And I opened my eyes at one point in the circle. And I was like, oh, I'm in the circle. I was like, oh, I'm in the presence of God right now. I don't, I can't explain it. It's a feeling. I am in the presence of what I can only describe as God. And I was like, this is the first spiritual experience I've ever had in my entire life. Twelve years ago at the school. Alterboy church, mass, fucking nothing. And then this was like, oh, this is what church is supposed to be. Like this connection to the center beam or the center force. And like a real profound. Like, okay, I'm no longer an atheist. I now believe in a, a, a God or creation force. And obviously the question would be that someone asked you if they were trying to manage this. They'd say, but you are on drugs. Yeah. You understand that you're on drugs. And this is not a real experience. And this is all highlighted by the hallucination. Sure. It's happening in the neuro-transmitters and the way it's affecting your brain. Yeah. I don't, here's the thing I can't counter that. Do you know what I mean? Like I'm not, it's not one of these things where like, it's true for me. Right. Well, here's the question. Here's what I always said. Mm-hmm. Because I have this very same conversation with Dennis McKenna. And we both agreed on this that who cares if it's real. Mm-hmm. And I think that's the same experience. Like if, if you took a pill and that pill or you took ayahuasca and that ayahuasca makes you reach that state or if you reach that state from saying an incantation and then you walk through a, a, a, a, a, a, a. A, a, a, a, a, a, a. What ever it is. Yeah. How do we know that that's not real? Like imagine if God was real and you could get in front of God, but the only way to do it is to eat mushrooms. He'd be like, wait, what? I would argue what that's true. I mean, might be. I mean, do you know what I mean? Experience. But it might be. It's the only way. Now the, the good thing is it's in me now because it, then I was no longer an ayahuasca and I was like, that was as real a thing. It's never happened. It's in you meaning it's changed you. Yeah. So the depression's gone. Well that I'll get to that. So in no, I, my belief in God. Yes. Believe in a central creation force, right? And by the way, I know how this sounds. It's very mockable. It's very reducible and like, this podcast is filled with mockable, reducer. Sure, sure, sure. Laughing all the way to the bank and mock and getting mocked all the way. So, so the fourth time I do it, that circle that I was doing it in, they weren't like COVID. They were like loose with COVID and it's like 20 people in a room and this is in like before the vaccine. Like early. So I'm like, a guy got COVID right after the ceremony. I'm like, could you test anything? We don't really just whatever. So I went back to the first guy, the original guy and did a private with the inadwards and my friend Catherine and worked for Ian. He had a great time, not great time, but like a profound spiritual time. My friend Catherine was sort of like very uneasy and then and I, it wasn't working for me. And I kept saying, yeah, this wasn't working. I was like, maybe I'll take more because like it felt like I had to work out the amount at the other place. So this place was like maybe I'll take more and I probably ended up drinking like an ounce and I don't, I've come to drink around a quarter of an ounce. But so this was like an ounce and it wasn't working, wasn't working, wasn't working. it made like a fucking freight train where like I immediately, I purged and I went into, like I would have a thought like what and my brain and in my brain it sounded like I'd go what and we go. And I was like, oh, I'm in pink fluid land. Like I'm law, I'm gone. I'm going to be a drug casualty. Uh, then I was in outer space alone and the universe was dying. You're alone. We're killing Saturn children. Uh, the Milky Way. Like if that was the message I was getting, like it's all dying and you're alone. And I breathed. I mean it's the most terrifying thing I've ever experienced until I'll get to the, the thing that topped it. Uh, I was breathing just in case. I was literally like breathing. Ian said, I was reading like this. And I was for like he said about two and a half hours. I have no recollection of any of it other than I'm in outer space. Like it, it's, I was when I came to, I was, I slept with the lights on for a few days. It was so terrifying to my absolute core. Um, and I, but I realized about three or four days after that from not being on antidepressants, the, I'd say the floorboards of my mood were a little mushy. Like the, like I could get low, lower than I could without antidepressants. Uh, I'm sorry, with antidepressants, it would be like more sort of secure and not on antidepressants, it was a little loose and gushy. And I realized about four days after that terrifying outer space experience that it was completely secure and it was like polished granite. Like a fixture brand. Yeah. Like I'm never going to, and I literally was like, I'm never going to need antidepressants again. Positive. And you haven't had them since now. Really. Yeah. That was, that was December 2020. That's incredible. Yeah. And here we are. It's the end of May. Yeah. So this is a year and a time. 2022. So, uh, yeah. I had a little panic on stage, but I figured that out. So, so that was so, so now, so I've done, I have four times at this point had that experience. And I was like, I really like I, uh, in that it's, it's a connection to spirituality. You know what I mean? Like in, in, in, I don't have any besides that, you know? And so I went to the other place, the good circle. And I had a few rough ceremonies. Um, like one of them in the room, I heard a, uh, tiger. Like, like it's in the room. There is a tiger in the room acoustically. It was like there was a cat tiger in the room. And then I hallucinated a tiger came around and altered. I went like, like real fucking fear. And I had a couple tough journeys like that where it was one another one that was funnier is I thought, I mean, dude, in this circle, I've seen people get possessed. They had to tie a guy up. Like it's re, it's impossible, but I've seen it. It's one of these things where I'm like, this shit's wild. Um, that one where the guy was possessed, they'd pour salt in his mouth like real wild shit. Um, I'm like, oh, this is the rapture. This is the rapture when the rapture. This is the end. Like we're in, so I had that like rapture thing again. And they go, let's go around the room. Just check in with everybody. Neil and I go, not good. Like two couple words to describe your feeling, go not good. And then they go to the next guy and he goes, I'm balancing and I'm like balancing. Dog, this is it. Like it's over. And then when I heard balancing and I, and then as they went on, I was like, oh, this is not the rapture. I've just like, Neil, this is your problem and your problem alone.