All right here we go. Mr. Dawkins. Thank you very much for being here. I really appreciate it. Thank you I'm a huge fan of your work and we have a new book out outgrowing God It went as it comes out. It's out now. It is out. It is now like this week, right? Last week I think I read the God delusion in in preparation for let's keep pull that microphone right up to your face Just get it about a fist away from your face. You don't have to move. Okay. My phone move for you. Okay. I'm a huge fan of your work And I always wanted to ask you it You you go so hard against religion and you have for so long has there ever been time where you've gotten fatigued from this Where you're like I just leave this to somebody else Well obviously not because I just because other watching It's not so hard as you think I mean you you remember it is hard But actually if you read it again, I think you'd find it was not as hard as you remember I didn't mean hard in in a negative sense. I mean you push your okay You're so enthusiastic about your am enthusiastic. Yes I'm also humorous. I mean I like to think it's a funny book But a lot of people do think it's hard in the other sense and and sometimes when they read it again They realize actually no it's more humorous. It's not so Not so edgy not so hard hitting as they think as they originally thought it was Well, I think that's probably because you've had some interviews in the past We have talked to some fiercely religious people and you've had some cantankerous Interactions with them. I think maybe so they they associate you with having this almost aggressively Atheistic stance yes, well, it perhaps you're thinking about a rally. I'm not Well, I mean he's aggressive alright. Yeah in the other way I did once had to tell him will you please stop interrupting me and let me talk and So that might give the slight impression that I'm aggressive now. What was that BBC documentary that you you had done Well, you you had done several the one where you had gone and interviewed a bunch of different religious people Yes, that was not BBC that was channel four which is the commercial station and Yes, I interviewed Ted Haggard yes and a guy who ran a thing called hell not hell holes hell hell houses Where they right? Yeah, tried to terrify children. Mm-hmm. I mean freak them out with Horrible little play little playlets. Yes, the devil coming on with horns and Living eyes and and I actually participated in a reenactment of that play in Los Angeles back in the day a comedy reenactment Bill Maher was in it a bunch of other comedians were in it and we read word for word the script and we Acted it out in front of a live audience so people would come through the hell house Yeah, this haunted house, but instead it was people knew it was all comedians reading and they're like is this really the words that they said Yeah, it was so preposterous that it actually without being a parody. It actually played out like a comedy Well when we filmed it we filmed them doing the play and then we fit they filmed me interviewing the perpetrator Michael somebody rather yeah, and I said to him What's your target audience and he said 12 and I said really are you are you really serious that you liked it He said hell is at a terrible place that anything I can do to persuade children not to sin and they must Knowledge in knowledge Jesus and so on is is worth it I thought that was a deeply immoral thing to say, but I think he was sincere I will I would agree with you is it's it's very disturbing that that was a there's a great documentary on it as well For someone who wants to see like the thought process behind them creating this But one of the things that I really enjoyed about the god delusion is that you you kind of outline every single possible argument against atheism and then had a counter to it in advance like if you you know You you have a soft position Look at chapter one if you look at this look at chapter two and you outline that in the preface before you got into it Yes, well, I tried to as persuasive as possible the new book out growing god is sort of aimed at a younger audience and I like to think that could be read at any age but the aim to a younger audience is a bit shorter and perhaps a bit easier to follow I'm not sure Why is it that you think that there are so many religions and that basically every single Civilization Throughout human history has had some sort of deity some sort of higher power. It's amazing the way they split and divergent divergent divergent divergent as though they somehow can't get along with each other and Maybe new leaders arise who have a leadership complex or something and want to found their own Say time and time again. You have break away religions break away faiths I don't know what the psychological reason for it is But they I want to have noticed is that they usually Hate the religion which is the closest to their own more than they do more distant ones and that has a certain biological ring to it too That just kind of makes sense to it to a biologist looking at diverging species Well, it almost seems like if you were studying human beings if you were something that was completely alien to our Civilization our culture and you were looking at this the strange tendency to believe in something that there's no proof of and Devote a massive amount of energy into defending that put it into your songs and put it into You know your pledge of allegiance and all these did which of course was not until the 1950s But all the different things that people have done in so many different cultures with in regards to religion It almost seems like a natural aspect of being a human being you're right that they put an enormous amount of energy and effort and expense and time And and costing sharing some of the extreme sex which whips themselves with with horrible weapons actually be Ska their own backs It's a it's very very surprising to a biologist you do you think we would think that they would we more interested in Surviving and reproducing but know there's something about religion that makes them go to extremes of costliness and I don't get it I must say do you I've thought about this so many times Do you think that it is in some way a Counter to the sort of existential angst that comes from being a finite life form from being a finite a thinking conscious Finite life form that's aware of its own demise. It's aware. It's coming so it has to formulate some purpose and so meaning and and Hope of an afterlife as well. Yes. Yes. That is the purpose and meaning right. Yes. I suppose that's right. Yes. I think that's that's right But I can understand why people might want to believe a priest who comes along and tells them you don't have to worry about death Because you're going to survive it. I'm less understanding of people who make up stories To comfort ourselves or other people. I mean a made up story should not be comforting I didn't understand how made up story can be comforting of course if you make it up and persuade somebody else then they could file it On the other hand is an afterlife really all that comforting when you think about Half of them believe they're going to go to hell So is anything but comforting? And also even if you're not going to hell you're going to heaven eternity in heaven. I mean sitting up sitting in in heaven for not just billions of years but trillions of years I mean these are these are timespans beyond our comprehension How unbelievably boring it would be What it though? I mean I don't know I Enjoyed life, but if I had to live my life over and over again infinitely if if I had an infinite number of this exact lives I Don't know how I'd approach that in the moment. I can enjoy it. I could do with maybe 200 years But I feel that no, I mean I think I think that eternity is what's frightening about death and eternity is best spent Under a local under a general anaesthetic. Mmm. Which is what's gonna happen Right Gonzo Alcohol lights maybe yeah, or maybe not have you had any experience with psychedelics? Yeah, no do you have any interest in that? I've been offered to be accompanied on a trip by a very nice woman friend. Yeah, and I've never so far dead take her up on it How come I? asked advice of a cousin of my father who just recently died who was a major expert on psychedelics and I think he was the one who introduced all the sucks lead to to met mexican for example and he judiciously advised against he said that the horrors of a bad trip are so so awful that He wouldn't advise somebody to go into it my friend Who's offering me this this trip says it would be a Relatively load does and she would take another load does that you could kind of accompany me. Yeah, and stop me jumping out of window or anything Well, there's so many stories in so many ancient religions It seemed to originate with the consumption of some some sort of a psychedelic. Yes, and you know there's many Including John Marco leg grows the sacred mushroom Jesus was a mushroom. Yes. Yes, so I mean I mean you could see the connection if you were a primitive person with no access to science and You found some mushroom growing under a tree and consumed it and had this unbelievable experience You would assume that you've transcended this life and gone into this other realm where we're got exist I once thought that I would try a psychedelic when I was on my deathbed That's it, but what if it was amazing? And you're like I could have gotten so much done with this If I if I tried this out when I was 30 yes, maybe right. Yeah, I Don't you know, I don't think anybody should do anything. I mean I used to I used to encourage people to do things all the time now My my thought is do whatever compels you whatever you feel like it But I would think that a person like yourself who has a sort of rigorous belief that the lights go out and then that's it I would think that that would be attractive to just at least dip your toes in yes, yes Well, don't you think the lights go out? I don't know. You know, I don't know I've had some pretty profound psychedelic experiences that make me wonder what What thoughts are and what what consciousness is and whether or not there's some way that it transcends Well, I wonder what consciousness is, but it's pretty clear that it's to do with brains and brains decay and so I Wouldn't hope that much hope if I were you well you might be right. Yeah You might be well certainly consciousness does have to do with brains And we know brain damage severely perturbed consciousness but there's some interaction with certain chemicals and that Makes this experience far different than what it is when we're on The natch. I'm still brains there. Mm-hmm. Yeah Still brain, but that's it reductionist I think we're always reductionism nothing wrong with it. I'm not saying there is Do you what is the the fiercest opposition that you've ever had to to your work? Fiercest almost cogent Well, which try both fiercest meaning the most Who has become the most angry at your work and most Ted haggard maybe that guy really yeah, well he's such a preposterous person for folks You don't know he was a guy who He was he was pretty anti gay right and then turned out he was Smoking meth and having sex with gay prostitutes and you know The whole deal and which is whenever someone to me is ridiculously anti gay I always assumed that they're gay. I always assumed well this guy's he's just trying to like divert Divert attention. Yes, well, he was very hostile and In a very weird way it's it's all on television. It's that was before his scandal Oh, yes, you got a hold of him before the scandal. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, he was he was very hostile with you. I remember that he was aggressive like angry He'll almost try to run us over in the in the car park afterwards I think he didn't know who I was when he interviewed me and then I think he went away afterwards and googled me Was there Google back that I don't think there was I think that's a navigator. I think that maybe it was yeah, that's So he was the the fiercest in terms of his reaction. Yeah, they're very nasty snarly face and And he looked at the fiercest. Yes. Yeah, well, there's anybody had a good debate with you about it Where they had some good points not good points. No, I mean, I've had very amicable debates religious people Bishops archpishops and people like that rabbi chief to the chief rabbi of Britain Very amicable and The former archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams is such a nice man and Intelligent in the literal sense that he finishes your sentences for you And so he clearly understands exactly what you're trying to say and gets there before you finish the sentence But then for some weird reason doesn't agree with it Yeah, that is That is the conundrum super intelligent people who are deeply religious and who believe everything everything from the resurrection to The Virgin Mary to everything. I assume that he would believe Possibly in the resurrection because they regard that as the kind of non-negotiable part. What surprised me was that He turned out to believe in all the other miracles as well, which I thought sophisticated theologians just don't do I thought they Said oh, that's just a metaphor or didn't really happen or that's not important just symbolic or something like that, but he really believed believes in that a lot what was his Interpretation of things like death by adult for adultery and things almost I didn't ask him about that I said I simply don't know Well what's fascinating to me is not just the old religions, but really the young religions the young religions As I've gotten older are more interesting things like Mormonism and more particularly Scientology Which is even more preposterous probably the most preposterous one that we have though those are really interesting to me They are interesting, but because they're so young that we can see how they grew up. We've gone to see the actual process Mormonism I'm Depressed by how successful it is actually Scientology as well, but Mormonism since We know Joseph Smith was a charlatan everything about him's screen charlatan and yet plenty of respectable people including presidential candidates men in suits appear to believe it in the case of I mean I discuss it in Art wearing God in addition to the book of Mormon Joseph Smith purported to translate another book called the book of Abraham which Was it a different language as I'm ancient Egyptian language and he published his full translation of the book of Abraham which was he said was all about Abraham's Judge John Yitter Egypt and lots of detail about Egypt and Abraham in Egypt and things um the original manuscripts was were destroyed in a fire in Chicago and so he was safe from anybody Exposing his translation. It was discovered that some of these manuscripts had survived and they had not been destroyed and modern scholars who actually knew the language Including some Mormon scholars translated it again a true translation. We said nothing whatever to do with Abraham or Egypt This is absolute cast on demonstration that Joseph Smith was a complete fake and charlatan This is fully documented and yet they go on believing that he was a prophet And he was 14 too when he came up with it which is even more bizarre. Yeah 1820. It's 14 years old I didn't know that it was a little kid. Yeah, just a boy with a fantastic imagination and it sort of caught fire Yes, the golden plates which disappeared. Yeah, the seer stone You read it to a hat It's just so strange to me that it persists But the people that practice the religion are so nice. They're some of the nicest cult members I've ever met in my life Yes, I suppose so Mormons are my favorite. Yeah, okay. Absolutely my favorite even when they come on your doorstep and sort of they haven't Okay, they did maybe I changed my my tune. You're right over there Jamie Good. Okay. I'm also very interested in the Perhaps even more recent things like the cargo cults. Oh the Pacific where again these these actually arose in living memory and The worship of John from In some of the islands in the Pacific where you can see what happened And this gives you an insight into what must have happened with Jesus where You know the gospels weren't written down until decades after Jesus's death if he ever lived which he probably did and so Having seen how easily the cargo cults arose people who Worship John from worship Prince Philip the leave that Cargo planes were sent by the ancestors and would build dummy Airfields with dummy control towers and radar dishes and dummy planes on the airfield and things this is all within living memory and Something like that. It's just so transparent that something like that went on in the early church Well the Scientology story to me is the most bizarre because it was literally I mean if you wanted to have A crazy religion like what would be the most ridiculous religion for people to believe in well and he even announced he was going to do it Still believe it, but if you're gonna have the most ridiculous religion You would say well you get a fiction author particularly a bad one a bad science fiction author who Walked around in a jacket with metals on the gave himself and have that guy create a religion a guy who is Really a self diagnosing his own psychological issues and trying to deal with him through this concept of Dianetics You know, I'm sure you read Lawrence Wright's book. I have you read it, but I mean I know the story The book is fantastic. It's just so crazy It's so and it's so strange that to this day people are clinging to it And it makes you wonder like what is it about these systems of belief that are so Intrinsically attractive to people So uniquely a part of being a person these these belief systems I think I get it when there's childhood indoctrination involved but in the case of Scientology Some of the celebrities who joined it. That's not childhood in No, and that's just sheer ranks stupidity. I think there's also an element of being a part of a tribe Yes, that especially the celebrity thing because I've met quite a few of them out here Especially in the early days the 90s before the internet came along and sort of exposed a lot of the stuff and South Park Before they came along and exposed it there was quite a few people that thought that there was a career Advantage to being a part of Scientology there were so many successful actors that were a part of Scientology and they were They seemed to be disciplined and focused And they they were avoiding drugs and all the pitfalls of Hollywood fame and stardom And they also seemed to be helping each other that Hollywood directors who were also Scientology would look towards Hiring Scientologists producers and actors. They kind of free masonry that yes. Yes There's some strange thing that we are all very attractive Attracted to being a part of a tribe and being a part of even if the belief system is ridiculous if we are in a group that Subscribes this belief system. It's very attractive to people. It's a very important point and tribalism is a very important part of human human nature a very very bad part I think yeah and But rewarding parts well I suppose so Stephen Pinker you probably had him at some point He makes the point that So much of what we believe Humans generally believe is not about evidence, but it is about Is this part of my tribe right? What does my tribe believe this? Yes, and Jonathan Hayte also makes the same point about republicans and Democrats. Yeah, so there's a there's a fierce tribalism going on and It's it accounts for so much of what people believe as opposed to actually looking at the evidence The Center for Inquiry which my foundation has just merged with is of course all about Trying to get people off that sort of thing that of irrationality and to instead evaluate claims on the basis of evidence Critically evaluate its scientific evidence, but it's hard because people have other Motives like emotion tribalism things like that. Well people find great comfort in these belief systems. It gives them sort of I've often said that it gives them some sort of like a scaffolding for their Just their structure of the world their ethics their morals they they can use religion as some sort of a mechanism to help them get by something that they can climb on to Is some of the confusion of the unknown? I'm sure that's true, but I don't understand why anybody Therefore thinks therefore the religion is true Why would you think that because it provides you with a scaffold you can climb on? That makes it true. I could understand you erecting a scaffold that was say gymnastics or or a certain diaries Something like that, but a belief about the universe That's either got to be true or not and it doesn't make it true just because it's comforting or provides you with a scaffold to climb on well, it's almost like it's a spiritual system like a placebo effect like a spiritual placebo effect and by believing that this is true It gives you this comfort and allows you to condense your thoughts into a better path The placebo effect of course is very real and doctors know about it But did you know that the placebo effect works even if the patient is told it's a placebo? Yes, and that I don't get Incredible. Yeah, it's very strange. Well, it's sometimes people doing things and knowing that they're doing things gives them this sort of feeling of momentum of accomplishment of progress and I think So many people are just so adrift and don't have focus that even just telling them hey We're gonna you're gonna be a part of this program. Yes program to treat xy disease Whatever it is and here's this thing like just just focusing on it Well, I think the main reason why so many people believe in home the opposite Which not only doesn't work but cannot work is the placebo effect then they They well, it's part of they're getting better anyway of course, but it's also the placebo effect that at home Theopathic I won't say doctor homeopathic practitioner. Yeah, gives them nonsensical piece of medicine and They believe it's we're gonna work and so it does and and so the placebo effect is important The CFI Center for Inquiry has actually got a lawsuit going on at the moment against pharmaceutical shops selling homeopathic remedies alongside Genuine ones. Mm-hmm. We can't stop them actually Selling homeopathic remedies, but we can try and do is top them putting them on the same shelf as though there's no difference But between them, but my colleague Nick Humphrey who's a psychologist very insightful one Things you could actually even justify homeopathy on the grounds that Homeopathic practitioners are allowed to prescribe placebo as they call them homeopathic where they are placebo's whereas real doctors are not allowed to To describe they used to real doctors used to prescribe placebo is also time But they're now no longer allowed to because it violates human rights, but homeopaths are allowed to bizarrely Because they don't call them placebo's if they did they wouldn't be allowed to why have a similar thought about chiropractic work Chiropractors, you know do relieve pain from some for some people, but there's no reason why it works I would not be totally surprised if it worked. I don't have looked into it enough I would absolutely be surprised at homey up with it works. It cannot work because there's no active ingredient I can't wait to tell you the story of chiropractic medicine then it was created by a guy who is a magnetic healer was murdered by his own son and his son took over the business and started saying that it can cure everything from leukemia A heart disease everything all by manipulating the spine. Yes, it was made done in the 1800s and there's no science behind It at all but yet so many people have found pain relief and chiropractors today It's weird to lump them all in together, but many chiropractors today do do good work because they incorporate legitimate modalities in terms of like Rehabilitation like cold laser and all these different massage remedies and all these different things that actually physically work I know a woman who is a horse chiropractor. She does that right? But what I'm trying to make is that whereas It's an empirical question whether where the chiropractic works in the case of homey up with it cannot work Because the dilution is such that the there's nothing there's nothing there. There's no chemical reason One of things they were they say it could work because water has a memory But if they could prove that water has a memory they'd get the Nobel Prize for physics and they're not going to One of the things that I really enjoyed about your book was When you explain to people that everyone who practices a religion is an atheist You're just an atheist in regards to Zeus or Apollo 999 other gods. Yes, and that's a home run With this arc. Yes because of just go one god further. Yes, but that really is a home run because this is this concept of You know, I me and my friends Jokingly would always say praise Odin when anything would happen. It was pretty good or cool We say praise Odin and I start doing an online and people really got into saying praise Odin about certain things I'd rather like that. Yeah, some people got mad at me. They actually got mad that I was you're mocking Christianity by saying praise Why no, I wasn't even really I was just having fun. Yes I was having fun because of Odin seemed like a cool god. You know, it's a old school god It's the god of the Vikings Douglas Adams wrote a lovely book called the long dark tea time of the soul Which in which the Norse gods are part of it and Odin in that in that book has got old and senile and He's just lies in bed all the time and asking for clean sheets every day And Thor is out there doing mischief with his great hammer and and think that one at one point Odin sees Gets Thor super glued to the floor and things of his wonderful story The the vast number of different religions I mean the incredible number. I mean how many how many actual religions are there? thousands thousands yes, I forget how many thousand and many of them share similar belief systems and it's really interesting when you see how they're like You know the Noah's arc story is very similar to the epic of Gilgamesh And there's so many that you see like oh, they probably told this to someone else and these people Moved and course. Yeah, it's traveled on and it's it's just amazing that that concept is alien to be bought when I was a boy I was raised Catholic and I had an aunt who was Jewish in my uncle married my aunt and he had a convert to Judaism And it was like a big deal in the family everybody we talk about it and it's there was no anger Everybody loved my aunt. She's great lady, but it was just strange that he was converting to the subject of the religion I remember I was five years old when this was going on and I was like wait, wait, wait, wait, wait What do you mean another religion? Yes, it's like what's going on? Yes, and they're like oh, she's Jewish. I go what What does that mean? What do you mean? She's Jewish and they had explained it to me? Yes, okay, but she believes in God. I can't that they believe in God. Okay, so why is it a different thing? Well, they believe Jesus was a different kind of a thing it was they don't they don't necessarily believe you The guy that we think he was but if it had been Hindu they didn't have to explain to you they believe in hundreds of gods They knew and yes, yes, yeah, and then we'd have to go way back. Yeah it's just When you first hear that I mean I'm that was put probably put the first seeds of doubt in my head when I was young boy When I was like wait, what there's more than one? I kind of I'll never forget that moment because we're all sitting around the dinner table And I was just a little kid and I'm gonna think what do you mean? There's another one I? Think that's a very powerful way of Geshitichodran is to just simply she tells them that yes, I tell him nothing but facts You're not indoctrinating right you're just telling them there are lots of different religions and Hindus believe in hundreds of gods and Jews were even one God and Muslims leaving one God and they don't believe in Jesus and and just Lay out all the different religions that would be a very good educational exercise has there ever been next civilization that existed without belief in a higher power I don't think there has no Of course there are plenty of individuals who Educate that to do not believe in a higher power. I think Probably true to say that every every I mean anthropologists might couldn't might deny them and there might be some tribe that doesn't But I suspect they all do well. There's been some tribes that worshiped animals in a particularly. Oh, yes, they survived off of yes yeah, and and and River gods and thunder gods and and moon gods and sound gods and fire gods and things yes When you look at human civilization and you you go back to the origins of religion and you Look towards the future do you envision a time where humanity is free of What you would consider irrational belief systems or belief systems and not based on facts. I do I'm not sure it'll come soon But I do and I look forward to that time of course I think we're moving in the right direction and the figures bear that out in even in America which is of this of the scale of Western civilizations Even in America the number of people who does subscribe to a religion Is is dropping Dramatically and the number who say they have no religion is now about 25% that's a lot There is a deal and that compares to any one particular Christian denomination and yet politically That group the the nuns the note the no beliefs have no lobby. They have no no powerful Pressure group so politicians will go out there and suck up to I don't know the Irish lobby the Polish lobby the Jewish lobby the Catholic lobby etc But the atheist lobby Hasn't got his act together or is not only just not beginning to get his act together well politically I think people are terrified of the concept because it's such a Such a long branch to go out on one of things that you brought up in the god delusion was The willingness of people to vote for a gay candidate for president a black candidate for president a woman candidate for president But then an atheist which is I believe 40% they think they think that You've got to have a belief in some kind of higher power in order to be moral But the weird thing is that it doesn't have to be the same higher part as the one you believe it Anyone will do as long as it as long as there is one, but if you don't believe in a higher part you must be immoral you and that of is totally ridiculous when you think about the Horrible immorality of for example the both the Bible and the Quran which are Horific in the sense that if you believe if you actually got your morals if you got your moral values from the Old Testament or the Quran and they they share that would be a great deal of course You would be Stoning the doubt resist a death and stoning people to death for breaking the Sabbath and Doing sacrifices human sacrifices and animal sacrifices all sorts of horrible things which of course do go on now in Islamic countries especially gay people getting thrown off high buildings and women being Beheaded for the crime of being seen with a man not their husband and that kind of thing so that that we we can see What you get when you get your morality from an Abrahamic scripture and yet there are still people in this country who say you cannot be moral unless you believe in a higher power What do you think it let's Extract these this concept of a higher power. Let's let's get rid of it Let's let's get rid of where do you think people get their morals and their ethics from that's a profound a difficult question We clearly don't get them from religion and yet we get them from somewhere and you can demonstrate that by the fact that The moral values of any particular century are markedly different from those of other centuries even decades so In the 21st century we here now have moral values which are Really significantly different from a hundred years ago or 200 years ago or 300 years ago and Within any one of those centuries you could take people who are in the vanguard of moral progress For example in the 19th century Abraham Lincoln Charles Darwin Th. H. Huxley would have been on the liberal Progressive end of the spectrum and other people would have been on the opposite end But even Abraham Lincoln for example made a speech that I quoted in outgrowing God in which he said of course Nobody would seriously think that black people are the equal of white people Nobody would seriously say that black people should be allowed to vote or should be allowed to marry white people This is Abraham Lincoln who freed the slaves and was As I say in the forefront of progressive thought Charles Darwin Again was in favor of freeing the slaves he was passionately anti slavery but he too thought that There was no question about black people being the equal of white people they obviously weren't and and and Huxley Thomas Huxley again Darwin's bulldog Thought the same way now those people were at the forefront as I say Today they would still be in the forefront and they would be horrified To look back on what they said in the 19th century. Well something is changing as the centuries go by In outgrowing God. I call it something in the air which of course doesn't explain anything But what I mean by that is that it's not literally hovering in the air, but it's a can call it's a con collection of Oh Conversations between people dinner party conversations Parliamentary decisions congressional debates judicial decisions by judges juries newspaper articles journalism all these things together Conspire together to produce something in the air something that that defines a given century or maybe even a given decade With the moral values of that of that decade Then the knowledge base which is just so superior today in In terms of like with the general public has access to In terms of what we understand about human beings It's just different than it was back then and it continues to be different and now with the internet We have so much more access to these conversations And it's not just about being at a dinner table with the right people you can watch YouTube videos For self-debating religious scholars so that so the that that progress of something in the air has As it were taken accelerated pace because of the internet And I think that's a very hopeful sign of course the internet also can be used for the opposite purpose But I think there's a kind of a symmetry there because especially if you look at Binaitered areas of the world like Afghanistan and Pakistan Where until recently the idea of being an atheist was simply inconceivable was off the radar They didn't even consider it. It wasn't something that they thought was possible Now they do Because they got the internet and we've got a project within CFI of downloading free of charge as PDFs Several of my books including the god delusion and will be outgrowing god as well And these are being downloaded by large numbers of people the first PDF download of the Arabic edition of the god delusion was downloaded 13 million times Arabic edition 13 million times so now They are being exposed to the possibility of atheism Which wasn't a positive of course there's still a bit the internet is also exposing them to Islamic propaganda But they've had that all along from imams molars And they're madrasa schools But now they've got it coming the other way as well and I have great hope that the internet will mark a turning point Do you think that people need a structure and is it possible to give them a secular structure that mimics religion? There's certainly some sort of a community aspect. Yes. Well, just possibly I don't feel that very strongly myself But I'm aware that many other people do and there are people who are interested in starting up Sort of atheistic or secular meet-up groups on Sundays and lectures. Yeah, my worries of that will become a sex cult What about that? Oh, he seems to have someone who gets in control who winds up Having a as religious culture. Yes, I mean these extraordinary stories that awful man. What was he called? Who ended up taking his followers to a South American jungle and Jim Jones Jim Jones Diana and I mean he he had his gigantic Harine of all more the young women in there was do yes. Wake up. He had one that they all do yes. Yeah Um Well, okay, I mean I don't think that's happening so far with the secular hope not ones The worry is that once someone gets into position of being the person who gets to speak the alpha the the one who's on the You know on the stage addressing the people and giving them the doctrine That he becomes far too attractive for his own good. Well, that that would not surprise any naive Darwinian who would say what do you think do you become and The the dominant Jim Pazee becomes dominant for right? That's what it's all about it exactly There's got to be a way to avoid that though. I mean maybe Maybe the the exposing nature of the internet would be The the thing that the the actual Yes thing that mitigates. Yeah. I'm not personally that interested in meet-up groups and community the centers and things I know that people are I mean I all like a really care about is scientific truth and and that's what I'm trying to Propagate that's very admirable But I think for some people it represents a bonding of the community and you could have concerts and lectures and book clubs and I think when they get together and they talk about all the values that Jesus proposed if Jesus is the higher power It gives them this sort of again moral scaffolding. Yes. Yes. Well Jesus would probably on the whole provider fairly good moral scaffolding not totally But right he was ahead of his time anyway. Do you so you do think he was a real person? Most of the scholars I've talked to say he probably was the evidence is not great of course, but I think I don't think it's that big a deal actually because he I Mean a wandering preacher called Yeshua or a househua Would it not be surprising? I mean it's a common name and The plenty for wandering creatures. What would be very surprising would be if he raised Raised from the dead and water and turn water into wine and that of course didn't did not happen Well, why couldn't people just drink water either? Why do they have to drink wine? He's trying to give people drunk That's a separate question But um, I mean I think it the point I'm making is that it's a very big difference as they did he exist and Maybe he did maybe didn't who cares really or as? That's very different from saying that a miracle worker right who really did do miracles rather than country and tricks existed Yes What was the you said that you wrote this it's a beginner's guide Outgrowing God well, it's for young people. I'd originally wanted to write a book for The young children and Publishers didn't want to do that They so they kept pushing the age range up and so it it stabilise at about 15 But I think um 14 well I The first chapter has been read by one ten year old of my my acquaintance. He loved it and I I think But really I'm hoping it'll be read by people of all ages There's um one thing that does happen to some people That are indoctrinated very young that the experiences so So negative to them that they rebel and they rebel and then they seek out other ways of thinking and then you find them eventually Bandsing them religion. There's a woman named Megan Phelps. Do you know who she is? I think I do she's Fred Phelps from the Yes, yes, yes, she was his granddaughter and Yes, amazing woman. Yes, she wound up communicating with people through all things Twitter. Yes, and men are husband She rebelled against her father. Yes I got a grant. Yeah, she wound up leaving the church and wound up Realizing that she was trapped in some sort of a Christian cult and a very hateful one. Yes They're the god hates facts because I know and the same was true of Nate Phelps who was Fred Phelps his son and he also escaped. He escaped on his 18th birthday. Well and and became an atheist and and became I think he's actually spoken at some of our Conferences from time to time Yeah, there's there's hope in that. Yes There is it's just when I like when people can and she I've had her on the podcast She's such a unique woman and she's so kind and she's so thoughtful and intelligent It's hard to believe that she's only been out of this cult for a few years. I mean Twitter has only been around Yeah, right. Yeah Why wasn't she ruined by it? Why she is so intelligent? How did she exist in that structure while being so intelligent? I agree but of course you I feel the same way about Apparently intelligent people who believe obvious nonsense. Yeah, and it's it's it's it's hard to understand It seems to be a part of what we are though. It seems to be a part of what human beings are as it exists in so many different civilizations yes, but Decreasingly number decreasing numbers of actual individuals right and in places like Holland and Scandinavia hardly anybody is religious really what are the numbers apart from Muslims who still are but but month them. I don't know that they're Pathetically small is there any evidence that that is Reaching the Muslim world as well and that people are well as I was saying the the the downloads of My books have been encouraging. We have this thing called CFI has a thing called the translation project which is specifically in order to do that in order to to take my books and we hope other people's books as well and put them into PDFs and then have them available for free download and I hear evidence from Iran from Egypt from Saudi Arabia from individuals who say yes, there's now quite a substantial groundswell of anti religious anti-Islamic opinion and I think it's going to increase and I'm really Incariously by that. One of the things about being Muslim in my eyes It's very similar to being Jewish is that Jewish people It's there are many Jewish people that are not religious, but they are Jewish like I have a very good friend my friend Ari He is he is Jewish, but he is an atheist and It's he identifies with being a Jewish person. He has Jewish relatives his father is a Holocaust survivor but he looks at it like a thing that he's a part of like a great long tradition that he's a part of But he doesn't observe now. I understand that. I think especially for People of Jewish heritage who have relatives killed in the Holocaust I think it could be a matter of kind of loyalty to their murdered relatives. I could easily get that and I think that there are probably cultural Muslims who Probably not for the same degree of loyalty, but we always think of themselves as Muslims. I suppose I meant cultural Anglican in the way. I mean, I sort of you know, I could sing the hymns and my family observes crispestly death the result away. When someone sneezes do you say blossom I never did say bless you actually, but I don't say anything I have no objection to saying because I don't want because that was religious not religious, but My college at Oxford had a fellow who was a famous philosopher famous atheist AJ air And he when he was senior fellow he used to say grace at dinner And when he was asked why he said I will not utter falsehoods, but I have no objection to uttering meaningless statements And that's what I feel Now when you set out to write this book and write it for young people, how did you structure it in your mind? Did you you did you address? Did you think of it as addressing young people with questions that are trying to talk yes It's in two halves that the first half is debunking God and begins with what we were talking about earlier There's a number of different gods and then moves on to the Bible and how unreliable a source of information it is And both the Old Testament and the New Testament they get a chapter each and then there's a couple of chapters on morality and why you don't need Well, not only do not need religion to immoral you better not have religion if you want to be moral and Then the second half of the book is about science because I think that one of the possibly the major reason people still cling to religion is a belief that The world is so complicated especially the living world is so complicated that it cannot be Explained by purely scientific means and so I've set out to Disabuse them of that and to show how even the most radically complicated and beautiful and elegant pieces of animal design Can be and are explained by Science, so that's most of the second half That's a weird one right they argument that it's too complicated for it to not be of the divine well It's I'm not sure it's weird. It's it's kind of understandable until you thought about it for a bit because um Complicated things don't just happen complicated things Like these cameras and this computer and things like that they We all know they had to have an engineer design them and and factories to build them and they're very very Improbable things statistically improbable the components of a computer or a camera If you jumble the up at random they wouldn't work obviously so um it's Kind of pardonable that people to think there must have been a designer But then you'll think a bit further and you realize that the designer himself would need just the same kind of explanation Therefore the designer is not an explanation that flies and I mean philosophers Before Darwin we a lot philosophers like Hume realized that but didn't have anything to put in its place Darwin came along and gave them that which you need to put in his place and When Hume would have loved Darwin if only he'd lived long enough to to meet him to to meet his ideas So I think we have to have sympathy for people who think that complexity must mean design um But nowadays we know better And that's what the second half about growing God is about Who designed the designer that is that that's the big conundrum for people who believe in God? Yes, it is and they they they shrug it off as they oh well He didn't did needed designer. He was always there or but well my favorite one is and why did he wait until 6,000. I know yes, I know exactly. Yes. That's For H. Is favorite oh favorite one We have in in the center of inquiry a program It actually came over from the Richard Dawkins foundation when we merged called ties the teacher institute for evolutionary science which is teaching Teachers how to teach evolution because middle school teachers in this country apparently are not um Don't have science degrees and they don't really know how to counter how to combat the pushback that they get from children and parents and school boards and things specifically against evolution And so we we're teaching teachers how to teach evolution. I mean we run workshops You've now run one in every state of the union And that I think it's one of the that's one of the projects of CFI which is closest to my heart Um, so back to this book. Sorry folks. We had a little bit of technical difficulty What was your motivation for this? You were just trying to figure out a way to sort of cut off these These notions at the room. Yes. I mean, I'm worried about childhood indoctrination and the fact that um People who are religious almost certainly adopt the religion of their parents and grandparents and great grandparents And so we've got a kind of pseudo genetic inheritance going on and I really hate that. I mean that that's wicked That's that's indoctrination of children. So I've always wanted to try to break that chain Going down the generations so I've always wanted to write a book for young people And of course it's highly necessary when you see the enormous and pernicious influence of Fundamentists religion especially in this country actually. Yeah now the science aspect of it This is I mean obviously when you're talking about the science of evolutionary biology and natural Selection and random mutations and all these different things that lead to a thing becoming a human being over the course of billions of years It's such a complex idea for people to grasp How is it? How do you Condense it and sort of simplify the path and introduce them to the works of these great scientists that have sort of established these These ideas for them. It's actually a very simple idea but it plays out in very complex ways and I think the main problem from a didactic point of view is that The results are so complex that it's hard to believe that anything so simple as natural selection non-random selection of randomly varying genes Could really be responsible for producing something as complicated as a human body and so it's a matter of Getting around beating that barrier of Incredulity If the idea was more complex it in a way it might be easier That's the fact that the idea is so simple. I think that maybe why it took so long For a Darwin to come on the scene when you think about it the middle of the 19th century is rather late 200 years after Newton Did with the face of it much clever a thing that's in yet It was another 200 years after Newton before Darwin came along. I think the reason for that Is that the idea is just too simple. It's always ridiculously simple to Be big enough to achieve the feet of explaining the complexity of any part of animal really Is there any are there any Examples that you point to in nature where observable evolution has occurred because there have been some where we've seen observable evolution over the course of you know the last Yes, I mean, Darwin himself made great play of domestication Which is very fast and which has occurred in historical time so we we can see How wolves have been changed into pecanises and poodles and labradors and spannles And that's a very very major change to have occurred in only Couple of thousand a few thousand years Um, and we see the same with cabbages and with roses and with Horses and all sorts of other things That's artificial selection not natural selection Everybody knew about artificial selection of course farmers and gardeners and pigeon fanciers all knew about it Darwin's great insight was to share you don't need a human selector You don't need a human breeder To do the transformation from wolf to pum pomeranian Um Nature does it for you Non-random survival is the equivalent of a human breeder doing the breeding um So that's what what Darwin did and and As for examples of natural selection. We do have some The famous peppered moths in Britain is one of them Mosquitoes I think Yes, the peppered moths is the this is a moth called bist on bettularia Which is Liz on tree bark. It sits on on tree bark. It is perfectly camouflaged. It looks like tree bark So it's it's light colored And then The industrial revolution in Britain in the 18th and 19th centuries Caused the woods around industrial areas like Manchester and Birmingham to become blackened And so the moth stood out they became conspicuous and they were picked off by birds But mutant moths were black And the mutant black moths were not picked off by birds And so what happened was that the percentage of black moths in the populations around Industrial centers like Birmingham and Manchester It became much more numerous and the light colored ones became almost extinct in those areas With at the same time the light colored moths in rural areas far from industrial pollution like Devon and Somerset stayed with their their original original color and this was worked out beautifully by by a man at Oxford actually called Bernard kettlewell And and he showed he actually went and sampled in these different areas And also did experiments showing birds actually picking off light colored moth in dark areas and and vice versa That's one that we can trace that we can trace Yes because the industrial revolution was only a couple hundred years ago So that that's an excellent example for people to see like this happens Look at this over 500,000 years. Look at this over 10,000 years I mean this is this is what happens. This is how random selection Well this this one happened over only 100 years All different years, but that this is how a human being came to be that this same process That's right and The creationists don't like the pepper and moth story. They say oh well, that's just one one gene They mean they they try to say that The same process will not give rise to major changes like from reptiles to birds or Long mammals also but it just is the same process over a much much longer period And what can be achieved in a couple of hundred years is small What can be achieved in a couple of thousand years is Wolf to peak in ease What can be achieved in a couple of million years is Oxford lipidicus to homo sapiens what can be achieved in a hundred million years is Shrew to human and a thousand million years would be bacterium to to human Well, maybe not maybe to two thousand million years, but it's just It when you're living in the present and you're you're thinking of yourself and you're thinking of biological life It's it's hard for a person to see things on those scales Which is one of the reasons why I think for many people that aren't educated in these These sort of subjects to buy into this concept of of a in some sort of intelligent sign Yes, well timescales are We have no concept of millions of years We can we can just about cope with I mean even thousands of years Even going back to the ancient Egyptians We get a kind of free song of All I do the one it was like what the epical gilga mesh what it was like then That's nothing compared to evolutionary time. It's just not even yesterday It's it's a couple of minutes ago. It's ridiculous Short time well you have a heart out at four o'clock and that time has come so I want to thank you for being here And I want to thank you for your commitment over the years to educating people and just You have an amazing amount of endurance for this stuff and because of that a lot of people have you know shifted their ideas and Gravitated towards science. It's been a pleasure. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Richard Dawkins ladies and gentlemen Bye-bye. Good. Thank you. I have to sign this